                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ASSET PRICES AND EXCHANGE RATES

                                               Anna Pavlova
                                              Roberto Rigobon

                                           Working Paper 9834
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9834


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research

©2003 by Anna Pavlova and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to
the source.
Asset Prices and Exchange Rates
Anna Pavlova and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 9834
July 2003
JEL No. F31, F36, G12, G15

                                            ABSTRACT


This paper develops a simple two-country, two-good model, in which the real exchange rate, stock and
bond prices are jointly determined. The model predicts that stock market prices are correlated
internationally even though their dividend processes are independent, providing a theoretical argument
in favor of financial contagion. The foreign exchange market serves as a propagation channel from one
stock market to the other. The model identifies interconnections between stock, bond and foreign
exchange markets and characterizes their joint dynamics as a three-factor model. Contemporaneous
responses of each market to changes in the factors are shown to have unambiguous signs. These
implications enjoy strong empirical support. Estimation of various versions of the model reveals that
most of the signs predicted by the model indeed obtain in the data, and the point estimates are in line
with the implications of our theory. Furthermore, the uncovered interest rate parity relationship has a
risk premium in our model, shown to be volatile. We also derive agents? portfolio holdings and identify
economic environments under which they exhibit a home bias, and demonstrate that an international
CAPM obtaining in our model has two additional factors.



Anna Pavlova                                           Roberto Rigobon
Sloan School of Management                             Sloan School of Management
MIT                                                    MIT, E52-447
50 Memorial Drive                                      50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                               Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
apavlova@mit.edu                                       and NBER
                                                       rigobon@mit.edu
1.       Introduction

Financial press has long asserted that stock prices and exchange rates are closely intertwined. In
recent times, the depreciation of the dollar against the euro and other major currencies has been
argued to put pressure on the investor sentiment and the US stock markets. Similarly, the previous
decade associated with high productivity gains and a stock market boom in the US was accompanied
by an exchange rate appreciation. Surprisingly, these connections have rarely been highlighted in
workhorse models of exchange rate determination. This paper develops a framework in which the
same forces that drive exchange rates, also influence countries’ stock markets, and argues that a
great deal can be learned about foreign exchange markets by examining stock markets, and vice
versa. Identifying interrelations between these markets would also shed light on some widely-
debated spillovers, such as, for example, international financial contagion.

       The innovation of our modeling approach is to draw upon three separate strands of literature:
international asset pricing, open economy macroeconomics and international trade, while differing
from each one of them in some important dimensions. On the one hand, while encompassing a
rich financial markets structure, the overwhelming majority of international asset pricing models
assumes that there is a single commodity in the world, implying that the real exchange rate has
to be equal to unity. Nontrivial implications on exchange rates in such a framework have been
obtained by either introducing barriers to trade into a real model, or by exogenously specifying a
monetary policy and focusing on the nominal exchange rate. On the other hand, the international
economics literature typically concentrates either on how different patterns of international trade
in goods affect the real exchange rate, or on how the nominal exchange rate is linked to bond
markets, typically overlooking the implications on equity markets. Ours is a two-country, two-good
model where the countries trade in goods as well as in stocks and bonds. To our knowledge, it is
the first asset pricing model in which the terms of trade, exchange rate, and asset prices are jointly
determined in equilibrium, thus marrying dynamic asset pricing with Ricardian trade theory.1

       The paper consists of two parts: theoretical and empirical. The first part presents our model of
a dynamic world economy under uncertainty. The two countries comprising the economy specialize
in producing their own good. The stock market in each country is a claim to the country’s output.
   1
    Zapatero (1995) employs a similar two-country, two-good economy and discusses the new insights the model
provides for empirical studies. Although his model offers valuable perspective on the exchange rate, it contains some
counterfactual implications regarding financial markets, which we discuss in Section 2.




                                                         1
Bonds, whose interest rates are uncovered endogenously within the model, provide further oppor-
tunities for international borrowing and lending. A representative agent in each country consumes
both goods, albeit with a preference bias toward the home good, and invests in the stock and bond
markets. Uncertainty in the economy is due to output (supply) shocks in each country and the
consumers’ demand shocks. While the former are very common in models of international macroe-
conomics, and especially international business cycles, the latter have received considerably less
attention. For the bulk of our analysis, we adopt a very general specification of the demand shocks,
imposing more structure later to gain additional insight. We distinguish between the special cases
where (i) there are no demand shocks, (ii) demand shocks are due to pure consumer sentiment, (iii)
demand shocks are due to preferences encompassing a “catching up with the Joneses” feature or
consumer confidence and (iv) preferences are state-independent and demand shocks are driven by
differences of opinion. It is ultimately an empirical question − addressed in the second part of the
paper − as to which of these specifications is the most plausible.

    Our model is extremely tractable, allowing us to characterize, in closed-form, the patterns of
responses of stock and bond markets in each country, as well as those of the foreign exchange
market, to supply and demand shocks. Since, by design, our model nests a number of fundamental
implications from various strands of the international economics literature, directions of some of
these responses are familiar. For example, all else equal, a positive shock to a country’s output
leads to a deterioration of the terms of trade it enjoys and an exchange rate depreciation (consistent
with the comparative advantages theory of the international trade literature). At the same time,
the national stock market sees a positive return (in line with the asset pricing literature). On the
other hand, a positive demand shock in a country leads to an exchange rate appreciation (as in
the open economy macroeconomics literature). We unify all these implications in one model, and
focus on the interconnections between the stock, bond and foreign exchange markets and on the
spillovers.

    One important spillover obtaining in our economy provides a natural basis for a theory of inter-
national financial contagion. The empirical literature on contagion has concluded that some factors,
such as trade and financial linkages, are important in explaining the propagation of shocks. Never-
theless, these channels account for a small proportion of the observed co-movement. The argument
is that the correlation in equity and bond prices is an order of magnitude larger than that implied




                                                  2
by the correlation in real variables.2 In our model, the real variables − the countries’ output pro-
cesses − are unrelated and yet stock returns on the national markets become positively correlated.
Contagion is a natural response to a supply shock in one of the countries. As we discussed earlier,
a positive output shock leads to a positive return on the domestic stock market; however, it has to
be accompanied by an exchange rate depreciation. The latter implies a strengthening of the foreign
currency, leading to a rise in the value of the foreign country’s output, thereby boosting its stock
market. The foreign exchange market thus acts as a channel through which shocks are propagated
across countries’ stock markets. Another spillover we uncover is what we labeled “divergence”: a
response of world asset markets to a demand shock in one of the countries. As mentioned earlier,
a positive shift in domestic demand causes an exchange rate appreciation. A strengthening of the
domestic currency relative to the foreign leads to divergence in world financial markets: it provides
a boost to the domestic stock and bond markets, while asset prices abroad fall. This pattern is
very close to macroeconomic dynamics observed in the US in the 90’s when large capital inflows
were pushing the interest rates down, increasing stock prices, and strengthening the dollar. These
implications, together with the remaining patterns of responses to innovations in supply and de-
mand, provide a testable theory of the interconnections between stock, bond and foreign exchange
markets in different countries.

      In our model, uncovered interest parity in its classical form need not be satisfied. The presence
of demand shocks implies that the interest rate parity relationship necessarily contains an additional
term capturing a pertinent risk premium. We demonstrate that this term is time-varying, driven
in part by demand shocks, and possibly quite volatile. We also derive portfolio strategies, shown
to consist of holding a mean-variance portfolio and an additional portfolio hedging against future
demand shocks. Within our model, we can identify economic environments under which countries’
portfolios exhibit a home bias, which is demonstrated to be due to the nature of the demand shocks.
In particular, a home bias is induced when the demand shocks are positively correlated with the
supply shocks in each country. Agents, who get enthusiastic and demand more consumption (biased
toward the home good) when their country is experiencing an output increase, optimally hold a
larger fraction of the domestic stock − the claim to the domestic output. This is consistent with
our consumer confidence or differences in opinion interpretations of the demand shocks. Finally,
due to the presence of the hedging portfolios in the countries’ investment strategies, we obtain a
  2
   See, e.g., Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996), Fischer (1998), Goldstein, Kaminsky, and Reinhart (2000),
Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), Claessens, Dornbusch, and Park (2001), Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Végh (2003).



                                                      3
multi-factor CAPM in our model. In addition to the standard market factor, our model identifies
two further factors: demand shocks of each country − hence pointing to a potential misspecification
of the traditional international CAPM.

       The second part of the paper tests the implications of our theory on daily data for the US vis-à-
vis Germany and the UK. Our model implies that the stock market prices, bond prices and exchange
rates are described by a three latent-factor model with time-varying coefficients. The model, as
it is, has too many degrees of freedom to fit the data, so we estimate two simplified versions of it
in order to increase chances of finding a rejection. First, we force the coefficients to be constant
and the latent factors to be homoskedastic. The two most important findings emerging from
this estimation are: (i) demand shocks are twice as important as supply shocks in describing the
behavior of asset prices and the exchange rate, (ii) the data reject the hypotheses that our demand
shocks are generated by either pure sentiment or “catching up with the Joneses”-type behavior.
Rather, our results support the view that the demand shocks are likely to represent differences in
opinion or consumer confidence, which is positively correlated with the current performance of the
domestic economy.

       In our second pass at the data, we directly estimate the pattern of responses of stock, bond
and foreign exchange markets to the underlying shocks within a latent-factor model with constant
coefficients where only some sign restrictions are imposed. To solve the identification problem, we
rely on the natural heteroskedasticity present in the data.3 Our estimation procedure can uniquely
identify twelve coefficients in a system of simultaneous equations corresponding to each bilateral
estimation. We find that, for example, in the case of the US vis-à-vis the UK all twelve point
estimates have the signs predicted by the model, and eleven are statistically significant. Moreover,
the theory entails implications as to how the coefficients are related to each other. For most of the
point estimates predicted to be equal by the model, we cannot reject the hypothesis that they are
the same, however we do find some rejections, especially in bond markets responses. Finally, we
examine the robustness of our implications on the low frequency data, which contains observations
of the countries’ output and thus allows us to relate the latent factors from our estimation to
innovations in output in the data. Although in this exercise the size of our sample is significantly
reduced, we are still able to argue that the responses of asset and currency markets entailed by the
   3
     Our approach follows the identification through heteroskedasticity literature, which is based on Philip Wright’s
(1928) book. It has been recently extended by Sentana and Fiorentini (2001) for the conditional heteroskedasticity
case (see also Rigobon (2002)), and Rigobon (2003) for the case in which heteroskedasticity can be described by
different regimes.


                                                         4
model hold in the data, and that the output shocks identified by our estimation are indeed highly
correlated with the actual output innovations.

      In terms of the modeling approach, our work is closest to the international asset pricing lit-
erature. As we mentioned earlier, however, most of the models in this literature are casted in a
single-good framework, in which forces of arbitrage equate the real exchange rate to unity. Nontriv-
ial implications on exchange rates have been obtained either by exogenously specifying a monetary
policy and focusing on the nominal exchange rate instead of real (see, for example, Bakshi and Chen
(1997), Basak and Gallmeyer (1999) for monetary general equilibrium models, and Solnik (1974),
Adler and Dumas (1983) for the international CAPM), or by introducing barriers to trade into a
real model (Dumas (1992), Sercu and Uppal (2000)), and thus impeding goods markets arbitrage.
To our knowledge, the only other multi-good asset pricing model in which the exchange rate is
determined through the terms of trade is Zapatero (1995).4 In terms of the overall objective of
constructing a structural model tying together exchange rates and asset prices and taking it to the
data, we know of two papers that are closest to our work. In a mean-variance setting, absent inter-
national trade in goods, Hau and Rey (2002) study the relationship between stock market returns
and the exchange rate. Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa-Clara (2001) also examine this relationship
so as to argue that exchange rates fluctuate less than the implied marginal rates of substitution
obtained from stock market returns.

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the economy and derives the
testable implications of our model. Section 3 presents the empirical analysis. Section 4 discusses
caveats and avenues for future research. Section 5 concludes and the Appendix provides all proofs.


2.      The Model

2.1.     The Economic Setting

We consider a continuous-time pure-exchange world economy along the lines of Lucas (1982).
The economy has a finite horizon, [0, T ], with uncertainty represented by a filtered probability
space (Ω, F, {Ft }, P ), on which is defined a standard three-dimensional Brownian motion w(t)
                                                                                          ~    =
(w(t), w∗ (t), wθ (t))> , t ∈ [0, T ]. All stochastic processes are assumed adapted to {Ft ; t ∈ [0, T ]},
  4
    Another analysis that inspired our work is Cass and Pavlova (2003), who employ a similar model to argue that
benchmark models of financial equilibrium theory in economics and finance, commonly believed to entail similar
implications, can be in fundamental disagreement.



                                                       5
the augmented filtration generated by w.
                                      ~ All stated (in)equalities involving random variables hold
P -almost surely. In what follows, given our focus, we assume all processes introduced to be well-
defined, without explicitly stating regularity conditions ensuring this.

       There are two countries in the world economy: Home and Foreign. Each country produces its
own perishable good via a strictly positive output process modeled as a Lucas’ tree:

                      dY (t) = µY (t) Y (t) dt + σY (t) Y (t) dw(t)               (Home),                       (1)

                     dY ∗ (t) = µ∗Y (t) Y ∗ (t) dt + σY∗ (t) Y ∗ (t) dw∗ (t)      (Foreign),                    (2)

where µY , µ∗Y , σY > 0 and σY∗ > 0 are arbitrary adapted processes. Note that the country-specific
Brownian motions w and w∗ are independent.5 The prices of the Home and Foreign goods are
denoted by p and p∗ , respectively. We fix the world numeraire basket to contain α, α ∈ [0, 1], units
of the Home good and (1-α) units of the Foreign good, and normalize the price of this basket to be
equal to unity.

       Investment opportunities are represented by four securities. Located in the Home country are a
bond B, in zero net supply, and a risky stock S, in unit supply. Analogously, Foreign issues a bond
B ∗ and a stock S ∗ . The bonds B and B ∗ are money market accounts instantaneously riskless in
the local good, and the stocks S and S ∗ are claims to the local output. The terms of trade, q, are
defined as the price of the Home good relative to that of the Foreign good: q ≡ p/p∗ . The terms of
trade are positively related to the real and nominal exchange rates; however, we delay making the
exact identification till Section 3, where we map nominal quantities available in the data into the
variables employed in the model.

       A representative consumer-investor of each country is endowed at time 0 with a total supply
of the stock market of his country. Thus, the initial wealth of the Home resident is WH (0) =
S(0) and that of the Foreign resident is WF (0) = S ∗ (0). Each consumer i chooses nonnegative
consumption of each good (Ci (t), Ci∗ (t)), i ∈ {H, F }, and a portfolio of the available securities
             ∗              ∗              j
(xSi (t), xSi (t), xB
                    i (t), xi (t)), where x denotes a fraction of wealth Wi invested in security j. The
                            B


   5
    It is straightforward to extend the model to the case where shocks to the countries output are multi-dimensional
and correlated. Our equilibrium characterization of the stock prices and the exchange rate would be the same. Since
part of our objective in this paper is to demonstrate that Home and Foreign stock returns become correlated even
when the countries’ output processes are unrelated, we forgo inclusion of additional (possibly common) components
in the shocks structure.




                                                         6
dynamic budget constraint of each consumer takes the standard form

dWi (t)               dB(t)      ∗   dB ∗ (t)          dS(t) + p(t)Y (t)dt    S∗     dS ∗ (t) + p∗ (t)Y ∗ (t)dt
           = xB
              i (t)         + xB
                               i (t)          + xS
                                                 i (t)                     + xi  (t)
Wi (t)                 B(t)           B ∗ (t)                 S(t)                             S ∗ (t)
                   1
              −          (p(t)Ci (t) + p∗ (t)Ci∗ (t)) dt ,       i ∈ {H, F },                               (3)
                  Wi (t)

with Wi (T ) ≥ 0. Both representative consumers derive utility from the Home and Foreign goods
                ·Z T                                                    ¸
                                                              ∗
              E      θH (t) [aH log(CH (t)) + (1 − aH ) log(CH (t))]dt     (Home country),   (4)
                   0
                ·Z T                                                   ¸
                                                             ∗
              E      θF (t) [aF log(CF (t)) + (1 − aF ) log(CF (t))]dt    (Foreign country), (5)
                     0

where aH and aF are the weights on Home goods in the utility function of each country. The
objective of making aH and aF country-specific is to capture the possible home bias in the countries’
consumption baskets. This home bias may in part be due to the presence of non-tradable goods,
and by imposing an assumption that aH > aF , we would model it in a reduced form. (We elaborate
on this in Section 4.) Heterogeneity in consumer tastes is required for most of our implications;
otherwise demand shocks will have no effect on the real exchange rate or the terms of trade. The
“demand shocks,” θH and θF , are arbitrary positive adapted stochastic processes driven by w,
                                                                                           ~ with
θH (0) = 1 and θF (0) = 1. The only requirement we impose on these processes is that they be
martingales. That is, Et [θi (s)] = θi (t), s > t, i ∈ {H, F }. This specification is very general. In the
special cases we consider later in this section, we put more structure on these processes depending
on the interpretation we adopt. Note that the presence of the stochastic components θH and θF
in (4)–(5) does not necessarily imply that the countries’ preferences are state-dependent. As we
discuss in one of the interpretations below, the countries may disagree on probability measures
they use to compute expectations. Then, state-independent utilities under their own probability
measures give rise to an equivalent representation (4)–(5) of the countries’ expected utilities under
the true measure.


2.2.      Characterization of World Equilibrium

Financial markets in the economy are potentially dynamically complete since there are three inde-
pendent sources of uncertainty and four securities available for investment. Since endowments are
specified in terms of share portfolios, however, this is not sufficient to guarantee that markets are
indeed complete in equilibrium, as demonstrated by Cass and Pavlova (2003) for a special case of
our economy where θH and θF are deterministic. Nevertheless, one can still obtain a competitive

                                                             7
equilibrium allocation by solving the world social planner’s problem because Pareto optimality is
preserved even under market incompleteness.6 The planner chooses countries’ consumption so as
to maximize the weighted sum of countries’ utilities, with weights λH and λF (see the Appendix),
subject to the resource constraints:
                        ·Z T n
        max
         ∗      ∗
                      E        λH θH (t) [aH log(CH (t)) + (1 − aH ) log(CH∗ (t))]
   {CH , CH , CF , CF }            0
                                                                                                          o ¸
                                                                                                    ∗
                                                       +λF θF (t) [aF log(CF (t)) + (1 − aF ) log(CF (t))] dt

                                                                          with multipliers

                s. t.      CH (t) + CF (t) = Y (t) ,                            η(t),                           (6)

                           CH∗ (t) + CF∗ (t) = Y ∗ (t) ,                         η ∗ (t).                       (7)


       Solving the planner’s optimization problem, we obtain the sharing rules

                      λH θH (t)aH                                                 λF θF (t)aF
CH (t) =                                  Y (t),                CF (t) =                              Y (t) ,
               λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF                                  λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF
                         λH θH (t)(1 − aH )                                          λF θF (t)(1 − aF )
CH∗ (t) =                                              Y ∗ (t), CF∗ (t) =                                         Y ∗ (t) .
               λH θH (t)(1 − aH ) + λF θF (t)(1 − aF )                    λH θH (t)(1 − aH ) + λF θF (t)(1 − aF )

The competitive equilibrium prices are identified with the Lagrange multipliers associated with the
resource constraints. The multiplier on (6), η(t, ω), is the price of one unit of the Home good
to be delivered at time t in state ω. Similarly, η ∗ (t, ω), the multiplier on (7), is the price of one
unit of the Foreign good to be delivered at time t in state ω. We find it useful to represent these
quantities as products of two components: the state price and the spot good price. The former is
the Arrow-Debreu state price, denoted by π, of one unit of the numeraire to be delivered at (t, ω)
and the latter is either p (for the Home good) or p∗ (for the Foreign good). The equilibrium terms
of trade are then simply the ratio of η(t, ω) and η ∗ (t, ω), which is, of course, the same as the ratio
of either country’s marginal utilities of the Home and Foreign goods:

                                   η(t)          λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF         Y ∗ (t)
                          q(t) =    ∗
                                         =                                                 .                    (8)
                                   η (t)   λH θH (t)(1 − aH ) + λF θF (t)(1 − aF ) Y (t)

The terms of trade increase in the Foreign and decrease in the Home output. When the Home
output increases, all else equal, the terms of trade deteriorate as the Home good becomes relatively
less scarce. Analogously, the terms of trade improve when Foreign’s output increases. This is the
   6
    For a special case of our economy where θH and θF are deterministic, Cass and Pavlova prove that any equilibrium
in the economy must be Pareto optimal, and thus the allocation is a solution to the planner’s problem. When θH
and θF are stochastic, we verify that the allocation is Pareto optimal.



                                                           8
standard terms of trade effect that takes place in Ricardian models of trade (see Ricardo (1817)
and Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977) for seminal contributions). So far, the asset pricing
literature has ignored it by assuming a single good.

   The terms of trade also depend on the relative weight of the two countries in the planner’s
problem and the relative demand shock θH /θF . If we make an additional assumption that each
country has a preference bias for the local good, then a positive relative demand shock improves
Home’s terms of trade: sign(∂q/∂(θH /θF )) = sign(aH − aF ) > 0. The presence of this effect relates
our model to the open economy macroeconomics literature. In the “dependent economy” model (see
Salter (1959), Swan (1960), and Dornbusch (1980), Chapter 6), a demand shift biased toward the
domestic good raises the price of the Home good relative to that of the Foreign, thus appreciating
the exchange rate. In our model, if aH is larger than aF then the relative demand shock does indeed
represent a demand shift biased toward the domestic good.

   Finally, we determine stock market prices in the economy. Using the no-arbitrage valuation
principle, we obtain
                       Z   T                                            Z   T
                               π(s)                            ∗                π(s) ∗
             S(t) =                 p(s)Y (s)ds     and       S (t) =                p (s)Y ∗ (s)ds.    (9)
                       t       π(t)                                     t       π(t)

Explicit evaluation of these integrals, the details of which are relegated to the Appendix, yields

                                                       q(t)
                                    S(t) =                      Y (t)(T − t) ,                         (10)
                                                  αq(t) + 1 − α
                                                        1
                                   S ∗ (t) =                    Y ∗ (t)(T − t) .                       (11)
                                                  αq(t) + 1 − α

Consistent with insights from the asset pricing literature, each country’s stock price is positively
related to the national output the stock is a claim to. Recall that the innovations to the processes
driving the Home and Foreign output are independent. This, however, does not imply that inter-
national stock markets are contemporaneously uncorrelated. The correlation is induced through
the terms of trade present in (10)–(11). One can combine (10) and (11) to establish a simple
relationship tying together the stock prices in the two countries and the prevailing terms of trade:

                                                        1 Y ∗ (t)
                                           S ∗ (t) =              S(t) .                               (12)
                                                       q(t) Y (t)

   The dynamics of the terms of trade and the international financial markets are jointly deter-
mined within our model. Proposition 1 characterizes these dynamics as a function of three sources
of uncertainty: two country-specific shocks and the relative demand shock.

                                                          9
Proposition 1. The dynamics of the Home and Foreign stock and bond markets, and the terms
of trade are given by
 dS(t)                      1−α                          αq(t)                         1−α
           = I1 (t)dt +               A(t)dθ(t) +                  σY (t)dw(t) +                σ ∗ (t)dw∗ (t) ,   (13)
  S(t)                  αq(t) + 1 − α                αq(t) + 1 − α                 αq(t) + 1 − α Y
dS ∗ (t)                    αq(t)                        αq(t)                         1−α
           = I2 (t)dt −               A(t)dθ(t) +                  σY (t)dw(t) +                σ ∗ (t)dw∗ (t) ,   (14)
 S ∗ (t)                αq(t) + 1 − α                αq(t) + 1 − α                 αq(t) + 1 − α Y
 dB(t)                      1−α                          1−α                           1−α
           = I3 (t)dt +               A(t)dθ(t) −                  σY (t)dw(t) +                σ ∗ (t)dw∗ (t) ,   (15)
 B(t)                   αq(t) + 1 − α                αq(t) + 1 − α                 αq(t) + 1 − α Y
dB ∗ (t)                    αq(t)                        αq(t)                         αq(t)
           = I4 (t)dt −               A(t)dθ(t) +                  σY (t)dw(t) −                σ ∗ (t)dw∗ (t) ,   (16)
B ∗ (t)                 αq(t) + 1 − α                αq(t) + 1 − α                 αq(t) + 1 − α Y
  dq(t)
           = I5 (t)dt + A(t)dθ(t) − σY (t)dw(t) + σY∗ (t)dw∗ (t) ,                                                 (17)
  q(t)
where θ(t) ≡ θH (t)/θF (t), A(t) ≡ λH λF (aH − aF )/[(λH θ(t)aH + λF aF )(λH θ(t)(1 − aH ) + λF (1 − aF ))],
and Ij (t), j = 1, . . . , 5 are reported in the Appendix. Furthermore, if aH > aF , the diffusion
coefficients of the dynamics of the Home and Foreign stock markets and the terms of trade have the
following signs:
                            Variable/ Effects of         dθ(t)   dw(t)   dw∗ (t)
                            dS(t)
                             S(t)                         +       +        +
                            dS ∗ (t)
                             S ∗ (t)                      −       +        +
                                                                                                       (18)
                            dB(t)
                             B(t)                         +       −        +
                            dB ∗ (t)
                             B ∗ (t)                      −       +        −
                            dq(t)
                             q(t)                         +       −        +

   Proposition 1 identifies some important interconnections between the financial and real markets
in the world economy. Under the home bias assumption, it entails unambiguous directions of
contemporaneous responses of all markets to innovations in supply and demand, summarized in
(18). (18) nests some fundamental implications from various strands of international economics,
which we highlighted in our earlier discussion. Our goal is to unify them within a simple model,
and focus on the interactions.

   One such interaction sheds light on the determinants of financial contagion − a puzzling ten-
dency of stock markets across the world to exhibit excessive co-movement (for a recent detailed
account of this phenomenon, see Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Végh (2003)). Contagion in our model
occurs in response to an output shock. Ceteris paribus, a positive output shock say in Home causes
a positive return on the domestic stock market. At the same time, however, it initiates a Ricar-
dian response of the terms of trade: the terms of trade move against the country experiencing
a productivity increase. A flip side of the deterioration of the terms of trade in Home is an im-
provement of those in Foreign. Hence, the value of Foreign’s output has to rise, thereby providing

                                                    10
a boost to Foreign’s stock market. Note that nothing in this argument relies on the correlation
between the countries’ output processes. In fact, in a special case of our model where there are no
demand shocks (discussed below), we obtain a perfect co-movement of the stock markets despite
independence of the countries’ output innovations. Bond markets certainly also react to changes
in productivity: a positive output shock in Home lowers bond prices in Home and lifts those in
Foreign.

     While supply shocks move the countries’ stock prices in the same direction, demand shocks act
in the opposite way. We call this phenomenon “divergence.” Thus, a demand shock say in Home
causes a relative demand shift biased toward the Home good, thereby boosting Home’s terms of
trade. Improved terms of trade increase the value of Home’s output, and hence lift Home’s stock
market, while decreasing that of Foreign’s output and lowering Foreign’s stock market. Similarly,
since our bonds are real bonds, a strengthening of Home’s terms of trade increases the value of
the Home bond and decreases that of the Foreign. A world economy without supply shocks is
thus an example of perfect divergence: asset markets of different countries always move in opposite
directions.

     Finally, Proposition 1 provides analytical characterization of the sensitivities of each market’s
responses to the supply and demand shocks, and also establishes cross-equation restrictions on how
these sensitivities measure up to each other. The system of simultaneous equations describing the
joint dynamics of the five markets (13)–(17) establishes a basis for our empirical analysis, carried
out in Section 3.


2.3.    Special Cases and Interpretations of θH and θF

In Proposition 1 we did not commit to specifying the dynamics of the demand shocks θH and θF . For
the empirical analysis to follow, this is advantageous because the relative demand shock θ = θH /θF ,
in general, depends on the underlying Brownian motions w and w∗ inducing a correlation in the
error structure that we do not have to impose ex-ante. In this section, we put more structure on
the martingales θH and θF as we consider various economic interpretations of these processes:

                    dθH (t) = ~κH (t)> θH (t)dw(t)
                                              ~ ,         dθH (t) = ~κF (t)> θH (t)dw(t)
                                                                                    ~ .           (19)


A.     Deterministic Preference Parameters

It is instructive to consider a special case where θH and θF are deterministic processes, i.e., ~κH and

                                                     11
~κF are zeros. By substituting equation (8) into equation (12), we find that

                                               λH θH (0)aH + λF θF (0)aF
                             S ∗ (t) =                                           S(t).
                                         λH θH (0)(1 − aH ) + λF θF (0)(1 − aF )

As the multiplier term is non-stochastic, the two stock markets must be perfectly correlated. This
implication achieves our goal of generating international financial contagion without assuming cor-
relation between individual countries’ output processes, but it is certainly rather extreme and is
easily rejected empirically. (Zapatero (1995) and Cass and Pavlova (2003) obtain this implication
in their models as well, dubbing the resulting equilibrium a “peculiar” financial equilibrium.) In
what follows, we force θH and θF to be stochastic processes, which would provoke the divergence
effect and hence guarantee imperfect correlation between Home and Foreign stock markets, but
would still produce financial contagion.


B.    Preference Shocks or Pure Sentiment

The next special case we consider is where θH and θF are driven by the Brownian motion wθ ,
independent of w and w∗ . In this case, ~κH = (0, 0, κH )> and ~κF = (0, 0, κF )> , where κH and κF
are arbitrary adapted processes. Then θ has dynamics

                   dθ(t) = (κF (t)2 − κH (t)κF (t)) θ(t) dt + (κH (t) − κF (t)) θ(t) dwθ (t).

The process θ can then be interpreted as a relative preference shock or a shock to consumer
sentiment.


C.    “Catching up with the Joneses”/ Consumer Confidence

Consider the case where the processes θH and θF depend on the country-specific Brownian motions:
~κH = (κH , 0, 0)> and ~κF = (0, κF , 0)> , where κH , κF < 0 may depend on w and w∗ .7 Home and
Foreign consumers’ preferences then display “catching up with the Joneses” behavior (Abel (1990)).
The “benchmark” levels of Home and Foreign consumers, θH and θF , are negatively correlated with
aggregate consumption of their country, Y and Y ∗ , respectively. Positive news to local aggregate
consumption reduces satisfaction of the local consumer, as his consumption bundle becomes less
attractive in an improved domestic economic environment. The implication of this interpretation
    7
      The labels κH and κF are used just to save on notation, they need not be the same as in interpretation B. Note
that under this interpretation ~κH and ~κF do not depend on the Brownian motion wθ . This specification makes wθ
a sunspot in the sense of Cass and Shell (1983): it affects neither preferences nor aggregate endowments. There
is then a potential problem with employing the planner’s problem in solving for equilibrium allocations because it
only identifies nonsunspot equilibria. Since markets are dynamically complete in our economy, however, the sunspot
immunity argument of Cass and Shell goes through.


                                                         12
for the relative demand shock, θ, is that

          dθ(t) = κF (t)2 θ(t) dt + κH (t) θ(t) dw(t) − κF (t) θ(t) dw∗ (t),      κH (t), κF (t) < 0.

That is, an innovation to θ is negatively correlated with the Home output shock and positively
correlated with the Foreign shock.

     An alternative kind of dependence of agents’ preferences on the country-specific output shock is a
form of consumer confidence. The idea is that agents get more enthusiastic when their local economy
is doing well and hence demand more consumption. Formally, preferences exhibiting consumer
confidence are the same as those under catching up with the Joneses, except that κH (t), κF (t) > 0.


D.    Radon-Nikodym Derivatives Reflecting Heterogeneous Beliefs

The previous two special cases we considered assume that consumer preferences are state-dependent.
State-dependence of preferences, however, is not necessarily implied by our specification (4)–(5).
Under the current interpretation, the countries have state-independent preferences, but they differ
in their assessment of uncertainty underlying the world economy. For example, Home residents
may believe that the uncertainty is driven by the (vector) Brownian motion w            ∗ , w θ )>
                                                                           ~ H ≡ (wH , wH    H

                                                   ~ F ≡ (wF , wF∗ , wFθ )> . All we require is that the
and Foreign residents believe that it is driven by w
“true” probability measure P and the country-specific measures H (Home) and F (Foreign) are
equivalent; that is, they all agree on the zero probability events. Under their respective measures,
the agents’ expected utilities are given by
                     ·Z T                                           ¸
                   i                                       ∗
                 E        [ai log(Ci (t)) + (1 − ai ) log(Ci (t))]dt ,         i ∈ {H, F },
                         0

where E i denotes the expectation taken under the information set of agent i. Thanks to Girsanov’s
theorem, the above expectations can be equivalently restated under the true probability measure
in the form of (4)–(5). The multiples θH (t) and θF (t), appearing in the expressions as a result
of the change of measure, are the so-called density processes associated with the Radon-Nikodym
                                    ¡ ¢                              ¡ dF ¢
derivatives of H with respect to P , dH
                                     dP , and F with respect to P , dP , respectively.

     The densities θH and θF may reflect various economic scenarios. One is the case of incomplete
information: the consumers do not observe the parameters of the output processes, and need to
estimate them. While the diffusion coefficients σY (t) and σY∗ (t) may be estimated by computing
quadratic variations of Y (t) and Y ∗ (t), estimation of mean growth rates of output is rather nontriv-
ial. First, the consumers may be assumed to be Bayesian, endowed with some priors of the growth

                                                     13
rates. Then they will be updating their priors each instant as new information arrives, through
solving a filtering problem.8 Second, the consumers may use some updating method other than
Bayesian. For example, they may be systematically overly optimistic or pessimistic about the mean
growth rates of output. Finally, they may explicitly account for model uncertainty in their decision-
making. All these special cases result in consumers employing a probability measure different from
the true one. These differences of opinion can be succinctly represented by some Radon-Nikodym
derivatives θH (T ) and θF (T ). Under any of these interpretations, we can no longer assume that θ
in Proposition 1 is uncorrelated with either w or w∗ , which we have to take into account in our
econometric tests.


2.4.    Interest Rate Parity and Trading Strategies

Uncovered interest rate parity in its classical form is a relationship between local interest rates at
Home and Foreign and the expected exchange rate (terms of trade) appreciation. In this section we
show that in our setting, such a relationship must have an additional term capturing a pertinent
risk premium. This term is, in general, time-varying. We also fully characterize equilibrium interest
rates prevailing at Home and Foreign, under different interpretations of the demand shocks. These
results are reported in the following proposition.

Proposition 2. The uncovered interest rate parity relationship has the form

                                rF (t) − µq (t) = rH (t) + σq (t)> (mH (t) + σq (t)),                              (20)

where µq and σq are the mean growth and volatility parameters in the dynamic representation of q,
dq(t)/q(t) = µq (t)dt + σq (t)> dw(t),
                                 ~     mH is the Home market price of risk reported in the Appendix,
and r and r are the Home and Foreign real interest rates, i.e., instantaneously riskless returns
      H       F

on local money market accounts specified in terms of the local goods, given by:

  (i) under interpretations A and B,

                               rH (t) = µY (t) − σY (t)2 ,      rF (t) = µ∗Y (t) − σY∗ (t)2 ,
    8
      We provide details of the ensuing filtering problems in the Appendix, in the context of the proof of Proposition 2.
We consider the case where the agents believe there are only two independent innovation processes, wi and wi∗ , and
the case where, additionally, there is the third one, wiθ . The first two innovations drive the output processes Y
and Y ∗ , respectively. Following Detemple and Murthy (1994), we impose additional regularity conditions on σY (t)
and σY∗ (t) to make the filtering problem tractable: both processes are bounded and are of the form σY (Y (t), t) and
σY∗ (Y ∗ (t), t), respectively. When the agents perceive that the parameters they are estimating also depend on the
third innovation process, which can represent either intrinsic of extrinsic uncertainty (a sunspot), they make use of
a public signal carrying information about wiθ .




                                                           14
 (ii) under interpretation C,

                                                     λH θH (t)aH
               rH (t) = µY (t) − σY (t)2 +                               σY (t)κH (t),
                                                λ θ (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF
                                                |H H     {z            }
                                                        CH (t)/YH (t)
                                                           λF θF (t)(1 − aF )
               rF (t) = µ∗Y (t) − σY∗ (t)2 +                                            σ ∗ (t)κF (t),
                                                λH θH (t)(1 − aH ) + λF θF (t)(1 − aF ) Y
                                                |                  {z                 }
                                                                  ∗ (t)/Y ∗ (t)
                                                                 CF      F



(iii) under interpretation D (see the Appendix for the detailed description of the economic setting),

                                      λH θH (t)aH (µH (t) − µY (t)) + λF θF (t)aF (µF (t) − µY (t))
      rH (t) = µY (t) − σY (t)2 +                                                                   ,
                                                       λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF
                                      |                            {z                             }
                                                  CH (t)                      CF (t)
                                                   Y (t)
                                                         (µH (t)−µY   (t))+    Y (t)
                                                                                     (µF (t)−µY   (t))


                                      λH θH (t)(1 − aH )(µ∗H (t) − µ∗Y (t)) + λF θF (t)(1 − aF )(µF (t) − µ∗Y (t))
      rF (t) = µ∗Y (t) − σY∗ (t)2 +                                                                                ,
                                                      λH θH (t)(1 − aH ) + λF θF (t)(1 − aF )
                                      |                                    {z                                    }
                                                         C ∗ (t)                      C ∗ (t)
                                                          H
                                                         Y ∗ (t)
                                                                 (µ∗H (t)−µ∗Y   (t))+ Y F∗ (t) (µ∗F (t)−µ∗Y (t))


where µH (t) and µF (t) denote perceived or estimated mean growth rates of the Home output by
Home and Foreign consumers, respectively, and µ∗H (t) and µ∗F (t) denote perceived or estimated
mean growth rates of the Foreign output by Home and Foreign consumers, respectively.


   In its classical form, uncovered interest rate parity is a relationship which assumes that arbitrage
will enforce equality of returns on the following two investment strategies. The first one is investing
a unit of wealth in the Home money market account resulting in receiving the riskless return at
rate rH , in units of the Home good, over the next instant. The second is investing the same
amount in the Foreign money market, at rate rF , over the next instant and then converting the
proceeds paid out in the Foreign good into the Home good using the prevailing terms of trade.
In our model, the two strategies are not equivalent because in terms of the Home good, the first
strategy is riskless, while the second one is risky. The left-hand side of (20) represents the mean
return on the second strategy, given by the Foreign money market rate less the mean terms of
trade appreciation. The right-hand side contains the return on the riskless first strategy, plus an
additional term capturing the risk premium the risky strategy commands. This risk premium is,
in general, time-varying. The only case in which it can be shown to be constant in the context
of our model is within interpretation A (no demand shocks) under an additional assumption that
the mean growths and volatilities of the output processes Y and Y ∗ are constant. Recall that the
role of interpretation A is to establish a theoretical benchmark; it is easily rejected empirically.


                                                      15
Under the remaining interpretations, the risk premium term depends on the demand shocks. Hence,
uncovered interest rate parity in its classical form − (20) with no risk premium term − does not
obtain in our model.

   In the empirical section, which comes next, we estimate the variance-covariance matrix of the
shocks, and find that the variance of demand shocks is two times larger than that of supply shocks.
One implication of this finding is that the risk premium would be very volatile, too. Deviations
from the classical uncovered interest rate parity relationship have been found to be very large and
volatile, and the need for a very volatile risk premium has been emphasized repeatedly in the
empirical literature since Fama (1984). Our model may then shed some light on these issues.

   Equilibrium riskless rates of return on money market accounts in each country have to be such
that agents are willing to save. In the benchmark case of no demand shocks (interpretation A), local
interest rates must then be positively related to the growth of aggregate consumption of the local
good and negatively related to the aggregate consumption volatility, reflecting the precautionary
savings motive. When the demand shocks are interpreted as pure sentiment shocks (B), driven
by an independent source of uncertainty, the local money market rates are the same as in the
benchmark. This is because the sentiment shocks are martingales; otherwise if they had nonzero
mean growth terms, these terms would have appeared in the expression for the interest rate as
additional inducements for the agents to save, acting analogously to impatience parameters (which
we do not model). Since the demand shocks do not co-vary with aggregate consumption uncertainty,
they also do not give rise to an additional precautionary savings component. Such a component
appears under interpretation C, where aggregate consumption of the local good imposes a negative
(catching up with the Joneses) or positive (consumer confidence) externality on the agents. In the
former case, this gives rise to an additional precautionary savings effect, driving down the interest
rates, while in the latter case the interest rates rise. The strength of this additional effect induced
by consumption externalities of Home (Foreign) agents is determined by the relative importance
of Home (Foreign) consumers in the world economy. This relative importance is captured by the
shares of the agents in the aggregate consumption of the local good, which can also be linked to
wealth distribution in the economy. An additional component over the benchmark also appears
in the interest rate expressions under the differences of opinion interpretation D, as highlighted in
Proposition 2. Perhaps a better way to present say the Home rate under this interpretation is as a
weighted average of the Home rates prevailing if only Home consumers were present in the economy



                                                  16
(µH (t) − σY (t)2 ) and if only Foreign consumers were present (µF (t) − σY (t)2 ), with weights again
given by the agents’ consumption shares.

   We now turn to computing the agents’ trading strategies. To facilitate comparison with the
literature, we consider an additional security: a “world” bond B W , locally riskless in the numeraire.
This bond does not, of course, introduce any new investment opportunities in the economy; it is
just a portfolio of α shares of the Home bond and (1-α) shares of the Foreign bond. Let r denote
the interest rate on this bond.

   The number of non-redundant securities differs across interpretations A–D, which complicates
our exposition. Thus, as we discussed earlier, Home and Foreign stocks are perfectly correlated
under interpretation A, and hence investments in individual stock markets cannot be uniquely
determined. Under the remaining interpretations, we can uniquely identify agents’ holdings of
national stock markets. One of the bond markets, however, may or may not be redundant depending
on the interpretation. In what follows, we replace the Foreign bond by the world bond in the
investment opportunity set of the agents. (Investment in the Foreign bond can be recovered from
the portfolio allocations to the Home and world bonds, where applicable.)

   Before we proceed to reporting our results, we need to define the notion of a home bias. We
measure a bias in portfolios relative to the (common to the agents) mean-variance portfolio. Thus,
a Home (Foreign) resident’s portfolio is said to exhibit a home bias if the portfolio weight he assigns
to the Home (Foreign) stock is higher than that in the mean-variance portfolio.

Proposition 3.      (i) Countries’ portfolios are given by

                 xi (t) =       (σ(t)> )−1 I m(t)   + (σ(t)> )−1 I ~κi (t) ,      i ∈ {H, F } ,       (21)
                                |       {z      }     |       {z         }
                             mean-variance portfolio hedging portfolio

      where the compositions of the vector of the fractions of wealth invested in risky assets, xi , of the
      volatility matrix of the investment opportunity set σ, of the market price of risk m and of the
      auxiliary matrix I, different across interpretations A–D, are provided in the Appendix. The
      remaining fraction of wealth, 1−x>  ~                                             ~
                                        i 1, is invested in the world bond B , where 1 = (1, . . . , 1) .
                                                                              W                          >


 (ii) Under interpretation B, countries’ portfolios do not exhibit a home bias. Assume further that
      aH > aF . Then, under interpretation C, in the case of κH (t), κF (t) > 0 (consumer confi-
      dence) portfolios always exhibit a home bias, while in the case of κH (t), κF (t) < 0 (catching
      up with the Joneses) the portfolio of Home exhibits a home bias if and only if (1 − α)σY∗ (t) +
      A(t)θ(t)αq(t)κF (t) > 0 and that of Foreign if and only if αq(t)σY (t)+A(t)θ(t)(1−α)κH (t) > 0.
      Under interpretation D, the sign of the bias is ambiguous.




                                                    17
(iii) The international CAPM has the form
                                  µ j              ¶          µ j                                       ¶
      Et (dS j (t))                dS (t) dW (t)                 dS (t)            λH
                    − r(t) = Covt           ,         − Covt             ,                      dθH (t)
         S j (t)                    S j (t) W (t)                 S j (t) λH θH (t) + λF θF (t)
                                   µ j                                     ¶
                                     dS (t)            λF
                             −Covt            ,                     dθF (t) ,       S j ∈ {S, S ∗ } , (22)
                                      S j (t) λF θF (t) + λF θF (t)

       where W ≡ WH + WF is the aggregate wealth and r is the interest rate on the world bond,
       reported in the Appendix.


    In our economy, the fact that the countries have logarithmic preferences does not imply that
the their investment behavior is myopic. Their trading strategies involve holding the standard
mean-variance portfolio along with a hedging one. Although the countries do not hedge against
changes in the investment opportunity set (which is standard for logarithmic preferences), they do
hedge against their respective demand shocks.9 The way they do so depends on the correlation
between their demand shocks and output shocks, and hence differs across our interpretations of
demand shocks. Thus, if the demand shocks are independent of output shocks − pure sentiment
interpretation B − portfolio weights the countries assign to the stocks coincide with those in the
mean-variance portfolio. If a country’s demand shocks are positively related to its output shocks
(consumer confidence interpretation C)− that is, if a country demands more consumption (biased
toward the domestic good) when it is experiencing a positive output shock − consumers increase
their portfolio holdings of the domestic stock, a claim to domestic output. On the other hand, if
the demand shocks are negatively correlated with the country’s output innovations − catching up
with the Joneses interpretation C − a home bias in portfolios may or may not arise. Proposition 3
provides a necessary and sufficient condition for the bias to occur. Finally, our differences of
opinion interpretation D is too general to entail unambiguous implications on the sign of the bias.
However, if specialized further, it is likely to yield sharper predictions. For example, albeit in a
different setting, Uppal and Wang (2003) argue that disparities in agents’ ambiguity about home
and foreign stock returns can lead to a home bias in portfolios.
    9
      Our references to consumers’ hedging behavior made in the context of the differences of opinion interpretation
of the demand shocks may appear confusing. How can consumers hedge deviations of their beliefs from the true
probability measure, which they do not know? In fact, they do not. They hold a portfolio which is mean-variance
efficient under their own probability measure, given by the product of the inverted volatility matrix (σ > )−1 and the
country-specific market prices of risk mi = m + ~κi , constructed from their own investment opportunity sets. The
representation in equation (21) is thus formally equivalent to a mean-variance portfolio under a country’s individual
beliefs, except it further decomposes a country-specific market price of risk into two components: the “true” market
price of risk m and the measure of deviation of agent’s beliefs from the true probability measure ~κi , both unobservable
from the point of view of an agent.




                                                           18
     The presence of the hedging portfolios optimally held by the agents clearly rules out the tradi-
tional one-factor CAPM. In addition to the standard market (aggregate wealth) factor, our model
identifies two further factors, the Home and Foreign demand shocks, that affect the risk premia on
the stocks. The expression in (22) also differs from the international CAPM (see Solnik (1974),
Adler and Dumas (1983)). As is standard for logarithmic preferences, the exchange rate does not
appear explicitly in (22); however, its determinants − the demand shocks − do. (One would expect
the exchange rate to appear as an additional factor if we relaxed the assumption of logarithmic
preferences.) The presence of the demand shocks points to a possible misspecification of the CAPM
widely tested empirically. Our alternative formulation might then provide an improvement over
the standard specification used in the international finance literature.


3.     Empirical analysis

In this section we examine the empirical implications of the model. We use daily data for the
US vis-à-vis the UK and Germany that has been collected from DataStream. As proxies for our
riskless bonds, we use data on the three-month zero-coupon government bonds for each country.
The US, UK and German stock market indexes are taken to represent the countries’ stock prices.
The dollar-pound and dollar-mark exchange rates are used for identifying the real exchange rates
and the terms of trade via a procedure described below. The data for the US and the UK are from
1988 until the end of 2002. The data for Germany is shorter, until December 1998, because of the
transition to the euro. We did not consider it prudent to complete the data from 1998 to the end
of 2002 by extrapolating the euro exchange rates and interest rates to the mark. Moreover, we
do not want our exercise to be contaminated by the change in an exchange rate regime that took
place with the creation of the euro. All empirical analysis involving Germany is thus performed on
a shorter data set.

     Figure 1 depicts the evolution of the exchange rate along with stock and bond markets values
for the US vis-à-vis Germany and the UK. Even a casual observation of the figure suggests that the
bond prices do not bear too much relationship to the exchange rates. This observation is strongly
supported by a regression analysis, not reported here, whose results may be interpreted as a failure
of uncovered interest rate parity, well-documented in the literature and also found in our sample.
On the other hand, the amount of co-movement between the stock indexes and the exchange rates
is quite striking. We computed the pertinent correlations and found them to be highly statistically


                                                  19
significant. Our theory that stock prices and exchange rates are driven by the same set of factors,
then, does not appear to be empirically unfounded.


3.1.     Real and Nominal Quantities

Before we proceed with our formal empirical analysis, we need to establish a mapping between the
quantities employed in our model and those in the data available to us − the data are in nominal
terms, while our model is real. The main issue is to impute the terms of trade from the available
data on nominal exchange rates. To do so, we first compute the real exchange rate implied by our
model. The real exchange rate, e, is defined as e(t) = PH (t)/PF (t), where PH and PF are Home and
Foreign price indexes, respectively. In practice, a variety of methods have been used for computing
a country’s price level, or cost of living (see Schultze (2003)). We have chosen to adopt geometric
average price indexes, which address the criticism pertaining to the substitution between goods
bias, and are consistent with the countries’ homothetic preferences:
                   µ     ¶ µ ∗        ¶                    µ     ¶ µ ∗      ¶
                     p(t) aH    p (t) 1−aH                   p(t) aF  p (t) 1−aF
          PH (t) =                           ,    PF (t) =                       .
                     aH        1 − aH                         aF     1 − aF

The real exchange rate, expressed as a function of the terms of trade, is then

                                                      (1 − aF )1−aF aaFF
                                 e(t) = q(t)aH −aF                       .
                                                      (1 − aH )1−aH aaHH

Finally, to obtain the nominal exchange rate, we need to adjust the real exchange rate for inflation
in Home versus Foreign. Unfortunately, daily data on inflation, required for our estimation, are
not available. However, our data span a relatively short period of time when international inflation
rates were very low. Consequently, as argued by Mussa (1979), our real rates are closely related
to the nominal ones. We thus assume that inflation is negligibly small and simply make a level
adjustment to the real rate to back out the nominal exchange rate, ε: ε(t) = εe(t), where ε is the
average nominal exchange rate in the sample.

   For our empirical investigation of the dynamics reported in Proposition 1, we use the variable
                                         µ                             ¶1/(aH −aF )
                                             ε(t) (1 − aH )1−aH aaHH
                                q(t) =                                                               (23)
                                              ε (1 − aF )1−aF aaFF

as a proxy for the terms of trade. Taking logs and applying Itô’s lemma, we obtain an equation to
replace (17) in Proposition 1:

       dε(t)
             = I6 (t)dt + (aH − aF )A(t)dθ(t) − (aH − aF )σY (t)dw(t) + (aH − aF )σY∗ (t)dw∗ (t) ,
        ε(t)

                                                        20
where I6 (t) = (aH −aF )I5 (t)+ 21 (aH −aF )(aH −aF −1)|σq (t)|2 . Under our assumption of no inflation
over the time period we are considering, the remaining equations in Proposition 1, (13)–(16), are
unchanged when prices are expressed in nominal terms. Finally, since the nominal exchange rate,
ε, is monotonically increasing with the terms of trade q, the signs of the coefficients identified in
Proposition 1 are maintained for nominal prices. Moreover, the signs of the effects of the shocks
     dε(t)                               dq(t)
on    ε(t)   are the same as those for    q(t)   reported in (18).

     For a practical implementation of this conversion of units, we need to calibrate parameters
aH , aF and α used in the expressions. It is reasonable to assume that about three quarters of a
country’s consumption comes from the locally produced good. Such home bias is primarily due
to the presence of non-tradable goods, which comprise a large fraction of national consumption.
While we do not explicitly account for non-tradable goods, their presence is modeled in reduced
form, through parameters aH and aF (see Section 4 for further elaboration). It is thus reasonable
to set aH equal to 0.75 and aF equal to 0.25. We also need a sensible value for α, the weight of
the US-produced goods in the world numeraire basket, or a price index. By setting α = 0.75 we
are implicitly assuming that the US economy is about three times the UK economy. Of course, we
run robustness checks where we vary these parameters, which we discuss later in this section. The
calibrated values of aH and aF are used for computing the series for the terms of trade via (23).
We then use the numeraire basket (identified by α) and the terms of trade to convert stock and
bond prices for each country into a common numeraire.


3.2.         Cross equation restrictions

We now turn to testing our model’s implications on the dynamic behavior of asset prices and
exchange rates. They are summarized in Proposition 1, in the system of equations (13)–(17) and
the accompanying table with the predicted signs of the coefficients (18). For convenience, we
reproduce this system below, in a matrix form:
                                                                  
          dS(t)
                              b(t)       1 − b(t)     b(t)
        S(t)                                                                        
        dS (t) 
            ∗                                                       
        S ∗ (t)        −1 + b(t)      1 − b(t)     b(t)               A (t) dθ (t)
                                                                                    
        dB(t)  ~                                                                    
        B(t)  = I +        b(t)        −b(t)       b(t)             σY (t) dw (t)   ,      (M1)
                                                                                    
        dB ∗ (t)                                                  
        B ∗ (t)        −1 + b(t)      1 − b(t)  −1 + b(t)          σY∗ (t) dw∗ (t)
                                                                  
          dε(t)
           ε(t)            (aH − aF ) − (aH − aF ) (aH − aF )
                        |                   {z                       }
                                            B1


                                                          21
where I~ is a (vector) intercept term and
                                                             µ                             ¶1/(aH −aF )
                         1−α                                     ε(t) (1 − aH )1−aH aaHH
              b(t) ≡                ,      with q(t) =                                                    .    (24)
                     αq (t) + 1 − α                               ε (1 − aF )1−aF aaFF

Unfortunately, while we can construct all the left-hand side variables in (M1), we do not have data
on the variables on the right-hand side of the system. Consequently, in our estimation we treat the
innovations A (t) dθ (t), σY (t) dw (t), and σY∗ (t) dw∗ (t) as latent factors that we extract from stock
and bond prices and exchange rates. The first factor, A (t) dθ (t), captures the relative demand
shock, while the remaining two, σY (t) dw (t) and σY∗ (t) dw∗ (t), represent Home and Foreign supply
shocks, respectively. (There is a slight abuse of terminology in this section; earlier we referred to
dθ, dw and dw∗ as the demand and supply shocks.) Note that the factor loadings in matrix B1 are
fully described by the quantity b(t), which depends only on the weight of the US-produced goods in
the world numeraire basket α, the nominal exchange rate ε, and the preference for domestic good
parameters aH and aF .

    Perhaps the most direct approach to testing our model would be to take Proposition 1 literally
and estimate the structural latent factor model (M1). Note, however, that since the factors are
in general heteroskedastic and may be correlated in our model, a priori there is no reason to put
any restrictions on their variance-covariance matrix. The only set of restrictions our theory entails
is those on the elements of matrix B1 . This estimation strategy, in practice, imposes too few
constraints on the model: implicitly, we would be fitting five series with three unrestricted factors.
As a result, the fit of the model within sample would be very good and the likelihood of rejecting the
model very low.10 For this reason, we have decided to adopt a different approach. We seek support
for our theoretical implications from the following two tests. The first one considers a simplified
version of (M1), where factor loadings are assumed constant, and the factors are homoskedastic.
We impose all the cross equation constraints, i.e., force the factor loadings in B1 to be related to
each other exactly as specified. In the second test, we drop the cross equations restrictions as well
as the assumption of homoskedasticity of the factors, and estimate the model imposing only the
sign restrictions from (18). The remainder of this subsection implements the first test, and the
next subsection is devoted to the second one.

    The key to executing the first test is recognizing that under the assumptions of constant coeffi-
cients (b(t) = b) and homoskedasticity we can estimate the model using the unconditional covariance
 10
    We have indeed estimated the model following this strategy. The fit within sample has been unrealistically good.
Results are available from the authors upon request, and from http://web.mit.edu/∼rigobon/www/.


                                                        22
                                     US-UK                       US-Germany
                          Point Estimate Std. Error      Point Estimate Std. Error
                 aH -aF        0.5219      0.0010            0.5450       0.0021
                    b          0.2569      0.0016            0.2588       0.0019
                   σθ          0.7702      0.0087            0.7616       0.0107
                   σY          0.3282      0.0057            0.2390       0.0049
                   σY∗         0.3824      0.0067            0.4968       0.0095
                  ρθ,Y         0.4294      0.0056            0.3108       0.0058
                  ρ∗θ,Y       -0.6658      0.0132            -0.9902      0.0209

Table 1: Constant coefficients and cross equation restrictions: Estimation of Model
(M1) for the US vis-à-vis the UK and Germany. σθ denotes the standard deviation of the
relative demand shock A(t)dθ(t), and ρθ,Y , ρ∗θ,Y are the correlations of this factor with the supply
shocks σY (t)dw(t) and σY∗ (t)dw∗ (t), respectively. All standard deviations are in percentage terms.


matrix computed from the aforementioned five time series for each pair of countries. We allow the
covariance matrix of the factors to be non-diagonal, so that the test can incorporate all of our
interpretations of θ and suggest which ones appear plausible in the data. We still force the two
supply shocks to have a covariance of zero, but the other two covariance terms are allowed to differ
from zero. We estimate the coefficients b and aH -aF , and the covariance matrix by GMM. We have
15 second moments estimated from the data (the covariance matrix of the observed returns), which
have to be explained by seven coefficients: two coefficients identifying matrix B1 , b and aH -aF ,
and five coefficients describing the covariance matrix of the latent factors (three variances and two
correlations). The results are reported in Table 1.

   Consider first the case of the US vis-à-vis the UK. As we discussed earlier, the reasonable
calibration of parameters aH and aF are 0.75 and 0.25, respectively. The point estimate of aH -aF ,
0.5219, is then very close to the calibrated value. Furthermore, after our accounting for the level
effect of the nominal exchange rate and the calibration of α, the average value of the terms of trade
from (23) is, roughly, one. Then, the calibrated value of the coefficient b from (24) is about 0.25.
The estimate we obtain in the data is 0.2569 − very close indeed.

   The remaining five estimates summarize the covariance matrix of the three latent factors. First,
note that the demand shocks are very important both in magnitude and significance, rejecting our
interpretation A, where we assume that only the supply shocks drive the economy. In fact, the
standard deviation of the demand shocks is twice as large as that of the supply shocks. The
standard deviations of the two supply shocks have similar orders of magnitude. Second, note
that the estimates of the correlations constructed from the covariance matrix, indicate that the
relative demand shock is positively correlated with the US’s supply shock, and negatively correlated


                                                 23
with the UK’s. The estimates are statistically significant, strongly rejecting the pure sentiment
interpretation B. Furthermore, the catching up with the Joneses interpretation C, under which
the the relative demand shock should negatively co-vary with the US supply shock and positively
with the UK’s, is rejected, too. The story the data is telling is the reverse: instead of becoming
relatively unhappy when their country’s aggregate consumption increases, agents appear to get
enthusiastic when their economy is doing well. This speaks in favor of our consumer confidence
interpretation C. Alternatively, these results may be viewed as evidence of differences in opinion
(interpretation D).

   The results for the case of the US vis-à-vis Germany are very similar. The point estimates of
aH -aF and b are almost identical to the previous case, as one would expect because the relative
sizes of the economies and their preference biases toward domestic goods are close. The variances
are also similar, although, in the case of Germany, its supply shocks are larger than the UK’s.
The pattern of the correlations is close to the previous case: again, the relative demand shock is
positively correlated with the US supply innovations, and negatively correlated with the German
− in support of the consumer confidence interpretation.

   In summary, the structural parameters estimated in this exercise are close to those from cali-
bration of B1 . Furthermore, we find that demand shocks are very important in explaining short-run
variation of asset prices: their variance is twice the size of that of supply shocks. Furthermore,
in the data demand shocks are neither independent of supply shocks, nor support the catching up
with the Joneses interpretation. Rather, the demand shocks are due to either differences of opinion
or variations in consumer confidence, positively related to fluctuations in national output.


3.3.   Sign Restrictions

The previous section studied a very restrictive version of the model. In this section we relax the
cross equation restrictions on the coefficients of matrix B1 , and also allow the variance of the latent
factors to change through time. We continue to maintain the assumption that the coefficients are
constant, but now impose only the sign restrictions arising from Proposition 1. Indeed, one of the
principal implications of the model is the unambiguous prediction for the signs of the responses
of observed prices to innovations in the latent factors, summarized in (18). We thus estimate the




                                                  24
following latent-factor model
                                                                  
                              dS(t)
                               S(t)                α11   1     α13
                                                                               
                            dS ∗ (t)                            
                             S ∗ (t)
                                                α21 1        α23     A(t)dθ(t)
                                                                               
                            dB(t)       ~                                      
                                        = I +  α31 α32      α33   σY (t)dw(t)  ,                          (M2)
                             B(t)                                              
                            dB ∗ (t)                            
                                               α41 α42      α43  σY∗ (t)dw∗ (t)
                             B ∗ (t)                            
                              dε(t)
                               ε(t)                1 α52       α53
                                                |     {z           }
                                                      B2
where αij are constant. The sign restrictions, entailed by our theory, require that α11 , α13 , α22 ,
α31 , α33 , α42 , α53 , are positive and that α21 , α32 , α41 , α43 , α52 , are negative. In order to estimate
the model, we have to normalize some of the coefficients in matrix B2 . The coefficients set equal to
unity reflect the following normalization: the productivity shock in the US has a unitary effect on
the US and the foreign stock market (responses of the two markets should be identical, according
to our theory) and the demand shock has a unitary effect on the exchange rate. We continue to
assume that the supply shocks in the US are orthogonal to those in the foreign country, but allow
the demand shocks to be correlated with the supply shocks. We also assume that heteroskedasticity
can be described by two regimes: a high and a low volatility regime.

       In model (M2), there is a problem of identification in the absence of heteroskedasticity. The time
series for the left-hand side variables allow us to estimate their variance covariance matrix, yielding
a total of 15 moments. On the other hand, once we allow for correlation between demand and
supply shocks, the right-hand side has 17 moments. Hence, standard identification is not possible.
Under the assumptions of constant coefficients and heteroskedasticity, however, the presence of
only two heteroskedastic regimes is sufficient to solve the problem of identification − even if the
covariance matrices across the two regimes are completely unrestricted. In other words, if there
are two heteroskedastic regimes, we can compute two distinct variance-covariance matrices, which
provide 30 moments. The right hand side has 12 unknowns in the matrix B2 . In addition, there are
two factor covariance matrices, each containing five unknowns. In total, there are 22 variables to
be estimated.11 Obviously, this system of equations satisfies the order condition, meaning that the
number of unknowns is smaller than the number of equations. However, a priori it is unclear whether
the 30 moments computed from the two regimes necessarily provide us with enough independent
  11
     This identification strategy is related to the recent “identification through heteroskedasticity” literature. See
Wright (1928) for the original contribution, and Sentana (1992), Sentana and Fiorentini (2001) and Rigobon (2003)
for recent developments. For applications see Caporale, Cipollini, and Demetriades (2002), Caporale, Cipollini, and
Spagnolo (2002), Rigobon and Sack (2003).


                                                         25
equations. Therefore, in the actual estimation we use more than two regimes; in fact, we use as
many as possible.

      The estimation procedure is as follows.


 (a) We compute two-day returns for each of the five variables we employ.

 (b) We run a VAR to clean for serial correlation and recover the residuals. We use five lags in all
        of our specifications, but the results are unaffected by increasing the number of lags.

 (c) We determine the heteroskedastic regimes using the residuals from the VAR. To do so, for
        each residual we first compute the rolling window variance. We also calculate the variance
        in the entire sample (similar to the average of the rolling window variance) and the standard
        deviation of the rolling window variance. We define a cut-off and identify the regime that
        occurs when the rolling window variance is above the average plus the cut-off times the
        standard deviation as highly volatile. The results we present assume the cut-off of one and a
        half standard deviations, but we have examined regimes defined by 0.5, 1.0 and 2 standard
        deviations cut-offs, and the overall message has been the same.

 (d) After computing (for each residual) the high and low volatility regimes, we compute the co-
        variance matrix for each of the 32 possible combinations of high and low variances. Obviously
        not all of the regimes have enough observations to estimate a covariance matrix; in such cases,
        the observations are dropped.

 (e) Finally, we estimate the parameters in matrix B2 and the covariance matrices by GMM
        imposing the sign restrictions specified above.


      We have made several assumptions in this procedure. First, we have chosen to use two-day
returns. When the model is estimated on weekly returns, very similar results are found. Employing
daily returns is problematic due to nonsyncronous trading in the US, and the UK and German
markets, and some of our results do change. We discuss this issue in detail below. Second, we
assume that heteroskedasticity of the latent factors can be characterized by two different regimes.
In the literature, however, heteroskedasticity is typically described by an ARCH or GARCH-type
model. Indeed, the identification strategy discussed above can be carried out exactly in a GARCH
setup.12 We have chosen to use the regimes instead because the estimates are consistent even if
 12
      See Sentana and Fiorentini (2001) and Rigobon (2002).


                                                        26
the underlying process is ARCH or GARCH, but if there were regime shifts in the data, a GARCH
model would have a hard time picking them up, while our methodology would not. Since there is
no reason to assume a particular structure for the evolution of the covariance matrices, we have
decided to take the safe strategy and estimate the model using regimes.

   In Table 2, we present the results from estimating the model for the US vis-à-vis the UK
case. The first three columns present the estimates of the elements of B2 for the model where the
covariance matrix of the latent factors is forced to be diagonal. The second set shows the results
for the model where the covariance matrix allows for correlation between the demand shock and
the supply shocks. Remember, however, that in all of the estimations we always force the supply
shocks of the US and the UK to have zero correlation.

   In our estimation of the first (no-correlation) model, we found 13 variance regimes with enough
observations to compute covariance matrices. Of the possible 12 coefficients, six are statistically
significant at more than 5 percent confidence, and the other three are statistically significant at
(about) one-sided 10 percent confidence. Note that not a single one of the sign restrictions is
binding, as evidenced by the coefficients being away from zero. (If a sign restriction is binding, the
corresponding coefficient should be exactly zero.)

   It is important to discuss the interpretation of these coefficients. Remember that our model
predicts that α11 , α13 , α23 , α31 , α32 , α33 are all equal in absolute value. Note that the estimates
of the coefficients in the US and the UK stock markets dynamics equations, α11 , α13 , and α23 ,
are 1.2152, 0.8237, and 1.2642, respectively, − they are close to each other and in fact are not
statistically different. The only major deviation occurs in the US bond price dynamics equation.
The estimates of the pertinent coefficients, α31 , α32 , and α33 are, in absolute value, 0.4169, 0.3497,
and 0.0287. These estimates are not only statistically different from zero, but also statistically
different from each other and from one. This observation suggests that even though the model
performs well for the stock markets, it does a poorer job explaining the US bond returns. The
model also implies that α12 , α21 , α22 , α41 , α42 , and α43 are all the same. In our estimation, α12
and α22 have been normalized to one; the absolute values of the other four are 1.844, 1.222, 0.924,
and 0.094. The first three estimates are statistically different from zero but not from one. In this
case, the UK bond prices are well explained by the model and the only rejection occurs in the
last coefficient. Finally, given our normalization, the coefficients in the exchange rate dynamics
equation, α52 and α53 , should be close to one in absolute value. Again, one is, but the other one is


                                                  27
                                                  US-UK
                          No Correlation                               Correlations 6= 0
              Point Estimate Std. Error      t Statistic   Point Estimate Std. Error t Statistic
        α11        1.2152       0.7513           1.62           0.7123        0.0036      19.90
        α13        0.8237       0.5531           1.49           0.6030        0.0141       4.27
        α21       -1.8443       0.4542          -4.06          -0.6670        0.0053     -12.54
        α23        1.2642       0.9541           1.33           0.5453        0.0117       4.66
        α31        0.4169       0.0240          17.35           0.2846        0.0059       4.82
        α32       -0.3497       0.1590          -2.20          -0.1416        0.0030      -4.71
        α33        0.0287       0.0172           1.68           0.5916        0.0048      12.28
        α41       -1.2224       0.0849         -14.41          -0.4541        0.0158      -2.86
        α42        0.9239       0.4194           2.20           0.3949        0.0059       6.69
        α43       -0.0936       0.0557          -1.68          -0.5128        0.0970      -0.52
        α52       -1.0724       0.5246          -2.04          -0.3509        0.0052      -6.69
        α53        0.1633       0.1182           1.38           0.6574        0.0073       8.99

 Table 2: Sign restrictions: Estimation of Model (M2) for the US vis-à-vis the UK.


not. In this estimation, the overall impact of supply shocks coming from the UK is very small.

   The second set of columns presents estimates of the same model, except that now we do not
restrict the covariance matrix of the factors to be diagonal. Here, all but one coefficient are statis-
tically significant. Furthermore, the results are much closer to those predicted by the model. For
instance, the absolute values of α21 , α41 , α42 , α43 are 0.67, 0.45, 0.40, and 0.51. These estimates are
close to each other and different from zero, consistent with our theoretical implications. Moreover,
for the second set of coefficients, predicted to be equal in absolute value, α11 , α13 , α23 , α31 , α32
and α33 , the pertinent estimates are 0.71, 0.60, 0.54, 0.28, 0.14, and 0.59. Again, the estimates
are much closer to each other than in the covariance-restricted model. Even more importantly,
given the normalization we have imposed and the calibrated values of the coefficients, these co-
efficients should be close to 0.346 (as implied by combining the estimated values of b(t) from the
previous section with the current normalization: 0.257/(1-0.257)), which is indeed approximately
the estimated values.

   Table 3 shows the analogous results for the case of the US vis-à-vis Germany. Notice that for
the zero correlation model, there are seven estimates that are statistically significant at more than
5 percent confidence level. As before, the estimates are statistically different from zero indicating
that the sign restrictions are not binding. As for the interpretation of the coefficients, we note that
the estimates of α11 , α13 , α23 , α31 , α32 , α33 are 2.56, 0.82, 0.96, 0.94, 0.11, 0.12 in absolute value.
In this case, only the fifth estimate is statistically different from the other four, and different from
0.346 − which, again, is the coefficient that we would have obtained if we imposed the normalization


                                                    28
                                                  US-Germany
                            No correlation                                Correlations 6= 0
                Point Estimate Std. Error       t Statistic   Point Estimate Std. Error t Statistic
          α11        2.5564       0.8806            2.90           0.3563        0.1641      2.17
          α13        0.8196       1.4812            0.55           0.4684        0.3014      1.55
          α21       -2.9888       1.3326           -2.24          -0.0809        0.0489     -1.66
          α23        0.9651       1.7437            0.55           0.6630        0.0538     12.33
          α31        0.9384       0.3183            2.95           0.3105        0.0607      5.11
          α32       -0.1101       0.0419           -2.63          -0.0196        0.0069     -2.85
          α33        0.1197       0.2163            0.55           0.6398        0.1470      4.35
          α41       -2.6330       0.8842           -2.98          -0.4954        0.1150     -4.31
          α42        0.3714       0.1360            2.73           0.0173        0.0183      0.95
          α43       -0.3739       0.6755           -0.55          -0.6995        0.4202     -1.66
          α52       -0.5130       0.1767           -2.90          -0.0313        0.0378     -0.83
          α53        0.7649       1.3876            0.55           0.7488        0.4617      1.62

Table 3: Sign restrictions: Estimation of Model (M2) for the US vis-à-vis Germany


to the estimates obtained from the previous exercise. For the other coefficients, however, we cannot
reject the hypothesis that they are different from 0.346. Moreover, the estimates of α21 , α41 , α42 ,
and α43 are 2.98, 2.63, 0.37, and 0.37 in absolute value. For all of them except the third one, we
cannot reject the hypothesis that they are equal to one. Finally, the estimates of α52 and α53 are
also sensible: the estimate of α53 is not statistically different from the normalized value of one,
while that of α52 is different but very close (the upper bound of the confidence interval is 0.85).

      We run several robustness checks. In the interest of space, we only summarize the results.13 We
have estimated the model allowing for different cut-offs to determine the volatility regimes. The
results have been found to be qualitatively the same. However, it is important to mention that
if the cut-off is too big (more than 2.5 standard deviations), then very few regimes are found. In
principle, this makes the identification harder. On the other hand, if the threshold is too small (0.5),
the covariance matrices are very well estimated but their differences across regimes are small. As a
result, this implies that the estimates are also noisy. Nevertheless, the message in the end is similar.
We have also performed several other robustness checks: we have included more than five lags in
the original VAR − this has made no difference. We have also varied parameters aH and 1-aF from
0.75 to 0.9, and α from 0.65 to 0.9. This only changes the average value of the coefficients without
changing dramatically the relative importance of the variances. In other words, in a variance
decomposition exercise the results are (roughly) unaltered. However, remember that both aH and
1-aF have to bounded away from 1/2 to be consistent with the home bias in consumption.
 13
      The results can be replicated by using the programs available from http://web.mit.edu/∼rigobon/www/.




                                                       29
   Finally, we have varied frequencies with which we compute the returns. In the estimation
presented above we used two-day returns, however we have also examined weekly and daily returns.
When we have estimated the model using weekly returns we have found that the number of regimes
is drastically reduced and the estimates become less precise. However, the point estimates are
very close to those using two-day returns. It is important to mention that when we have used
daily returns we have found different results. For example, several of the coefficients have been
estimated to be zero, indicating that the sign restrictions have been binding. The reason for this
is nonsyncronous trading. It is to be expected that some of these coefficients are zero because
several of the US innovations occur at times when the UK and German stock markets are closed.
Indeed, most GDP and productivity related announcements in the US occur in the afternoon,
when European markets are closed. Our model is not designed to account for this nonsynchronous
trading: all prices respond instantly to supply and demand innovations, and we do not have intraday
data to compute returns over the time intervals when all pairs of markets of interest are open.

   In summary, estimation of the unrestricted version of the model lends strong support to our
theory. Not only are the signs of the coefficients predominantly as predicted in Section 2, but also
the magnitudes of a number of the coefficients are consistent with a reasonable calibration of the
model. Nevertheless, some rejections of our implications are found − mostly regarding the bond
prices dynamics.


3.4.   Including Output: Low Frequency Data

Our empirical analysis thus far has relied on the implications of the model in identifying the
latent factors − output and demand shocks − from the high frequency data on stock, bond and
foreign exchange markets. Indeed, key to our identification of the contemporaneous coefficients
and the relative importance of each of the shocks have been the sign restrictions from the model
(in combination with heteroskedasticity clearly present in our data). This approach is in the
same spirit as that used in the macroeconomics literature, especially the strand of it that focuses
on labor markets, where, similarly, theory-supplied restrictions are used to disentangle supply
and demand shocks (see Blanchard and Diamond (1989), Davis and Haltiwanger (1990), Davis
and Haltiwanger (1992), Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996); finally see Fisher (1976) for a
comprehensive treatment of the problem of identification using sign restrictions.) In this section
we want to make our identification more convincing by introducing a measure of output into the



                                                30
system of equations, and thus relating our factors to innovations in output. This strategy, however,
comes at a cost of moving to lower frequencies, at which output is reported. Because we rely
on heteroskedasticity in the data, we cannot use a GDP series sampled at quarterly frequency
(we would have too few observations in each of the regimes); therefore as a proxy for output we
use industrial production data at monthly frequency. Industrial production is obviously a noisy
measure of output and productivity, but one that we expect to be highly correlated with both of
them.

   The procedure used is similar to the one in the previous section in that we estimate the following
system of equations:
                                                               
                            dS(t)
                             S(t)              α11 α12 α13
                                                      
                          dS ∗ (t)                    
                           S ∗ (t)        α21 α22 α23 
                                                                        
                          dB(t)                       
                           B(t)
                                           α31 α32 α33     A(t)dθ(t)
                                                                        
                          dB ∗ (t)    ~                                 
                                     =I + α41 α42 α43   σY (t)dw(t)  ,                             (M3)
                           B ∗ (t)                                      
                           dε(t)                      
                                           1 α52 α53     σ ∗ (t)dw ∗ (t)
                            ε(t)                          Y
                          dY (t)                      
                                          α61 1 α63 
                           Y (t)                      
                           dY ∗ (t)
                           Y ∗ (t)           α71 α72 1
                                           |     {z      }
                                                 B3
                                                 dY (t)         dY ∗ (t)
where all the data are now monthly, and           Y (t)   and    Y ∗ (t)   are constructed from the industrial
production series collected from Datastream. We adopt a more natural normalization of matrix
B3 , in which the productivity shocks now have a unitary effect on the output measures. It is
important to mention that production is very simplistic in our model: it is driven solely by changes
in productivity. In real life, of course, industrial production is hardly a pure measure of productivity
− it is likely to be affected by demand shocks as well − and hence we do not impose a constraint
that either α61 or α71 is zero.

   Before estimating (M3), it might be worth pointing out why this model cannot be estimated by
OLS. It is well-known from econometric theory that a naı̈ve OLS estimation of equation (12) − the
equation linking together stock prices and the exchange rate − would yield incorrect implications
because of the omitted variable bias due to the latent factors. It is worth demonstrating how severe
this bias actually is. For example, in the case of the US vis-à-vis the UK the naı̈ve estimation of
(log-linearized) equation (12) yields
              dS ∗ (t)           dε(t)           dY ∗ (t)           dS(t)           dY (t)
                ∗
                       = 0.1007        − 0.0089    ∗
                                                          + 0.7431        + 0.0218         .
               S (t)      (2.17) ε(t)     (0.18) Y (t)      (15.92) S(t)     (0.46) Y (t)


                                                     31
                                        Low Frequency Estimates
                               US-UK                               US-Germany
                Point Estimate Std. Error t Statistic Point Estimate Std. Error    t Statistic
          α11       0.0678       0.0580        1.2          0.0639     0.0484          1.3
          α12       1.3535       0.2208        6.1          1.3557     0.2062          6.6
          α13       0.7478       0.0331       22.6          0.0620     0.0500          1.2
          α21       -0.0804      0.0763        1.1         -0.0371     0.0177          2.1
          α22       0.7323       0.0553       13.2          0.7576     0.0224         33.8
          α23       1.0253       0.1069        9.6          1.1242     0.1265          8.9
          α31       0.7471       0.2812        2.7          0.0122     0.1123          0.1
          α32       1.1751       0.4691        2.5          0.8391     0.2432          3.4
          α33       -0.4100      0.2417        1.7         -1.1462     0.1986          5.8
          α41       -0.7411      0.2749        2.7          0.1120     0.1153          1.0
          α42       -1.0800      0.4566        2.4         -0.8701     0.2434          3.6
          α43       0.4649       0.2385        1.9          1.1040     0.2005          5.5
          α52       -0.6502      0.1758        3.7         -0.2717     0.1494          1.8
          α53       0.8584       0.0897        9.6          0.0513     0.0337          1.5
          α61       -0.8032      0.1173        6.8         -0.2796     0.1713          1.6
          α63       0.0658       0.0506        1.3          0.7660     0.0147         52.1
          α71       0.9499       0.1204        7.9         -1.2283     0.0947         13.0
          α72       0.0761       0.0713        1.1          0.7219     0.0714         10.1

Table 4: Sign restrictions: Estimation of Model (M3) for the US vis-à-vis the UK and
Germany.


Several nonsensical results emerge. First, the signs on the exchange rate and both the US and the
UK outputs agree with neither our theory nor the standard reasoning of policymakers. Second,
the coefficients are significant only for the exchange rate and the US stock market, with the latter
encompassing a very high t-statistic. In other words, the only conclusion that we derive from this
regression is that contagion is extremely important. In fact, the adjusted R2 of this regression is
54 percent, but if the US stock market is excluded, the R2 drops to 2 percent. The results for
Germany-US are qualitatively even worse. In that case the only significant coefficient is the US
stock market, and incorrect signs occur in the same places.

   The OLS results should not be interpreted as a rejection of the model. Do we believe that a
positive productivity shock has no impact on stock prices? What these OLS regressions demonstrate
is that they are simply not fit to capture the effects we are interested in. We thus estimate the
coefficients of our system (M3) through the sign restrictions imposed by the model in combination
with heteroskedasticity in the data. (We have normalized each variable to have a variance of one,
and hence the coefficients do not have a structural interpretation.) The results are shown in Table 4
for each pair of countries.

   In our description of the results, let us first concentrate on the US supply shock (captured by
the coefficients αi2 , i = 1, . . . , 7). Notice that the shock clearly has a positive effect on the US


                                                  32
stock market (1.35, significant), as well as the foreign stock market (0.73 and 0.76, significant). It
also increases the US bond prices (1.17 and 0.84, significant), reduces foreign bond prices (-1.08
and -0.87, significant), and depreciates the exchange rate. The last effect is quite pronounced in
the case of the UK (-0.65, significant), but weaker in the case of Germany (-0.27, with a t-statistic
of 1.8). Furthermore, a US productivity shock has a positive impact on industrial production
abroad, with German output being highly responsive (0.72, significant), but the UK’s a lot less
(0.08, not significant). These responses are in much agreement with our earlier analysis. The effects
of the US shock on both the US and foreign stock markets are positive and significant. The latter
represents contagion, which is detected even by the OLS regressions. The negative exchange rate
reaction is exactly as predicted by the model. The bond prices, unfortunately, are moving in the
wrong direction. The relationship between output processes across nations is something taken as a
primitive in our model, so we are in no position to comment on how industrial production of one
country should respond to changes in that of the other. Thus, we merely report our estimates.

   The pattern of responses to the foreign supply shock is very similar (captured by αi3 , i = 1, . . . 7).
For the UK, an increase in productivity induces a rise in the US (0.75) and the UK stock markets
(1.03). At the same time, it reduces the US bond prices and increases the UK bond prices (-0.41
and 0.47, not significant), while generating an appreciation of the dollar (0.86, significant) and an
increase in the US output (0.07, not significant). Again, all the signs are as implied by our theory,
except those for the bond prices. In the case of Germany, all the signs are the same, but the
significance of the estimates varies. For example, the effects on the US stock market and on the
exchange rate are not significant, however, the effects on bond prices and output are significant.

   Finally, the demand shock produces the following responses (captured by αi1 , i = 1, . . . 7). For
the UK case, a positive demand shift biased toward the US increases the US stock market (0.07, not
significant) decreases the UK stock market (-0.08, not significant), increases the US bond prices
(0.75, significant) and reduces the UK bond prices (-0.74, significant). It also appreciates the
exchange rate (this is the normalization), decreases the US output (-0.80, significant) and increases
the UK output (0.95, significant). The coefficients on stock and bond markets’ responses, and
the exchange rate are all in line with the predictions of the model. The relationship between
the demand shock and output is somewhat puzzling, however, as we explained earlier, no definite
predictions regarding this relationship can be made within our model. The coefficients for Germany
exhibit the same pattern except for the coefficient on the German output, which is now negative



                                                   33
                                        Correlations (percentage terms)
                                US-UK                                          US-Germany
                 A(t)dθ(t)   σY (t)dw(t)   σY∗ (t)dw∗ (t)   R2     A(t)dθ(t)   σY (t)dw(t)   σY∗ (t)dw∗ (t)   R2
       dS(t)
        S(t)
                   16.4         64.5           45.7         60.9     21.7         53.4           38.2         56.8
      dS ∗ (t)
       S ∗ (t)
                   -7.9         38.4           68.8         60.5     -1.8         21.1           35.4         53.3
       dB(t)
       B(t)
                   76.6         52.7           -54.1        94.2     54.8         33.6           -33.9        86.0
      dB ∗ (t)
       B ∗ (t)
                   -75.4        -48.2          59.2         94.0     -52.7        -26.1          29.8         81.2
       dε(t)
        ε(t)
                   50.2         -27.8          46.5         67.8     24.1         -11.0          41.5         57.3
      dY (t)
       Y (t)
                   -29.4        49.8           22.6         43.2     -28.9        44.1           18.2         30.1
      dY ∗ (t)
       Y ∗ (t)
                   34.1         23.8           49.4         41.4     -0.6          5.3            1.4         7.2

     Table 5: Correlation between the latent factors and the observed variables.

and significant. The only other differences are in the significance of the coefficients.

   Our next step is to investigate the nature of the latent factors that are derived from the estima-
tion. We thus compare the supply shocks from our estimation to the actual output innovations in
the data. Figure 2 presents both estimated and actual series for each country. As can be seen from
the plots, the latent factor follows the output innovations very closely in all cases. To substantiate
this assessment, we compute the correlation between the latent factors and the observed variables.
Table 5 reports the results.

   Notice that US supply shock is highly correlated with the US stock market, bond prices, and
output (close to a 50 percent correlation). Likewise, the UK supply shock is very highly correlated
with the UK stock market, bond prices, and output. Estimation for the case of Germany produces
similar patterns, except that the correlation of output with the corresponding supply shock is rather
small. The demand shock for both the US-UK and US-Germany estimations is highly correlated
with the exchange rate, as well as bond prices. The latter has an implication for uncovered interest
rate parity. Recall the prediction of our model (made in Section 2) that deviations from the classical
interest rate parity relationship should to be attributed primarily to demand shocks. The pattern of
estimated correlations seems to support that view. Finally, we report the within sample explained
variation of the observed variables by the latent factors − this is a quasi R2 . As can be seen, except
for the German output, the latent factors have very high explanatory power.

   Overall, the message from this exercise is very similar to the one from our previous estimations.
By relying on sign restrictions and heteroskedasticity, we are able to estimate the coefficients of the
model, which are shown to conform closely with the implications of our theory.



                                                            34
4.       Caveats and Future Research

Our framework is certainly very stylized and several assumptions require further exploration. First,
our model is real; both stocks and bonds are claims to a stream of goods. While perhaps this
is a reasonable way to model stocks, in real life, bonds are IOU’s specified in nominal terms.
This is presumably the reason why our model’s implications regarding stock prices and exchange
rate dynamics find solid empirical support, while those for bond prices do not fare as well in the
data. A natural next step is to introduce money formally into the model, which would allow for
a distinction between real and nominal assets, and derive similar implications for nominal asset
prices and exchange rates. We believe that the main mechanism will survive this extension − due
to trade in goods and in asset markets, real exchange rates will continue to be determined by the
same factors that drive real stock market returns.

       Second, we have assumed that all goods are traded, and the literature on PPP and real exchange
rate determination has demonstrated the importance of the non-tradable goods sector. In our
model we have oversimplified this aspect by assuming different weights on Home and Foreign goods
(aH and 1-aH ) in the utility function. This is a reduced form for a two-sector economy with a
tradable and a non-tradable sectors, where the non-tradables are produced with tradable Home
goods.14 However, extending the model to deal explicitly with transfers across the tradable and
non-tradable sectors might find broader applications in international finance.

       Third, we have employed a log-linear utility in our model. This specification has an apparent
advantage of allowing us to compute stock prices in closed form. As a result, we obtain a par-
simonious structural model with only three latent factors, making the problem of its estimation
manageable. We are aware of very few models in the asset pricing literature capable of producing
closed-form expressions for stock prices for an economy with multiple risky stocks. An apparent
drawback of the logarithmic specification is, of course, the myopic behavior it induces. The agents
are not genuinely myopic in our model − they hedge against future demand shocks, however, it
would still be desirable to examine different preferences specifications. This extension is likely to
  14
     For example, consider an economy where each country additionally consumes a local non-tradable good. That
is, each country’s representative agent has a log-linear utility defined over the (tradable) domestic good, the non-
tradable good, and the foreign good, with weights a1i , a2i , and 1-a1i -a2i , i ∈ {H, F }. Furthermore, assume that
the non-tradable good is produced using the local tradable good in each country with a constant returns to scale
technology, which transforms one unit of the domestic good into a one unit of the non-tradable good. Due to nature
of the technology employed, the utility function of each country effectively assigns a weight of a1i +a2i to domestic
goods. A reasonable calibration of the share of non-tradables in a country’s consumption, would then give rise to a
preference bias toward the domestic good, supporting the specification of the utility function adopted in our model.


                                                         35
entail the cost of imposing further assumptions on the parameters of the countries’ output processes.

     We have attempted to relate the supply and demand shocks, treated as latent factors in our
estimation, to actual output innovations in the data by moving to lower frequencies at which
output data are available. A different approach would be to use survey data and macroeconomic
announcements as proxies for productivity and demand innovations, and study the direct effects
of these innovations on asset prices and exchange rates along the lines of Andersen, Bollerslev,
Diebold, and Vega (2003), Rigobon and Sack (2002) and Rigobon and Sack (2003). Also left for
future research are tests of our model’s implications on capital flows and the CAPM.


5.     Conclusions

The empirical literature on exchange rate determination has devoted a tremendous amount of
effort to explaining its short run fluctuations by interest rate differentials. It is fair to say that this
strategy has not been very successful. In this paper we attempt to offer an alternative view on the
exchange rate: its movements should be influenced by the same set of factors that govern stock
market returns. This new perspective not only renders new insights on exchange rates, but also
identifies important interconnections between foreign exchange and financial markets and sheds
light on the apparent excessive correlation of stock markets worldwide.

     The factor decomposition implied by our model shows that the variance of demand shocks is two
times larger than that of output innovations. In our model, the additional term in the uncovered
interest rate parity relationship − the risk premium − is driven primarily by demand shocks. This
entails large time-varying deviations from interest rate parity. Moreover, we find strong support
for the view that demand shocks are driven by differences of opinion or consumer confidence rather
than pure sentiment, or catching up with the Joneses behavior. Our strategy of testing the model
relies on imposing a number of cross-equation restrictions, as well as overidentifying restrictions
obtained from several heteroskedastic regimes detected in the sample. This approach is designed
to increase chances of rejecting the model − and yet very few rejections are found.

     This paper is a first attempt to unify the international trade, open economy macroeconomics
and asset pricing literatures and uncover the impact of demand and supply shocks on the joint
dynamics of exchange rates, stock and bond prices. In order to do so, we have been forced to make
several simplifying and sometimes unrealistic assumptions that future research must relax. We feel
that deepening our stylized framework may lead to fruitful further insights.

                                                    36
Appendix

The state prices densities associated with the Home and Foreign goods are proportional to the
marginal utilities of the countries with respect to the corresponding good. They are given by

                              λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF
                   ξ(t) =                                                  (Home good),           (A.1)
                                        Y (t)
                              λH θH (t)(1 − aH ) + λF θF (t)(1 − aF )
                  ξ ∗ (t) =                                                (Foreign good).        (A.2)
                                              Y ∗ (t)
These state price densities are, of course, equal to the respective Arrow-Debreu state prices η and
η ∗ per unit probability P . Finally, the state-price density associated with the numeraire basket,
                                                ˆ ≡ αξ(t) + (1 − α)ξ ∗ (t).
henceforth the state price density, is given by ξ(t)


Derivation of Stock Prices. Through the identification of π with the Lagrange multipliers η
and η ∗ , π(t) = αη(t) + (1 − α)η ∗ (t), we can derive the price of the Home stock to be
         Z T                                         "Z                   #
                                                        T
                       1                                    1                     q(t)
S(t) =                            η(s)Y (s)ds = Et             ξ(s)Y (s)ds =               Y (t)(T − t) ,
                              ∗
          0 αη(t) + (1 − α)η (t)                           ˆ
                                                       t ξ(t)                αq(t) + 1 − α

where we first employed the definition of a conditional expectation appearing on transitioning from
the state prices to the state price densities associated with the respective good and then used the
fact that θH and θF are martingales. The Foreign stock price is determined through an analogous
procedure.


Weights in the Planner’s Problem. To conform with the competitive equilibrium allocation,
the weights λH and λF in the planner’s problem are chosen to reflect the countries’ initial en-
dowments. In particular, they are identified with the reciprocals of Lagrange multipliers associated
with each country’s Arrow-Debreu (static) budget constraint. Since in equilibrium these multipliers,
and hence the weights, cannot be individually determined, we adopthR a normalization aH θH (0)λiH +
                                                             1       T
aF θF (0)λF = 1. To pin down λH , note that WH (0) =           E 0 [ξ(t)CH (t) + ξ ∗ (t)CH∗ (t)]dt =
                                                                   ξ̂(0)
  1
     λ θ (0)T ,   where we used (8) and (A.1)–(A.2). On the other hand, WH (0) = S(0). This
ξ̂(0) H H
together with (10) yields λH = 1/θH (0). Consequently, λF = (1 − aH )/(aF θF (0)).


Proof of Proposition 1. Equation (8) can be equivalently restated as
                           µ                                 ¶
                                   λH θ(t)aH + λF aF
            log q(t) = log                                     + log Y ∗ (t) − log Y (t).
                             λH θ(t)(1 − aH ) + λF (1 − aF )
Applying Itô’s lemma to both sides and simplifying, we obtain
dq(t)                                λH aH                        λH (1 − aH )                  dY ∗ (t) dY (t)
        = Itô terms dt +                        dθ(t) −                                 dθ(t) + ∗      −
q(t)                           λH θ(t)aH + λF aF         λH θ(t)(1 − aH ) + λF (1 − aF )         Y (t)    Y (t)
                                            dY (t) dY ∗ (t)
        = Itô terms dt + A(t)dθ(t) −              + ∗      .
                                             Y (t)  Y (t)

                                                       37
Equations (10)–(11) are equivalent to

                   log S(t) = log q(t) − log(αq(t) + 1 − α) + log Y (t) + log(T − t) ,                        (A.3)

                  log S ∗ (t) = − log(αq(t) + 1 − α) + log Y ∗ (t) + log(T − t) ,                             (A.4)

respectively. Applying Itô’s lemma to both sides of (A.3) and (A.4), we have
                             µ                 ¶
 dS(t)                                αq(t)       dq(t) dY (t)
         = Itô terms dt + 1 −                          +
  S(t)                            αq(t) + 1 − α q(t)       Y (t)
                                     1−α                        αq(t)     dY (t)       1−α       dY ∗ (t)
           = Itô terms dt +                   A(t) dθ(t) +                      +
                                 αq(t) + 1 − α              αq(t) + 1 − α Y (t)    αq(t) + 1 − α Y ∗ (t)
dS ∗ (t)                             αq(t)     dq(t) dY ∗ (t)
           = Itô terms dt −                        + ∗
S ∗ (t)                          αq(t) + 1 − α q(t)   Y (t)
                                     αq(t)                      αq(t)     dY (t)       1−α       dY ∗ (t)
           = Itô terms dt −                   A(t) dθ(t) +                      +
                                 αq(t) + 1 − α              αq(t) + 1 − α Y (t)    αq(t) + 1 − α Y ∗ (t)
Substituting the dynamics of Y and Y ∗ from (1)–(2), we arrive at the expressions in Proposition 1.
The Itô terms (mean growth rates) appearing in the above equations enter nowhere in our esti-
mation procedure. Computation of these terms is straightforward but tedious, so in the interest
                                                                                                     ∗
of space we report just the end result: I5 (t)³= −µY (t) + µ∗Y (t) + σY (t)2 + A(t)σY∗´(t) d[θ(t),dtw (t)] −
A(t)σY (t) d[θ(t),dtw(t)] , I1 (t) = µY (t)+ αq(t)+1−α
                                                1−α
                                                       I5 (t) + σY (t)A(t) d[θ(t),dtw(t)] − σY (t)2 − αq(t)+1−α
                                                                                                         q(t)    Y (t)
                                                                                                                 S(t)
                                      ³                                           ´
                ∗            αq(t)               ∗      d[θ(t), w∗ (t)]    ∗    2         1     Y ∗ (t)
and I2 (t) = µY (t)− αq(t)+1−α I5 (t) + σY (t)A(t)            dt        + σY (t) − αq(t)+1−α S ∗ (t) , where [θ(t), w(t)]
and [θ(t), w (t)] are quadratic covariations of θ(t) with w(t) and w∗ (t), respectively. Further sim-
              ∗

plification of the quadratic covariation terms requires committing to an interpretation of θ (see
Section 2.3).
    Home and Foreign bonds are riskless in terms of the local good. That is,

                                dB i (t) = ri (t)B i (t)dt,     i ∈ {H, F } ,

where B i is in units of good i. ri is the local money market rate, the exact form of of which need not
concern us in this proposition (the rates rH and rF differ across our interpretations of the demand
shocks, and are reported in Proposition 2). Converted into the common numeraire,
                                 q(t)                                                     1
    B(t) = p(t)B H (t) =                  B H (t),      B ∗ (t) = p∗ (t)B F (t) =                 B F (t) .
                            αq(t) + 1 − α                                           αq(t) + 1 − α
Taking logs and then applying Itô’s lemma leads to the required expressions. Again, we report the
                                                                                         1−α
mean growth terms without providing the details of the computations: I3 (t) = rH (t)+ αq(t)+1−α I5 (t)
                           αq(t)
and I4 (t) = rF (t) −   αq(t)+1−α I5 (t).
    The sign restrictions follow from observing that sign(A(t)) = sign(aH − aF ) > 0, 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 and
q(t), σY (t), σY∗ (t) > 0. Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 2. The state price density associated with the Home good, ξ, has a
representation
                        dξ(t) = −rH (t)ξ(t)dt − mH (t)ξ(t)dw(t).
                                                           ~                      (A.5)

                                                         38
The Home money market rate, rH , and the market price of risk, mH , are obtained via an application
of Itô’s lemma to (A.1) taking into account the dynamics of θH and θF . In particular, under
interpretation A,
                        dξ(t) = −(µY (t) − σY (t)2 )ξ(t)dt − σY (t)ξ(t)dw(t),
whose drift term yields the required money market rate. The Home market price of risk is given
by mH (t) = (σY (t), 0, 0)> .
   Under interpretation B,

                                                     λH aH κH (t)θH (t)dwθ (t) + λF aF κF θF (t)dwθ (t)
dξ(t) = −(µY (t)−σY (t)2 )ξ(t)dt−σY (t)ξ(t)dw(t)+                                                       ξ(t).
                                                                 λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF

Since the quadratic covariation between the demand shocks θH , θF and Y is zero, the interest
rate has the same form as under interpretation A. The Home market price of risk is given by
mH (t) = (σY (t), 0, − λH aλHHκθHH(t)θH (t)+λF aF κF θF (t) >
                                   (t)aH +λF θF (t)aF      ) .
   Under interpretation C,

                                                           λH aH κH (t)θH (t)dw(t) + λF aF κF (t)θF (t)dw∗ (t)
dξ(t) = −(µY (t) − σY (t)2 )ξ(t)dt − σY (t)ξ(t)dw(t) +                                                         ξ(t)
                                                                       λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF
                λH aH κH (t)θH (t)σY (t)
           −                             ξ(t)dt .
               λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF

The last term reflects the nonzero quadratic covariation between θH and Y , lending an additional
term to the Home interest rate. Note that the Home state price density does not depend on the
Brownian motion wθ , or in other words, the risk associated with wθ is not priced (the sunspot
equilibrium, in which wθ matters does not obtain in our model). The Home market price of risk is
given by mH (t) = (σY (t) − λH θλHH(t)a
                                    aH κH (t)θH (t)
                                       H +λF θF (t)aF
                                                      , − λH θλHF(t)a
                                                                  aF κF (t)θF (t)
                                                                      H +λF θF (t)aF
                                                                                     , 0)> .
    We now turn to interpretation D. Our analysis until now, as well as our empirical tests, have
not required a complete specification of information sets of the agents, all the necessary information
has been captured by the density processes θH and θF . There derivatives may come from various
economic settings; here, for brevity, we consider only the case of incomplete information where the
agents observe all economic processes defined in Section 2, but do not have complete information
about their dynamics. The description of the setting is intendedly dense, and we refer the reader
to Basak (2000) for more detail. We consider two subcases: D1 and D2. Under interpretation D1,
the agents believe that there are only two independent innovations, wi and wi∗ , i ∈ {H, F }. The
innovation process wi of each agent i is such that given his perceived mean growth of the Home
output process, µi , the observed Home output process has the dynamics dY (t) = µi (t)Y (t)dt +
σY (t)Y (t)dwi . Similarly, the innovation wi∗ is such that given µ∗i the Foreign output has dynamics
dY ∗ (t) = µ∗i (t)Y ∗ (t)dt + σY (t)Y ∗ (t)dwi∗ . The differences in opinion pertaining to the underlying
innovation process are induced by differences in the agents’ priors, which they may or may not
update as new information arrives. The case of Bayesian updating is an example of a filtering
problem, the details of which need not concern us here since the the optimization problem is well-
known to be independent of the inferencing problem. The outcome of the inferencing problem
is the country-specific drift processes µi and µ∗i , which we treat as exogenous. Note that the


                                                    39
agents differ in their assessment of the underlying innovations and the drift terms, but agree on
the volatilities, which they may deduce from the quadratic variations of the observed processes.
The sub-interpretation D2 is similar to D1, except that now the agents believe that there are
three independent innovations, wi , wi∗ and wiθ , i ∈ {H, F }, that the parameters they estimate
depend on. The dynamics of the Home and Foreign output processes are perceived to be as above.
Additionally, the agents observe a public signal, s, perceived to be driven by the third innovation
process, following ds(t) = µsi (t)s(t)dt + σs (t)s(t)dwiθ (t), i ∈ {H, F }, the drift component of which
is not observable.
   The innovation processes of agent i bear the following relationship to the “true” underlying
                                                                              ∗      ∗
Brownian motions: dwi (t) = dw(t) + µY (t)−µ i (t)
                                                   dt, dw ∗ (t) = dw ∗ (t) + µY (t)−µi (t) dt (interpretations
                                       σY (t)            i                        ∗
                                                                                σ (t)           Y
                                           µsi (t)−µsi (t)
D1-D2), and dwiθ (t) = dwθ (t) +                σs (t)     dt   (interpretation D2). By Girsanov’s theorem, the
innovation process w    ~ i ≡ (wi , wi∗ , wiθ )> (the last
                                                    component is absent under interpretation D1) is a
Brownian motion under the probability measure i, i ∈ {H, F }. We can then identify ~κH (t) in the
representation of (the density of) the Radon-Nikodym derivatives of H with respect to P , θH , to
                       µ∗ (t)−µ∗ (t)                                            µ∗ (t)−µ∗ (t)
be −( µY (t)−µ H (t)
          σY (t)     , Y σ∗ (t)H , 0)> (interpretation D1), −( µY (t)−µ H (t)
                                                                   σY (t)     , Y σ∗ (t)H , µs (t)−µ  sH (t) >
                                                                                                 σs (t)     )
                            Y                                                                       Y
                                                                       µ∗Y (t)−µ∗F (t)
(interpretation D2). Analogously, ~κF = −( µY (t)−µ F (t)
                                               σY (t)     ,                  ∗ (t)
                                                                            σY         ,   0)> (interpretation D1), ~κF =
                   µ∗ (t)−µ∗ (t)
−( µY (t)−µ F (t)
       σY (t)     , Y σ∗ (t)F , µs (t)−µ  sF (t) >
                                     σs (t)     ) (interpretation D2). Hence, under the true measure P ,
                        Y
dθi (t) = ~κi (t)θi (t)dw(t),
                        ~     i ∈ {H, F }.
    Applying Itô’s lemma to (A.1) and using the dynamics of θH and θF , we obtain

                                                                      λH aH ~κH (t)> θH (t)dw(t)
                                                                                             ~ + λF aF ~κF (t)> θF (t)dw(t)
                                                                                                                       ~
dξ(t) = −(µY (t) − σY (t)2 )ξ(t)dt − σY (t)ξ(t)dw(t) +                                                                      ξ(t)
                                                                                     λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF
                 λH aH (1, 0, 0)~κH (t)θH (t)σY (t) + λF aF (1, 0, 0)~κF (t)θF (t)σY (t)
             −                                                                           ξ(t)dt .
                                       λH θH (t)aH + λF θF (t)aF
The last term is again due to the quadratic covariation of the process Y with θH and θF . Substituting
the expressions for ~κH and ~κF from above, we arrive at the statement in the Proposition. The Home
market price of risk is given by mH (t) = (σY (t), 0, 0)> − λH aHλ~κHHθ(t)θ H (t)+λF aF ~
                                                                                        κF (t)θF (t)
                                                                        H (t)aH +λF θF (t)aF
                                                                                                     .
    The Foreign interest rate is determined through an analogous procedure, via an application
of Itô’s lemma to (A.2) and then an identification of rF with the ensuing drift term. The dif-
fusion term yields the Foreign market price of risk: mF (t) = (0, σY∗ (t), 0)> (interpretation A),
mF (t) = (0, σY∗ (t), − λH (1−a  H )κH (t)θH (t)+λF (1−aF )κF θF (t) >
                             λH θH (t)(1−aH )+λF θF (t)(1−aF )      )  (interpretation B), mF (t) =
(− λH θHλ(t)(1−a
          H (1−aH )κH (t)θH (t)
                 H )+λF θF (t)(1−aF )
                                      , σY∗ (t) −           λF (1−aF )κF (t)θF (t)
                                                      λH θH (t)(1−aH )+λF θF (t)(1−aF ) , 0)
                                                                                            >   (interpretation      C),
                                λH (1−aH )~κH (t)θH (t)+λF (1−aF )~κF (t)θF (t)
mF (t) = (0, σY∗ (t), 0)> −          λH θH (t)(1−aH )+λF θF (t)(1−aF )          (interpretation D).
    Finally, we obtain the uncovered interest rate parity relation through an application of Itô’s
lemma to both sides of a no-arbitrage restriction ξ ∗ (t) = ξ(t)/q(t) and matching the corresponding
dt terms. This procedure yields −rF (t) = −rH (t) − µq (t) + σq (t)> (mH (t) + σq (t)). Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 3. We first focus on the composition of xi and the form of σ. We also
report the form of the auxiliary matrix I, whose role is to modify the dimension of the vectors m
and ~κi to make the matrices involved in the multiplications conformable.

                                                                40
  (i) Under interpretation A, one can only determine the investment in the composite (world)
      stock market, and not in individual stock markets. The position in the composite security
      is of form (21). We do not provide details for this interpretation, and refer the reader to
      Zapatero (1995) or Cass and Pavlova (2003).

 (ii) Under interpretation B, four independent investment opportunities are required to dynami-
      cally complete financial markets. We take these to be represented by the Home stock S, the
      Foreign stock S ∗ , the Home bond B and the world bond B W . Hence, xi has three components:
                     ∗                                   ∗
      xi = (xSi , xSi , xB
                         i ). From the dynamics of S, S and B, (13)–(15), and the definitions of θH
      and θF we identify the matrix of the investment opportunity set:
                                                                  
                                    αq(t)σY (t)            ∗
                                                   (1 − α)σY (t) 0
                         1                                        
                                                          ∗       
       σ(t) =                     αq(t)σY (t)     (1 − α)σY (t) 0 
                  αq(t) + 1 − α                                   
                                                           ∗
                                    (α − 1)σY (t) (1 − α)σY (t) 0
                                                                   
                                                               1−α
                                                A(t)θ(t)  
                                                                    
                                                                    
                                          +                 −αq(t)  I (~κH (t) − ~κF (t))> , (A.6)
                                            αq(t) + 1 − α          
                                                               1−α

     with I is simply a 3 × 3 identity matrix under this interpretation.

(iii) Under interpretation C, there are only two independent sources of uncertainty, and hence
      three securities are sufficient to dynamically complete financial markets. We take them to
                                                                        ∗
      be S, S ∗ and B W . Hence, xi has two components: xi = (xSi , xSi ). From (13)–(14) and the
      definitions of θH and θF we identify the matrix of the investment opportunity set:
                                                               
                                    αq(t)σ   (t) (1 − α)σ ∗ (t)
                         1                Y             Y
                                                                
         σ(t) =
                  αq(t) + 1 − α     αq(t)σ (t) (1 − α)σ ∗ (t)
                                         Y              Y

                                                                                        
                       A(t)θ(t)  1 − α                                        1 0 0
                 +                        [I (~κH (t) − ~κF (t))]> , with I =        . (A.7)
                     αq(t) + 1 − α −αq(t)                                       0 1 0

(iv) To address interpretation D, we again consider subcases D1 and D2. Under interpretation
     D1, three securities dynamically complete markets: for instance, S, S ∗ and B W , and hence
                                            ∗
     xi has two components: xi = (xSi , xSi ). Under interpretation D2, there is an additional
                                                                                      ∗
     nonredundant security, B, and hence xi has three components: xi = (xSi , xSi , xB   i ). The
     matrix σ is then obtained using (13)–(14) under interpretation D1 to yield an expression in
     (A.7) and (13)–(15) under interpretation D2 to yield an expression in (A.6). Of course, ~κH
     and ~κF used in the expressions for σ are interpretation-D-specific (reported in the proof of
     Proposition 2).

   From now on we focus solely on interpretations B–D. Before we proceed to trading strategies,
we derive the interest rate r on the world bond B W , and the market price of risk m. Both are

                                                 41
                                                              ˆ dξ(t)
identified from the representation of the state price density ξ, ˆ = −r(t)ξ(t)dt
                                                                          ˆ            ˆ
                                                                                 − m(t)ξ(t)d w(t).
                                                                                             ~
                        ˆ
Using the definition of ξ and (A.1)–(A.2), we obtain

                    α rH (t)q(t) + (1 − α) rF (t)                        α mH (t) q(t) + (1 − α) mF (t)
           r(t) =                                       and m(t) =                                      .
                           α q(t) + 1 − α                                       α q(t) + 1 − α

    (i) Trading strategies. It can be verified that matrix σ is invertible under interpretations B-
D. We can then appeal to the martingale representation methodology (Cox and Huang (1989),
Karatzas, Lehoczky, and Shreve (1987)) to transform the dynamic optimization problem of Home
(Foreign) country to a static problem of maximizing the objective in (4) (in (5)) subject to the
                            RT
static budget constraint E[ 0 (ξ(t)Ci (t) + ξ ∗ (t)Ci∗ (t))dt] = Wi (0), i = H (i = F ). The first-order
conditions for this optimization are

                      θi (t)ai  1                 θi (t)(1 − ai )  1
                               = ξ(t),                   ∗        = ξ ∗ (t),        i ∈ {H, F }.             (A.8)
                       Ci (t)   λi                     Ci (t)      λi

Note that the multipliers on the static countries’ budget constraints are the reciprocals of the
planner’s weights λH and λF .
    The optimal trading strategy of agent i is identified from thehstochastic integral representation       i
                      Rt                                                       RT
Mi (t) = Mi (0) + 0 ψi (s)> dw(s) ~     of the martingale Mi (t) ≡ Et 0 (ξ(t)Ci (t) + ξ ∗ (t)Ci∗ (t))dt by
modifying the standard argument to account for multiple goods (see, e.g., Karatzas and Shreve
(1998), Theorem 7.3):
                                                                    ψi (t)
                                      σ(t)> xi (t) = I m(t) + I                ,                          (A.9)
                                                                  ˆ
                                                                  ξ(t)W  i (t)
                                                                                 RT
where Wi (t) is time-t optimal wealth of agent i, Wi (t) = 1 Et [ t (ξ(s)Ci (s) + ξ ∗ (s)Ci∗ (s))ds],
                                                                       ξ̂(t)
                                                                              RT
and m, σ are interpretation-specific. In our model, Mi (t) = Et [ 0 (ξ(s)Ci (s) + ξ ∗ (s)Ci∗ (s))ds] =
    RT                                      Rt
Et [ 0 (λi θi (s)ai +λi θi (s)(1−ai ))ds] = 0 λi θi (s)ds+λi θi (t)(T −t), and hence dMi (t) = λi~κi (t)θi (t)(T −
t)dw(t).
    ~     The diffusion coefficient of Mi (t), ~κi (t)θi (t)(T − t), is identified with ψi (t). Note also that
                                     Z    T
                    ˆ
                    ξ(t)Wi (t) = Et [         (ξ(s)Ci (s) + ξ ∗ (s)Ci∗ (s))ds] = λi θi (t)(T − t) .         (A.10)
                                      t

Plugging this together with ψi (t) into (A.9) we arrive at the expression in Proposition 3.
    (ii) Home bias. We now examine conditions under which consumers’ portfolios exhibit a home
bias. To do so, we need to sign the first and second components of the vector (σ(t)> )−1 I ~κi (t),
i ∈ {H, F }. Under interpretation B, these two components are equal to zero since ~κi (t) = (0, 0, κi ),
and hence fractions of wealth both Home and Foreign consumers invest in stocks of their respective
countries are exactly as in the mean-variance portfolio. Under interpretation C, from (A.7),
                     1           1
(σ(t)> )−1 =
                 det(σ(t)) αq(t) + 1 − α
                                                                                                
                               ∗                                    ∗
                      (1 − α)σY (t) + A(t)θ(t)αq(t)κF (t) −(1 − α)σY (t) + A(t)θ(t)(1 − α)κF (t)
                 ×                                                                              ,
                      −αq(t)σY (t) + A(t)θ(t)αq(t)κH (t) αq(t)σY (t) + A(t)θ(t)(1 − α)κH (t)



                                                           42
where det(σ(t)) denotes the determinant of σ(t). Note that
                   £                                   ¤£                                ¤
     det(σ(t)) = αq(t)σY (t) + A(t)θ(t)(1 − α)κH (t) (1 − α)σY∗ (t) + A(t)θ(t)αq(t)κF (t)
                           £                     ¤        £                       ¤
                   −αq(t) σY (t) − A(t)θ(t)κF (t) (1 − α) σY∗ (t) − A(t)θ(t)κH (t)
                   
                    >0        if κH (t) > 0, κF (t) > 0,
                ⇒
                    <0        if κ (t) < 0, κ (t) < 0,
                                                      H             F


It then follows that if κH (t) > 0, κF (t) > 0 (consumer confidence) then the first component of
the vector (σ(t)> )−1 I ~κH (t) and the second component of (σ(t)> )−1 I ~κF (t) are unambiguously
positive. On the other hand, if κH (t) < 0, κF (t) < 0 (catching up with the Joneses), the sign
                                                                                       £
of the first component of the vector (σ(t)> )−1 I ~κH (t) coincides with the sign of (1 − α)σY∗ (t) +
                   ¤
A(t)θ(t)αq(t)κF (t) . Similarly, the sign of the second component of (σ(t)> )−1 I ~κF (t) coincides with
            £                                    ¤
the sign of αq(t)σY (t) + A(t)θ(t)(1 − α)κH (t) . Finally, under interpretation D, the sign of either
component of (σ(t)> )−1 I ~κi (t) is ambiguous.
    (iii) International CAPM. In an arbitrage-free market, the risk premium on stock j is related
to the market price of risk in the following way (e.g., Karatzas and Shreve (1998), Theorem 4.2):
                                                                X j       3
                                      Et (dS j (t)/dt)
                                            j
                                                       − r(t) =  σk (t)mk (t) ,
                                           S (t)
                                                                         k=1

where the diffusion coefficients        σ1j ,
                                        and     σ2j         σ3j
                                              are the loadings of stock S j on Brownian motions w,
w∗ and wθ , respectively, and mk are components of the market price of risk vector m. On the other
hand,                Ã                !
                                  ˆ                        ˆ        3
                                                                    X
                       dS j (t) dξ(t)     Covt (dS j (t), dξ(t))
                Covt           ,        =                        =−   σkj (t)mk (t)dt .
                          j      ˆ
                        S (t) ξ(t)               j    ˆ
                                               S (t)ξ(t)                                 k=1
Hence,                                                                      Ã                    !
                                   Et (dS j (t))                                           ˆ
                                                                                dS j (t) dξ(t)
                                                 − r(t)dt = −Covt                       ,                              (A.11)
                                      S j (t)                                             ˆ
                                                                                 S j (t) ξ(t)

                                          ˆ
   From (A.10), Wi (t) = λi θi (t)(T − t)/ξ(t), i ∈ {H, F }. Hence, the aggregate wealth is
                                                                  T −t
                        W (t) = WH (t) + WF (t) =                       [λH θH (t) + λF θF (t)] .
                                                                   ˆ
                                                                   ξ(t)
Taking logs, applying Itô’s lemma and rearranging, we have
                             ˆ
                           dξ(t)    dW (t) λH dθH (t) + λF dθF (t)
                                 =−        +                       + dt terms .                                        (A.12)
                            ˆ
                            ξ(t)     W (t)   λH θH (t) + λF θF (t)
Then,
          Ã                    !                      µ                     ¶            µ                                  ¶
                         ˆ
              dS j (t) dξ(t)                              dS j (t) dW (t)                    dS j (t)        λH dθH (t)
   Covt               ,             = −Covt                       ,             + Covt                ,
                        ˆ
               S j (t) ξ(t)                                S j (t) W (t)                       j
                                                                                             S (t) λH θH (t) + λF θF (t)
                                                      µ                                      ¶
                                                          dS j (t)    λF dθF (t)
                                        +Covt               j
                                                                   ,                             ,      S j ∈ {S, S ∗ } .
                                                           S (t) λH θH (t) + λF (t)θF
Combining this with (A.11), we obtain the required expression. Q.E.D.

                                                                   43
References
Abel, A. B. (1990): “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching up with the Joneses,”
 American Economic Review, 80, 38–42.
Adler, M., and B. Dumas (1983): “International Portfolio Choice and Corporation Finance: a
 Synthesis,” Journal of Finance, 38, 925–984.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and C. Vega (2003): “Micro Effects of
 Macro Announcements: Real-Time Price Discovery in Foreign Exchange,” American Economic
 Review, 93, 38–62.
Bakshi, G. S., and Z. Chen (1997): “Equilibrium Valuation of Foreign Exchange Claims,”
 Journal of Finance, 52, 799–826.
Basak, S. (2000): “A Model of Dynamic Equilibrium Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Beliefs
 and Extraneous Risk,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 24, 63–95.
Basak, S., and M. Gallmeyer (1999): “Currency Prices, the Nominal Exchange Rate, and
 Security Prices in a Two Country Dynamic Monetary Equilibrium,” Mathematical Finance, 9,
 1–30.
Blanchard, O. J., and P. Diamond (1989): “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Papers in
  Economic Activity, 1, 1–76.
Brandt, M. W., J. H. Cochrane, and P. Santa-Clara (2001): “International Risk Sharing
 is Better than you Think (or Exchange Rates are much too Smooth),” NBER working paper
 8404.
Caporale, G. M., A. Cipollini, and P. Demetriades (2002): “Monetary Policy and the
 Exchange Rate during the Asian Crisis: Identification through Heteroskedasticity,” working
 paper, CEMFE.
Caporale, G. M., A. Cipollini, and N. Spagnolo (2002): “Testing for Contagion: A Condi-
 tional Correlation Analysis,” working paper, CEMFE.
Cass, D., and A. Pavlova (2003): “On Trees and Logs,” Journal of Economic Theory, forth-
 coming.
Cass, D., and K. Shell (1983): “Do Sunspots Matter?,” Journal of Political Economy, 91,
 193–227.
Claessens, S., R. Dornbusch, and Y. C. Park (2001): “Contagion: Why Crises Spread
  and How This Can Be Stopped,” in Stijn Claessens and Kristin J. Forbes, eds., International
  Financial Contagion, (Kluwer Academic Publishers, MA), 19–41.
Cox, J. C., and C. Huang (1989): “Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies when Asset
 Prices Follow a Diffusion Process,” Journal of Economic Theory, 49, 33–83.
Davis, S. J., and J. Haltiwanger (1990): “Gross Job Creation and Destruction: Microeco-
 nomic Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, reprinted
 in P.N. Junankar, ed., The Economics of Unemployment, Edward Elgar Press.
        (1992): “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 819–863.
Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1996): Job Creation and Destruction. MIT Press,
 Cambrdige.
Detemple, J. B., and S. Murthy (1994): “Intertemporal Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous
 Beliefs,” Journal of Economic Theory, 62, 294–320.




                                             44
Dornbusch, R. (1980): Open Economy Macroeconomics. Basic Books, Inc. Publishers, New York.
Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson (1977): “Comparative Advantage, Trade,
 and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic Review,
 67, 823–839.
Dumas, B. (1992): “Dynamic Equilibrium and the Real Exchange Rate in a Spatially Separated
 World,” Review of Financial Studies, 5(2), 153–180.
Eichengreen, B., A. Rose, and C. Wyplosz (1996): “Contagious Currency Crises,” NBER
  working paper 5681.
Fama, E. F. (1984): “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 14(3),
  319–338.
Fischer, S. (1998): “Reforming the International Monetary System,” draft material presented as
  the David Finch Lecture, International Monetary Fund, November.
Fisher, F. M. (1976): The Identification Problem in Econometrics. Robert E. Krieger Publishing
  Co., 2nd edition, New York.
Goldstein, M., G. L. Kaminsky, and C. M. Reinhart (2000): Forecasting Financial Crises:
 Early Warning System for Emerging Markets. Institute of International Economics, Washington.
Hau, H., and H. Rey (2002): “Exchange Rate, Equity Prices and Capital Flows,” NBER working
 paper 9398.
Kaminsky, G. L., and C. M. Reinhart (2000): “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,” Journal
 of International Economics, 51(1), 145–168.
Kaminsky, G. L., C. M. Reinhart, and C. Végh (2003): “Two Hundred Years of Contagion,”
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Karatzas, I., J. P. Lehoczky, and S. E. Shreve (1987): “Optimal Portfolio and Consumption
 Decisions for a “Small Investor” on a Finite Horizon,” SIAM Journal of Control and Optimiza-
 tion, 25(6), 1557–1586.
Karatzas, I., and S. E. Shreve (1998): Methods of Mathematical Finance. Springer-Verlag,
 New York.
Lucas, R. E. (1982): “Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country World,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 10, 335–359.
Mussa, M. (1979): “Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and Theories of
 the Foreign Exchange Rate Market,” in K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer, eds., Policies for Em-
 ployment, Prices, and Exchange Rates, (North-Holland, NY), 9–57.
Ricardo, D. (1817): “On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation,” Sraffa, P., ed.,
  (London, 1951).
Rigobon, R. (2002): “The Curse of Non-investment Grade Countries,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 69(2), 423–449.
         (2003): “Identification Through Heteroskedasticity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  forthcoming.
Rigobon, R., and B. Sack (2002): “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” NBER
  working paper 8794.
        (2003): “Measuring the Reaction of Monetary Policy to the Stock Market,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

                                               45
Salter, W. (1959): “Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price Expenditure Effects,”
  Economic Record, 35, 226–238.
Schultze, C. L. (2003): “The Consumer Price Index: Conceptual Issues and Practical Sugges-
  tions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1), 3–22.
Sentana, E. (1992): “Identification of Multivariate Conditionally Heteroskedastic Factor Models,”
  FMG Discussion Paper 139, London School of Economics.
Sentana, E., and G. Fiorentini (2001): “Identification, Estimation and Testing of Conditionally
  Heteroskedastic Factor Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 102, 143–164.
Sercu, P., and R. Uppal (2000): Exchange Rate Votatility, Trade, and Capital Flows under
  Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Solnik, B. (1974): “An Equilibrium Model of the International Capital Market,” Journal of
  Economic Theory, 8, 500–524.
Swan, T. (1960): “Economic Control in a Dependent Economy,” Economic Record, 36, 51–66.
Uppal, R., and T. Wang (2003): “Model Misspecification and Under-Diversification,” Journal
 of Finance, forthcoming.
Wright, P. (1928): The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils. Macmillan Company, New York.
Zapatero, F. (1995): “Equilibrium Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 19, 787–811.




                                               46
1.2                                                                                                                                                                     2.75        1.2                                                                                                                                                                    1.015


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.01

1.1                                                                                                                                                                                 1.1
                                                                                                                                                                        2.25                                                                                                                                                                               1.005


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
 1                                                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                        1.75                                                                                                                                                                               0.995


0.9                                                                                                                                                                                 0.9                                                                                                                                                                    0.99


                                                                                                                                                                        1.25                                                                                                                                                                               0.985

0.8                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.98


                                                                                                                                                                        0.75                                                                                                                                                                               0.975
0.7                                                                                                                                                                                 0.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.97


0.6                                                                                                                                                                     0.25        0.6                                                                                                                                                                    0.965
 1/29/88   1/29/89   1/29/90     1/29/91   1/29/92    1/29/93   1/29/94    1/29/95   1/29/96      1/29/97   1/29/98      1/29/99   1/29/00   1/29/01     1/29/02   1/29/03           1/29/88   1/29/89   1/29/90     1/29/91   1/29/92    1/29/93   1/29/94     1/29/95   1/29/96      1/29/97   1/29/98    1/29/99   1/29/00   1/29/01     1/29/02   1/29/03

                                                          Exchange Rate       US Stock Market        UK Stock Market                                                                                                                           Exchange Rate         US Bond Price        UK Bond Price




                         (a) The US and the UK stock market in-                                                                                                                                (b) The US and the UK three-month zero-
                         dexes and the dollar-pound exchange rate                                                                                                                              coupon government bond prices and the
                                                                                                                                                                                               dollar-pound exchange rate


1.4                                                                                                                                                                     2.75        1.4                                                                                                                                                                    0.995


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.993
1.3                                                                                                                                                                                 1.3

                                                                                                                                                                        2.25                                                                                                                                                                               0.991
1.2                                                                                                                                                                                 1.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.989

1.1                                                                                                                                                                                 1.1
                                                                                                                                                                        1.75                                                                                                                                                                               0.987


 1                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                     0.985


                                                                                                                                                                        1.25                                                                                                                                                                               0.983
0.9                                                                                                                                                                                 0.9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.981
0.8                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8

                                                                                                                                                                        0.75                                                                                                                                                                               0.979

0.7                                                                                                                                                                                 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.977


0.6                                                                                                                                                                     0.25        0.6                                                                                                                                                                    0.975
 1/29/88       1/29/89         1/29/90      1/29/91        1/29/92        1/29/93       1/29/94         1/29/95          1/29/96       1/29/97         1/29/98                       1/29/88       1/29/89         1/29/90      1/29/91        1/29/92         1/29/93       1/29/94         1/29/95        1/29/96       1/29/97         1/29/98

                                                       Exchange Rate        US Stock Market        German Stock Market                                                                                                                       Exchange Rate        US Bond Price         German Bond Price




                         (c) The US and German stock market in-                                                                                                                                (d) The US and German three-month zero-
                         dexes and the dollar-mark exchange rate                                                                                                                               coupon government bond prices and the
                                                                                                                                                                                               dollar-mark exchange rate

                         Figure 1: Asset prices and exchange rates. The exchange rate is measured in the left axis.
                         In panels (a) and (c) the stock indexes are measured in the right vertical axis. In panels (b) and
                         (d), the bond prices are measured in the left vertical axis. For demonstrative purposes, all prices
                         are normalized so that the average exchange rate is equal to one.




                                                                                                                                                                               47
3




2




1




0




-1




-2




-3
  1985   1986   1987     1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002




                       (a) Estimated US output shocks vs. actual US output innovations




3




2




1




0




-1




-2




-3
  1985   1986   1987     1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002




                       (b) Estimated UK output shocks vs. actual UK output innovations




                                                             48
3




2




1




0




-1




-2




-3
  1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991     1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997    1998




            (c) Estimated German output shocks vs. actual German output innovations



Figure 2: Latent factors corresponding to supply shocks vs. actual output innovations.
In all panels, the latent factor is the schedule marked with squares and output innovations is the
solid plot.




                                                49
