                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MONETARY POLICY AND SECTORAL SHOCKS:
               DID THE FED REACT PROPERLY TO THE HIGH-TECH CRISIS?

                                             Claudio Raddatz
                                             Roberto Rigobon

                                           Working Paper 9835
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9835


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2003




We thank Ricardo Caballero for helpful comments on a preliminary version of the paper. All remaining errors
are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research

©2003 by Claudio Raddatz and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to
the source.
Monetary Policy and Sectoral Shocks: Did the FED react properly to the High-Tech Crisis?
Claudio Raddatz and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 9835
July 2003
JEL No. E43, E44, E52, E58

                                             ABSTRACT
This paper presents an identification strategy that allows us to study both the sectoral effects of
monetary policy and the role that monetary policy plays in the transmission of sectoral shocks. We
apply our methodology to the case of the U.S. and find some significant differences in the sectorial
responses to monetary policy. We also find that monetary policy is a significant source of sectoral
transfers. In particular, a shock to Equipment and Software investment, which we naturally identify with
the High-tech crises, induces a response by the monetary authority that generates a temporary boom in
Residential Investment and Durable Consumption but has almost no effect on the high-tech sector.
Finally, we perform an exercise evaluating what the model predicts regarding the automatic and a more
aggressive monetary policy response to a shock similar to the one that hit the U.S. in early 2001. We
find that the actual drop in interest rates we have observed is in line with the predictions of the model.




Claudio Raddatz                                          Roberto Rigobon
Department of Economics                                  Sloan School of Management
MIT                                                      MIT, E52-447
50 Memorial Drive                                        50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                 Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
craddatz@mit.edu                                         and NBER
                                                         rigobon@mit.edu
1     Introduction
The long boom experienced by the U.S. during the 90’s came to an end in 2001 with a
large decline in information technology (IT) investment. After growing at 16% during
2000, IT spending fell by 6% in 2001, while the NASDAQ lost half its value between
September 2000 and March 2001.
    The Federal Reserve responded to the end of the high-tech bubble and the general
collapse of U.S. stock markets by sharply reducing interest rates, cutting them by
a total of 4.75 percentage points during 2001. This loosening of monetary policy
was accompanied by markedly different performances across sectors. While sectors
like housing and automobiles experienced a significant boom, IT spending remained
largely unaffected during 2002.1 These differences brought into the debate the ability
of an interest rate based monetary policy to deal with sectoral shocks.
    There are two aspects in this debate. The first aspect is about the sectoral effects
of monetary policy. There are, of course, important reasons to care about these effects.
For example, monetary policy will have a strong redistributive component if different
sectors of the economy have different interest rate sensitivities. In this case, aggregate
output stabilization via monetary policy would be achieved by inducing larger cyclical
fluctuations in interest rate sensitive sectors. The decoupling of these sectors with
respect to the rest of the economy may induce some important redistributive effects in
the presence of sector specific factors of production. For instance, a monetary policy
aimed to stabilize aggregate output may fail to stabilize employment in response to
a shock to a low interest rate sensitivity sector when there are some sector specific
aspects of human capital. A different reason to care about the heterogeneous effect
of monetary policy is the implications it has about the effectiveness of monetary
policy as a policy tool. The ability of an interest-rate-based monetary policy to
jump-start the economy will depend on the relative importance of high interest rate
sensitivity sectors as a fraction of GDP. We may expect then to find a link between
output composition and the effectiveness of monetary policy, which may be especially
important for policymakers.
    The second aspect of the debate is about the role that monetary policy plays in
the transmission of sectoral shocks. By changing the level of interest rate in response
   1
     IT spending remained flat during 2002, and business forecasts predict only a small recovery for
2003. On the other hand, construction of new homes hit a 16-year high in December 2002, and sales
of new cars experienced its largest historical volume during 2001.


                                                 1
to a sectoral shock, monetary policy may either dampen or amplify the dynamic
propagation of shocks across sectors. An appropriate understanding of the way in
which monetary policy interacts with sectoral shocks is also very important for policy
design, and has been largely unexplored in the literature.
       This paper presents an empirical methodology based on the estimation of a struc-
tural VAR to analyze the sectoral effects of monetary policy. This methodology allows
us to compare the effects of monetary policy across sectors in terms of their delay,
persistence, and sacrifice ratio. In addition, our methodology also allows us to deter-
mine how a sectoral shock is transmitted to the rest of the economy, both directly
(through the interactions among sectors) and indirectly (through monetary policy).
       The methodology we propose is an extension of the standard VAR models of mon-
etary policy (Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Bernanke and Mihov (1998), Christiano
and Eichenbaum (1992), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999)) that decom-
poses aggregate GDP and includes all the components simultaneously in the VAR.
The identification of this structural VAR is largely based on standard assumptions:
(i) monetary policy responds contemporaneously only to the aggregate price index
and GDP; (ii) all the components of GDP responds to monetary policy only with a
lag. The only additional assumption we make is that the only source of contempo-
raneous comovement across sectors is the presence of correlated innovations.2 This
assumption allows us to solve the problem in the degrees of freedom that arises in the
unrestricted estimation.
       We apply our methodology to U.S. data. We decompose GDP into 7 components–
durable consumption, non-durable consumption, consumption of services, residen-
tial investment, investment in structures, equipment-and-software investment, and
a residual–and characterize the response of each of this components to a monetary
policy shock. The results we obtain show that, even at this level of aggregation, there
are considerable differences across components in the response to monetary policy.
In particular, consumption of durables, consumption of non-durables, and residential
investment have the largest response to monetary policy. A mild response is observed
in equipment-and-software investment, and, as in other studies (Bernanke and Gertler
(1995)), we find that investment in structures does not respond to monetary policy.
   2
    The assumption that there is no contemporaneous relation across sectors has however been
implicitly present in papers that study the sectoral effects of monetary policy by looking at one sector
at a time (Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Barth and Ramey (2001), Rigobon and Sacks (1998)). In
contrast to our approach, these papers do not assume any correlation among sectoral perturbations.


                                                   2
    We also find that a shock to investment in equipment-and-software generates
a significant effect on aggregate GDP. However, its effect on the consumption of
durables, consumption of non-durables, and residential investment is brief because of
the countervailing effect of the automatic monetary policy response induced by the
shock. Moreover, we find that a monetary policy shock aimed to smooth the shock to
equipment-and-software will generate a significant boom in the rest of the economy,
especially in residential investment and durable consumption.
    Overall, the simulated pattern of responses shows remarkable similarity with the
evolution of the U.S. economy after the high-tech crises, both qualitatively and quan-
titatively, which highlights the usefulness of our methodology for the analysis of mon-
etary policy.
    This paper is part of the vast empirical literature on the effects of monetary pol-
icy. Our methodology builds on the structural VAR approach used in this context by
Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Bernanke and Mihov (1998), Christiano and Eichen-
baum (1992), and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996b,a), among others. We
extend this methodology to explore the sectoral effects of monetary policy and to
consider the transmission of sectoral shocks. The sectoral effects of monetary policy
have been previously studied by Bernanke and Gertler (1995) and Barth and Ramey
(2001), among others. Our paper extends this literature in several dimensions. First,
these papers rely on the standard recursiveness assumption for identification and typ-
ically add a subset of sectors to an aggregate VAR to avoid getting into a degrees
of freedom problem.3 The problem with this approach is that the whole VAR is
re-estimated for each subset of sectors added to the specification.4 Therefore, the
structural parameters of the monetary policy rule are allowed to change across spec-
ifications.5 Second, by analyzing all sectors simultaneously we can study how shocks
    3
      Under the recursiveness assumption, the number of structural parameters grows quadratically
with the number of sectors in the VAR. So, adding one sector requires a significant increase in the
number of observations.
    4
      In this sense, the approach lacks internal consistency. Some of the papers in this literature
(Barth and Ramey (2001), Dedola and Lippi (2000)) have an additional consistency problem: they
add each sector at the bottom of the aggregate VAR. This boils down to assume that monetary policy
affects aggregate GDP only with a lag, but affects contemporaneously each of its components.
    5
      Rigobon and Sacks (1998) partially addressed the issue of the stability of the parameters by
using a two step procedure that first estimates the structural innovations from an aggregate VAR
and then feeds these innovations as exogenous variables in the dynamic specification of sectoral
output. Even though this approach maintains the parameters of the monetary policy response
stable across sectors, it is less efficient than our procedure, and it also does not permit to analyze
the transmission of sectoral shocks.


                                                  3
to particular sectors impact other sectors and the rest of the economy. In contrast,
most of the papers in the literature study one sector at a time using the recursiveness
assumption. Therefore, they cannot be used to analyze the transmission of sectoral
shocks.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the empirical
methodology and the identification assumptions. Section 3 documents the sectoral
effects of monetary policy in the U.S.. In section 4, we use our model to analyze
the effect of a shock to equipment-and-software on the rest of the U.S. economy and
to determine the consequences of a monetary policy aimed to stabilize that shock.
Section 5 concludes.


2     Empirical methodology
2.1       Standard VAR Analysis of Monetary Policy
We will use a Vector-Autoregression (VAR) model to estimate the sectoral effects of
monetary policy. The use of VAR to identify exogenous shocks to monetary policy
and their effect on different economic aggregates was pioneered by Sims (1980) and
further developed by Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and Christiano and Eichenbaum
(1992), among others. The standard model in the literature can be represented by
the following structural VAR:
                                          q
                                          X
                                A0 Xt =         Ai Xt−i + εt ,                     (1)
                                          i=1


where Xt = (Zt , St )0 , St is the instrument of the Monetary Authority, Zt are the
variables in the Monetary Authority’s information set, and q is a non-negative integer.
This specification assumes that the Monetary Authority follows a policy rule that is
linear on the variables in Zt and their lags. In addition, it is assumed that the
perturbations εt have the following properties:
                                                    (
                                                        D     τ =t
                       E[εt ] = 0; E[εt ε0τ ] =                         .
                                                        0   otherwise




                                                4
The estimation of this model is usually performed in two steps. First, the parameters
of the corresponding reduced form VAR are estimated:
                                             q
                                             X
                                      Xt =           Bi Xt−i + ut ,
                                               i=1


then the structural parameters (Ai and D) are recovered by making a series of identifi-
cation assumptions. The most widely used identification assumption in the literature
is the “recursiveness assumption”. This approach corresponds to assume that the
structural errors (εt ) are orthogonal (D = I) and the matrix summarizing the con-
temporaneous relations between the variables in the VAR (A0 ) is block diagonal.
                                                                          0          0 0
That is, it is assumed that the variables in Xt can be arranged as Xt = (Z1t , St , Z2t )
and                                                              
                                               a11       0    0
                                                                
                                     A0 =  a21 a22           0 .
                                               a31 a32       a33
      Intuitively, the recursiveness assumption corresponds to assume that the monetary
policy rule responds to contemporaneous values of the variables in Z1t , but these
variables respond to the monetary policy instrument only with a lag. Analogously,
variables in Z2t are contemporaneously affected by the monetary policy instrument,
but they affect the monetary policy rule only with a lag.
      The recursiveness assumption is not enough to recover all the structural param-
eters of the model. The reason is that the equations in the upper and lower block
of the matrix are indistinguishable from each other because of the block diagonal
structure of A0 . Nevertheless, it can be demonstrated that the assumption is suffi-
cient to identify the column of A0 associated with the monetary policy instrument,
which is enough to determine the response of all the variables to a monetary policy
shock. However, identification through the recursiveness assumption does not permit
to determine the response of the different variables to any other structural shock.
      The set of variables included in the monetary policy rule (Zt ) varies considerably
among the papers in the literature. The most simple model considers a measure of
activity (usually GDP) and a measure of price level (usually the CPI or the GDP
deflator).6 There are also differences regarding the variable to include as the monetary
  6
      Most of the papers also include a measure of commodity prices to account for the “price puzzle”



                                                     5
policy instrument. While some papers argue in favor of using the Federal Funds Rate
(Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Bernanke and Mihov (1998)), others have argued
in favor of using the level of non-borrowed reserves (Christiano and Eichenbaum
(1992)) or the ratio of non-borrowed to total reserves (Strongin (1995)). Regardless
of the monetary policy instrument considered, the literature typically assumes that
the monetary policy rule responds to contemporaneous values of the measures of
activity and prices, but these respond to the monetary policy instrument only with
a lag.7
   This methodology has proved to be extremely useful in understanding the dy-
namics of a monetary economy, but it is not exempt of critique. Particularly, the
zero-restrictions implicit in the block diagonal structure of A0 , which are crucial for
the identification of the monetary policy innovations, are arbitrary and have been
subject to debate.8 We do not address these critiques in this paper, as we are mainly
concerned with understanding the sectorial aspects of monetary policy.
   In summary, the standard way of determining the effects of monetary policy in the
literature is to estimate a reduced form VAR model including at least a measure of
activity, price level, and a monetary policy instrument. The recursiveness assumption
is then used to identify the relevant structural parameters. In the next section we will
show how, with minor modifications, this simple framework can be extended to the
analysis of the sectoral effects of monetary policy and the interactions among sectors.


2.2       A sectoral model of monetary policy
The approach we follow to estimate the sectoral effects of monetary policy is a simple
extension of the standard model in the literature. As discussed in the previous section,
the simplest model of monetary policy in the literature considers a monetary policy
rule based on aggregate activity and prices. The structural VAR representation of
this model corresponds to equation (1), where Xt = (Yt , Pt , Ft ), Yt is the GDP level,
Pt is the price level, and, following Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Ft , the Federal
Funds rate, is the policy instrument. The model is usually estimated in reduced
(see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999)).
   7
     Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996b) consider also the
possibility that the monetary policy instrument responds only with a lag to activity and prices,
which respond contemporaneously to the monetary policy shock.
   8
     See Faust (1998), Faust, Rogers, Swanson, and Rigth (2003), Rudebusch (1998), and Uhlig
(1999).


                                               6
form, and the structural parameters relevant for the transmission of monetary policy
are recovered using the recursiveness assumption.
       To understand the sectoral effects of monetary policy, we decompose the measure
of activity into N different components, so Xt = (Y1t , . . . , YN t , Pt , Ft ). If we were
to identify this VAR through the recursiveness assumption we would have to assume
that:                                                           
                                               A11 A12       0
                                                               
                                    A0 =  A21 a22           0                                     (2)
                                               A31 a32      a33

where Aij are the natural expansions of the aij elements to N variables.9
       This identification would allow us to recover the structural parameters from the
reduced form parameters. However, the disaggregation of the measure of activity
into its components would lead us very quickly into a degrees of freedom problem.
Indeed, this model has (N + 2)2 (q + 1) + 1 parameters,10 so we would need at least
(N + 2)(q + 1) + 1 observations of each variable. Assuming that the frequency of
the data is equal to the number of lags, this implies that we would need at least
T = (N + 2) + (N + 3)/q years of data in order to estimate the parameters. For
example, if we were using 7 sectors and quarterly data, 12 years of data would leave
us with zero degrees of freedom.
       An additional problem with the use of the recursiveness assumption to estimate the
sectoral model is that it can only identify the sectoral effects of monetary policy, but it
cannot identify the effects of a sectoral shock on the rest of the economy. Identifying
the effect of these shocks requires assumptions on the coefficients of A0 beyond the
block diagonal structure. In particular, it requires that enough conditions are imposed
on the coefficients of A11 so that each equation can be individually identified.
       For the previous reasons, we depart from the recursiveness assumption and use an
identification scheme that combines some elements of the recursiveness assumption
with additional assumptions from the simultaneous equations view of identification.
In particular, we assume that (i) the price level index relevant for monetary policy
depends only on aggregate activity, (ii) the monetary policy rule is a function only of
the aggregate activity and price level index, (iii) the structural innovations to different
   9
     For example, a31 is a 1 x1 element that corresponds to the response of the interest rate to output,
then A31 is the 1 x N vector of how the N sectors impact the interest rate.
  10
     Under the recursiveness assumption, A0 has (N + 2)(N + 1) + 1 parameters, Ai i = 1, . . . , q has
(N + 2)2 , and D has (N + 2) variances.

                                                   7
sectors are correlated, (iv) each sector’s activity affects other sectors only with a lag.
These assumptions impose the following structure on A0 and D :
                                                                
                                          IN           A12 0
                                        0                        
                               A0 =  α eN             1        0 ,                  (3)
                                         0
                                      β eN             βp       1
                                                               
                                          Σ        0        0
                                                            
                                 D =  0 σ 2p            0 ,                         (4)
                                          0        0    σ 2F
where eN is a vector of ones of dimension N and Σ is a N xN matrix Assumptions
(i) and (ii) are captured by imposing a common coefficient for all sectors in the rows
of A0 associated with the price index and monetary policy rule (α and β respec-
tively). These assumptions are implicit in the papers that estimate the effects of
monetary policy using aggregate data (e.g. Bernanke and Blinder (1992), Christiano
and Eichenbaum (1992)), and they help us to reduce the degrees of freedom problem.
They boil down to assume that the Taylor rule followed by the Monetary Authority
depends only on aggregate indicators. Assumptions (iii) and (iv) are non-standard
and require further discussion. As previously mentioned, the standard recursiveness
approach would have A11 unrestricted and Σ diagonal, so the sectoral shocks would
be completely idiosyncratic and any contemporaneous comovement across sectors
would be due to the simultaneous relations captured in A11 . Instead, our identifi-
cation scheme assumes that all contemporaneous comovement among sectors is due
to the correlation among their structural innovations. By doing so, we reduce the
number of structural parameters to be estimated in N (N − 1)/2. The obvious cost of
this assumption is that we impose symmetry in the contemporaneous relations across
sectors.
   Before proceeding further, note that assumptions (i)-(iv) are not necessary to
identify the sectoral effects of monetary policy. Besides the degrees of freedom issue,
which is not minor, the sectoral effects of monetary policy could be determined from
the estimation of the structural model of equation (2) under the recursiveness as-
sumption. What we buy with assumptions (iii) and (iv) is the possibility of analyzing
the effects of a sectoral shock. The cost is that the structural sectoral shocks are
non-orthogonal. So, a possible critique to our approach is that we make assumptions


                                               8
to identify the effect of sectoral shocks, but we obtain a model in which these shocks
are not truly independent. In order to address this critique, we also estimate our
model imposing some additional structure in the covariance matrix that introduce in-
dependent sectoral shocks. In particular, we also consider the case in which sectoral
shocks are orthogonal and all the correlation among sectors is due to an aggregate
shock. This corresponds to assume that:

                                     εt = Γzt + µt ,
                                 E[zt ] = 0, E[zt2 ] = σ 2z ,
                                 E[µt ] = 0, E[µt µ0t ] = Ω diagonal,

where Γ = (γ 1 , . . . , γ N , 0, 0)0 .
    Of course, this is not the first attempt to estimate the sectoral effects of monetary
policy. The main contribution of this paper is our identification approach, which
allows us to identify the sectoral effects of monetary policy and the transmission of
sectoral shocks simultaneously, making very few additional assumptions with respect
to the standard VAR models in the literature. The approach typically followed in the
literature on the sectoral effects of monetary policy (e.g. Barth and Ramey (2001),
Dedola and Lippi (2000)) is to estimate a structural VAR that includes aggregate
variables (GDP, a price index, and a commodity price index), the monetary pol-
icy instrument (usually the federal funds rate), and an index of industrial activity
(typically an industrial production index)–in that order–and that identifies the ef-
fects of monetary policy using the recursiveness assumption. That is, they assume
Xt = (Yt , Pt , CPt , Ft , Yit )0 . Under the standard recursiveness assumption the order-
ing of this VAR assumes that the monetary policy rule reacts contemporaneously to
the values of Yt , Pt , and CPt , but those variables react to the monetary policy instru-
ment only with a lag. It also assumes that monetary policy responds to the activity of
sector i with a lag, but sector i is affected contemporaneously by the monetary policy
instrument. It is clear that these two sets of assumptions are mutually inconsistent:
we cannot assume simultaneously that monetary policy does not affect any compo-
nent of aggregate activity contemporaneously, but it does affect contemporaneously
the sum of them. More importantly, by estimating a different VAR for each sector
these papers permit variation both on the parameters of the monetary policy rule
and on the information set relevant for the monetary policy response. This affects

                                                    9
the ability of the model to make meaningful comparisons about the effects of mone-
tary policy across sectors. In contrast, we provide a methodological framework that
estimates a common monetary policy rule across sectors, which allows us to perform
meaningful comparisons, and it is based on a clear set of identification assumptions
that can be subject to debate and robustness checks.


3      Sectoral effects of monetary policy in the U.S.
This section presents the results obtained by applying our methodology to the esti-
mation of the sectoral effects of monetary policy in the U.S.. We decompose U.S.
GDP into seven components: Consumption of Durables (CDU R), Consumption of
Non-Durables (CN DU R), Consumption of Services (CSER), Residential Investment
(IRES), Equipment-and-Software Investment (IEQU IP ), Investment in Structures
(IST RU C), and a residual compressing government expenditure, inventory invest-
ment, and net exports. We use the Consumer Price Index (CP I) as a measure of the
price level and the Federal Funds Rate (F F R) as the monetary policy instrument.
So, our vector Xt corresponds to (CDU Rt , CN DU Rt , CSERt , IRESt , IEQU IPt ,
IST RU Ct , IRESt , CP It , F F Rt )0 , and we estimate the structural parameters of (3)
and (4) by Maximum Likelihood11 using quarterly data for the period 1955:1-2002:312 .
We fist present the results obtained for aggregate activity (the sum of the sectoral
effects) and compare them with previous results in the literature as a benchmark for
our methodology. Next we turn into the sectoral results.


3.1     An aggregate benchmark
In an aggregate model of monetary policy with GDP, prices, and the Federal Funds
Rate (FFR) in the VAR, the matrix A0 has 3 relevant parameters: (i) the effect
of output on prices, (ii) the automatic response of the FFR to output, and (iii)
  11
      The parameters can also be estimated by a two-step procedure in which the first step consists on
the estimation of the reduced form parameters and the second step recovers the structural parameters
using GMM. The results obtained with both procedures are remarkably similar. The main difference
is that, consistent with the larger degrees of freedom of the ML estimation, the main structural
coefficients (A0 and Σ) are more precisely estimated. For a discussion of the results obtained with
the two-step procedure see the appendix.
   12
      The data on the GDP components was obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Data
on CP I and the F F R was obtained from the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.



                                                 10
the automatic response of the FFR to prices. As our methodology assumes that
the contemporaneous Taylor rule followed by the Monetary Authority responds only
to aggregate quantities, we directly estimate each of this parameters (α, β, and β p
in equation (3) respectively). The coefficients estimated for these parameters are
reported in Table 1. The results are consistent with a policy rule aimed to stabilize
output and prices. The coefficients of β and β p are negative, which implies that the
Monetary Authority tends to raise the FFR as a response to an increase in output or
prices. The three coefficients are statistically significant at conventional levels.

                                      [Table 1 about here.]

       The coefficient obtained for α is somewhat puzzling because it implies that prices
fall contemporaneously as a response to an increase in output. There could be two
possible explanations for this result: First, commodity prices induce negative corre-
lation between prices and output and we are not controlling for them. In general,
an increase in oil prices (for example) increases the aggregate price and tends to
reduce output. Indeed, our impulse responses clearly show the well known “price
puzzle” which requires the introduction of commodity prices to eliminate it. Second,
it is possible that this output innovations could be productivity shocks. In those
circumstance, a productivity increase is associated with a reduction in prices.
       Figure 1 presents the impulse response function of aggregate GDP and prices to
a one standard deviation shock to the FFR. The GDP is computed by aggregating
the individual sectorial responses to the monetary policy innovation.
       The monetary policy shock–corresponding to an 80 basis points rise in the FFR–
induces an immediate response on aggregate GDP, which contracts for about 8 quar-
ters before starting to return to its baseline level.13 Prices experience an initial in-
crease but start falling around the 5th quarter14 The main message from this exercise
is that our estimations of the size of the shock and the responses of the aggregate
variables are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with previous estimations
  13
      The magnitudes are expressed in percentage points. As the GDP series is normalized by the
average real GDP in the last 5 years, the impulse responses correspond to percentage deviations
from that baseline
   14
      The initial rise in prices corresponds to the so-called “price puzzle”. The usual explanation
for the price puzzle is that it is due to the misspecification resulting from omitting some leading
indicators of inflation that are part of the Central Bank’s information set (Sims (1992)). The typical
solution to the price puzzle is to include a commodity price index in the VAR. We do not include it
in order to focus on the sectoral results.

                                                 11
from aggregate VAR (see Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (1999)).

                                     [Figure 1 about here.]


3.2       How the residuals look like?
In the empirical literature of monetary policy under the structural VAR approach,
the estimated structural residuals of the monetary policy equation are interpreted as
monetary policy shocks. Similarly, in our approach the structural innovations to a
sector’s equation are interpreted as (non-orthogonal) shocks to that sector. In this
section, we describe some characteristics of the structural residuals and compare them
with previous estimations of the innovations to monetary policy and recent events
in the U.S. economy. This comparisons allows us to observe whether our model is
capturing some salient features of the data.

3.2.1      Comparing the policy shock measure

Figure 2 compares the policy shock measure obtained in our estimations with two
previous measures of monetary policy shocks in the literature: the Romer’s dates
(Romer and Romer (1989)) and one of the measures obtained by Christiano, Eichen-
baum, and Evans (1996b)15 . We observe that there is a strong correlation between
our measure and the one obtained using the Christiano et al. model. This is not
really surprising if we remember that our identification assumptions regarding the
monetary policy rule are very similar to theirs.16 The main difference between our
specification and theirs is that Christiano et al. assume that the Monetary Authority
also responds to the level of total and non-borrowed reserves (though only with a
lag). This seems not to be a first order issue given the high correlation between the
two series of structural residuals.
       The relation between our policy shock measures and the Romer episodes is also
surprisingly good. With the exception of the third quarter of 1978–period in which
  15
     For comparability reasons, we use the specification with the Federal Funds Rate as policy instru-
ment, no commodity prices, and benchmark identification (see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans
(1996b), pp. 43). As the authors emphasize, all their measures are qualitatively similar.
  16
     As noted above, the restrictions imposed on the parameters force the monetary policy rule to
respond only to aggregate GDP and price levels, not to their composition. This is exactly what
Christiano et al. implicitly assume by using aggregate data.


                                                 12
the Romer report a tightening of monetary policy–the Romer episodes are clearly
associated with the presence of positive monetary policy shocks.
       In summary, the monetary policy shocks estimated from the structural residuals
of our model seem to conform well with the results of previous studies.

                                      [Figure 2 about here.]

3.2.2      The High-Tech crises and the 1990-1991 recession

The late 90’s saw an immense expansion of the IT related businesses. The NASDAQ
composite index, which was closely associated with the “new economy”, reached a
peak in February 2000 at almost 5000 points, three times larger than its 1997 level
of about 1500. All these hype came to a sudden stop in late 2000 and early 2001.
Between August 2000 and August 2001 the NASDAQ fell from 4200 to 1800 points,
a 60% fall in only 1 year. At the same time, after growing at 16% during 2000, IT
investment fell by 6% in 2001. The onset of crisis on the high-tech sector marked the
end of the 90’s expansion in the U.S. and started the beginning of the current reces-
sion. This episode is clearly captured by our methodology. Our estimated structural
residuals show a 2.6 and 3.9 standard deviation shocks to equipment and software
investment precisely in the first two quarters of 2001.17 This situation is depicted in
Figure 3, which shows the structural residuals of the equipment and software invest-
ment series.18 We clearly observe a large negative shock in the late 2000 and early
2001. Note that this shock is larger than any other shock previously experienced by
this sector. Additionally, notice that our residuals also show consecutive positive in-
novations during the 90’s reflecting the large boom that the sector experienced during
that time.

                                      [Figure 3 about here.]

       Our structural residuals also seem to be capturing the events of the 1990-1991
recession. Between the second quarter of 1990 and the second quarter of 1991 (the of-
ficial peak and trough dates according to the NBER) we observe large negative shocks
  17
     Shocks of this magnitude are rare, with only 4 episodes of shocks larger than 2.5 standard
deviations observed within sample (2% of observations). In other words, the distribution of the
structural residuals has no particularly fat tails (though they are fatter than the normal case).
  18
     By construction, the structural residuals are serially uncorrelated, so the series are very noisy.
Following Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996b), we report the centered three quarter moving
average of the residuals.

                                                  13
to residential investment (2 std. dev.), consumption of services (2.5 std. dev.), and
consumption of durables (1.8 std. dev). The situation is summarized in Figure 4,
which shows that this was clearly an episode of constrained aggregate demand. Over-
all, these findings are consistent with the general view that the 1990-1991 recession
was largely associated with a consumer confidence crises.

                                    [Figure 4 about here.]

3.2.3      September 11 and the Accounting Scandals

The economy was also subject to two important shocks at the end of 2001 and the
beginning of 2002: September 11 and the accounting scandals after the collapse of
Enron. Because our data is quarterly it is impossible for us to disentangle these two
shocks. However, we can evaluate their overall effect.
       As can be seen in Figure 5, most sectors were recovering from the High-Tech crisis
when they were hit by September 11 and the accounting scandals shock. Most sectors
show positive innovations at the end of 2001 that are reverted considerably for the
first quarter of 2002 and beyond.

                                    [Figure 5 about here.]


3.3       Sectoral sacrifice ratios to monetary policy tightening.
Figure 6 shows the impulse responses functions of the different GDP components to
a one standard deviation contractionary shock to the Federal Funds Rate. The figure
also displays the 90% confidence bands associated to the impulse response functions.19
       The monetary policy shock has a significant and lasting effect in four sectors:
Consumption of Durables, Consumption of Non-Durables, Consumption of Services,
and Residential Investment. A minor effect is observed in Equipment-and-Software
Investment. As previously found in the literature (Bernanke and Gertler (1995)),
Investment in Structures is largely unaffected.

                                    [Figure 6 about here.]
  19
    The confidence bands were estimated by bootstrap. Our procedure to build the confidence
intervals is more conservative than the standard approach followed in the literature, so our bands
tend to be wider. The procedure is described in the appendix.



                                               14
    The delay of monetary policy is roughly similar across sectors, but some interesting
differences are observed. The trough of the response of GDP to the shock is achieved
in 8 quarters. So, the maximum effect of monetary policy is achieved two years after
a shock. This magnitude is similar across those sectors in which monetary policy has
a statistically significant effect: the maximum effect of the shock in Consumption of
Durables, Services, and Residential Investment is also experienced at the 8th quarter.
The only deviation is observed for Consumption of Non-durables, with a trough in the
12th quarter. Some differences in delay across these sectors are also observed when
we compare the first period in which their response to the monetary policy shock is
statistically different from zero. According to this measure, the delay of monetary
policy is shorter in Residential Investment and Services than in the Consumption
of Durables and Non-Durables: while Residential Investment and Services respond
almost immediately to the monetary policy shock, the shock has no effect on the
Consumption of Durables and Non-Durables until around the second quarter.
    One of the sectors with the longest delay to monetary policy is Equipment-and-
Software Investment with a trough at the 10th quarter. This finding provides some
evidence that Equipment-and-Software has a particularly slow response to monetary
policy. Indeed, it is only around the 8th quarter that the effect of monetary policy
is statistically different from zero for reasonable (although non-standard) confidence
levels.
    The impulse response functions also show that the monetary policy shock is highly
persistent. According to the point estimators, GDP has still not returned to its base-
line level after 20 quarters. This high persistence is also observed across sectors,
where, with the exception of Services, none has returned to its baseline level after 20
quarters. A conservative measure of the persistence of monetary policy is given by the
number of periods during which the effect of monetary policy is significantly different
from zero at conventional levels. Using this measure we obtain that the persistence
is of about 9 quarters for Consumption of Durables, 12 quarters for Consumption
of Non-durables, 4 quarters for Consumption of Services, and 14 quarters for Resi-
dential Investment. Under this measure the persistence in Equipment-and-Software
Investment would be around 2 quarters.
    A probably more interesting measure of the effect of monetary policy across differ-
ent sectors is the sacrifice ratio. These ratios are reported for the different sectors in
Table 2. The ratios were computed using the point estimates and represent a measure

                                           15
of the output loss resulting from the monetary policy shock for each sector as a frac-
tion of its baseline level. They correspond to the area under the normalized impulse
response functions during the period of time elapsed until each series returns to its
baseline level or twenty quarters. The normalized impulse responses for the different
sectors are reported in Figure 7. We observe in Table 2 that the two sectors with the
largest sacrifice ratio are Residential Investment and Consumption of Durables. This
is not surprising considering that Residential Investment is only 4.5 percent of the
economy but contributes with one quarter of the aggregate response. On the other
hand, Consumption of Services has the smallest sacrifice ratio among those sectors
with a significant response to monetary policy, which is not surprising given that the
Consumption of Services represents one third of the economy.

                                [Figure 7 about here.]

                                [Table 2 about here.]

   Overall, despite the usual amount of noise present in the estimation of impulse
response functions, we observe some interesting differences in the effect of monetary
policy across sectors. The evidence reported above suggest that monetary policy has
its largest effect on Consumption of Durable and Residential Investment; Structures
and Equipment-and-Software are much less sensitive. These findings are consistent
with the observed behavior of the U.S. economy after the high tech crises. The low
sensitivity of Equipment-and-Software Investment to monetary policy can explain
why the IT sector has remained depressed despite the sharp interest rate cuts by
the Federal Reserve, while the high sensitivity of the Consumption of Durables and
Residential Investment is also consistent with the temporary booms experienced by
the housing and automobile sectors. This results are not significantly affected by
excluding the last two years from the sample. The only effect of this modification
is that Equipment-and-Software becomes slightly more sensitive to monetary policy,
which has a statistically significant effect between the 6th and 9th quarters. The
relative sensitivity of Equipment-and Software is however unaffected. This evidence
suggest that the latest episode is not driving the results considerably.
   More generally, these differences across sectors imply that monetary policy has
the potential to generate inter-sectoral transfers. These transfers can be particularly
important if the monetary policy response is triggered by a sectoral shock because the

                                          16
change in interest rate can induce negative comovement between the sector affected by
the shock and the interest rate sensitive sectors. The transmission of a sectoral shock,
the role played by monetary policy on its transmission, and the pattern of sectoral
decoupling will be analyzed in the next section which applies our methodology to the
high tech crises.


4        The transmission of a sectoral shock: the high-
         tech crisis.
One of the main advantages of our methodology is that it allows us to identify the
effect of sectoral shocks and the role that the monetary policy rule plays in their
transmission. As previously explained, the crucial identification assumption is that
all contemporaneous comovement across sectors is the result of the correlation of their
structural innovations. This assumption, however, complicates the interpretation
of the sectoral shocks and the impulse response functions. Typically, the impulse
response functions plot the response of the VAR to a structural shock to one of
the variables. Under the standard recursiveness approach, the structural shocks are
orthogonal by assumption, so the source of the innovation is clearly determined. In
our case, the structural innovations to different sectors are correlated,20 so a sectoral
shock will typically coincide with simultaneous shocks to the rest of the sectors. It
is this correlation which generates the contemporaneous comovement observed in the
impulse responses.
       As described in section 2.2, there are basically two ways of understanding the
correlation of the structural innovations. The first is to assume that it corresponds
to the correlation among the sectoral shocks. Under this view, there are no idiosyn-
cratic shocks. The second is to assume that the correlation is due to the presence of
an aggregate shock. Under this view, the structural innovations correspond to the
combination of an aggregate shock and an idiosyncratic sectoral shock. Certainly,
there is no empirical way of telling between these two worlds. The true nature of the
sectoral shocks, however, must lie somewhere in the middle. Looking at the effect of
a sectoral shock under both extreme identification assumptions gives us some bounds
  20
    We still maintain the assumption that the structural shocks to monetary policy and prices are
orthogonal to the rest of the shocks and among themselves.



                                               17
within which the true impulse response function must lie. We believe that this is
an important step forward with respect to the current state of the literature, which
makes no attempt to identify the effect of this kind of perturbations.
       We applied our methodology to explore the effect of a shock to equipment-and-
software investment which we associate with the kind of shock that triggered the
recent U.S. high-tech crises. In order to understand the role played by monetary policy
in the transmission of the shock, we document both the impulse response functions
of the economy predicted by the full VAR and the counterfactual impulse response
functions obtained when the monetary policy channel of the VAR is suppressed. We
also analyze what would be the dynamic response of the economy if, in response to the
shock to Equipment-and-Software, the Monetary Authority reacted with a monetary
policy shock targeted to stabilize output within an specific time horizon (considering
the dynamics as given): we simulate the results for an horizon of 4, 8 and 12 quarters.
       The results obtained under the two alternative identification assumptions are dis-
cussed next. Overall, the results we present show that the automatic reaction of the
Monetary Authority has a significant role in the propagation of sectoral shocks. We
also find that the predicted response of our VAR shows some remarkable similarities
with the events observed in the U.S. in recent years. This similarity is more profound
when we assume that, in addition to its automatic response, the Monetary Authority
reacts to the fall in GDP with a monetary policy shock.


4.1       Correlated sectoral shocks
The impulse response functions of the economy and its different sectors to a one
standard deviation correlated innovation to Equipment-and-Software Investment are
reported in figures 8 and 9.21 Figure 8 shows that the shock has a significant impact
on GDP, which falls in 54 basis points respect to its baseline level after two quarters.
  21
     The effect of the correlated sectoral shock is determined as follows. Let R represent the corre-
lation matrix of the structural innovations. That is:

                                 R = diag(Σ)−1/2 Σ diag(Σ)−1/2 .

Column j of R contains the correlations between sector j and the rest of the sectors:
                                                     
                                                  ρ1j
                                                     
                                        R.j =  ... 
                                                   ρN j


                                                 18
According to its Taylor rule, the contemporaneous response of the Monetary Author-
ity is a reduction of the interest rate of 5 basis points. As activity keeps contracting
after the initial shock, the Monetary Authority keeps reducing the interest rate until
achieving a fall of 40 basis points two quarters after the shock. There is a significant
fall in prices which still persists after 20 quarters. Notice that the shock by itself is
highly persistent and output remains below its natural level for several years.
   As the correlations across sectors are typically positive, almost every sector expe-
riences a contraction as a result to the shock to Equipment-and-Software. However,
the speed of recovery is significantly different across sectors: Consumption of Ser-
vices, Consumption of Durables, and Residential Investment return to their baseline
level much faster than Consumption of Non-Durables, Equipment-and-Software In-
vestment, and Structures Investment. Remember from the previous section, that the
former are precisely those sectors with the highest sensitivity to monetary policy. So
their fast recovery can be attributed to effect of the fall in interest rates resulting from
the automatic response of the Monetary Authority. On the other hand, we previously
found that Equipment-and-Software had a small response to monetary policy, so it
is not surprising that the sector seems to be unaffected by the reaction of the Mon-
etary Authority, and it remains in recession after a significant amount of time. This
evidence suggest that the way in which monetary policy stabilizes output in response
to a shock to a low interest rate sensitivity sector is by inducing significant transfers
towards high interest rate sensitivity sectors.

                                   [Figure 8 about here.]

                                   [Figure 9 about here.]

   Figures 10 and 11 show the counterfactual impulse response functions obtained
when the monetary policy part of the VAR is suppressed. Figure 10 shows the impulse
response functions only of Equipment-and-Software and aggregate GDP, and Figure
Let σ j be the standard deviation of the structural innovation to sector j. The impulse response
function to a one standard deviation shock to sector j is then determined by setting:
                                                          
                                       Y10              ρ1j
                                    ..             . 
                                    .  = σ j  ..  .
                                     YN 0            ρN j




                                              19
11 shows the impulse response functions of all the different sectors. These figures
show that, as expected, output recovery is considerably slower in absence of the
stimulus provided by the reduction of interest rates. More interestingly, the sectoral
impulse response functions presented in Figure 11 provide an interesting benchmark:
comparing the sectoral impulse response functions of Figure 9 with those of Figure 11
we can determine the part of the sectorial dynamics that are determined by monetary
policy. The comparison shows that the quick recovery of Consumption of Durables,
Services, and Residential Investment observed in Figure 9 is exclusively due to the
effect of monetary policy: without an active monetary policy the effect of the shock
to Equipment-and-Software Investment on these sectors is large and long-lasting. In
addition, an active monetary policy make these sectors significantly less correlated
with less interest sensitive sectors like Investment in Structures.

                                   [Figure 10 about here.]

                                   [Figure 11 about here.]

       Figures 12 and 13 show the impulse response functions of the economy and the
different sectors to a different counterfactual policy exercise: we analyze what hap-
pens to the economy if the response of the Monetary Authority to the sectoral shock
goes beyond the automatic reaction dictated by its Taylor rule.22 In particular, we
ask what happens if the Monetary Authority responds with a monetary policy shock
aimed to stabilize aggregate output in less than two year (eight quarters). Figure 12
shows that the necessary monetary policy shock is of 47 basis points, which added to
the automatic response dictated by the policy rule (5 basis points) induces a contem-
poraneous decline in interest rates of 52 basis points. As this swift contemporaneous
response induces a fast recovery in aggregate activity, the interest rate does not fall
much further in future periods: it only declines by additional 24 basis points the next
quarter before starting to return to its baseline level. However, Figure 13 shows that
this swift policy reaction is unable to stabilize the Equipment-and-Software sector:
the recession in this sector still continues after two years. On the other hand, there is
a boom in Residential Investment and Consumption of Durables, which recover after
3 quarters and enter into an expansion thereafter. The effect on inflation is small.
  22
   This exercise would be affected by the Lucas’ critique if the shock reveals any new information
about the preferences of the Monetary Authority. We assume that this is not the case.


                                               20
                                      [Figure 12 about here.]

                                      [Figure 13 about here.]


4.2        Idiosyncratic sectoral shocks
Figures 14 and 15 report the impulse response functions of the economy and its
different sectors to an orthogonal innovation to Equipment-and-Software Investment.
In this case, all correlations across sectors are assumed to be due to the aggregate
shock.23 So, the innovation to Equipment-and-Software has no contemporaneous
effect on the other sectors, and its aggregate effect has to be smaller than in the
correlated case. Therefore, this exercise gives us a lower bound on the true effect of
a sectoral shock.24
       Figure 14 shows that, even under this extreme assumption, the sectoral shock
induces a significant decline in both aggregate GDP and interest rates. As expected,
the response is quantitatively smaller than in the correlated case: GDP falls by about
28 basis points after three quarters, the interest rate responds contemporaneously
with a decline of only 2 basis points after which keeps falling reaching a maximum
decline of 21 basis points.
  23
       More precisely, we are assuming that

                                              εt = Γzt + µt ,

so the variance of the structural innovation to sector j corresponds to

                                          σ 2j = γ j σ 2z + σ 2µj .

The impulse response function is obtained by setting
                                            ½
                                                0    i 6= j
                                      Yi0 =
                                               σ 2µj i = j

  24
     The structural VAR under the assumption that all sectoral correlations are generated by an
aggregate shock is different from the structural VAR with unrestricted correlation of sectoral shocks.
So, the parameters of this VAR were estimated anew. The results obtained for the structural
parameters, presented in the appendix, are remarkably similar to those obtained in the unrestricted
VAR. This similarity implies that the covariance matrix of sectoral shocks is amenable to this kind
of structure. In addition, it makes us very confident in our estimation procedure. The only problem
with the restricted estimation is that the hessian of the likelihood function (the information matrix)
is less well behaved than in the unrestricted case. For this reason, the confidence intervals tend to
be significantly larger (see discussion in the appendix).



                                                    21
   The shock has a very small effect in Consumption of Durables, Services, and
Residential Investment (Figure 15). The largest effects are observed in Consumption
of Non-Durables, Investment in Structures, and Equipment-and-Software. So, the
evidence shows that the small decline in interest rates is enough to stabilize the output
of high interest rate sensitivity sectors, but it is not enough to stop the recession in
the rest of the economy.

                                [Figure 14 about here.]

                                [Figure 15 about here.]

   Figures 16 and 17 show the results obtained for the stabilization exercise. In order
to stabilize the output within two years, the Monetary Authority would have to react
with a monetary policy shock of 36 basis points, achieving a total contemporaneous
decline in interest rates of 38 basis points. Similarly to the case of the correlated
sectoral shock, the interest rate would keep falling by 16 additional basis points before
starting to return to its baseline level, reaching a maximum decline of 54 basis points.

                                [Figure 16 about here.]

                                [Figure 17 about here.]

   Table 3 provides an overall comparison of the contemporaneous response of in-
terest rates for the cases of a correlated and independent sectoral shocks. The table
presents the contemporaneous decline in interest rates under four different stances
of monetary policy: automatic response implied by the Taylor’s rule, and aggregate
output stabilization within four, eight, and twelve quarters. The results previously
discussed are those corresponding to the automatic response and to the eight-quarter
stabilization. As expected, the shorter the targeted stabilization period, the larger
the required contemporaneous drop in interest rates. As also expected, the required
declines in interest rate are systematically smaller in the independent sectoral shock
case. More interestingly, the decline required to stabilize output within eight quar-
ters is of the same magnitude than the actual decline in interest rate induced by the
FED during 2001. As documented in section 3.2.2, the structural residuals obtained
with our methodology indicate two consecutive shocks to Equipment-and-Software
investment during the first two quarters of 2001: a 2.5-standard-deviation shock and

                                           22
a 4-standard-deviation shock. A back of the envelope calculation suggests that the
size of the monetary policy shock required to stabilize aggregate output within two
years should be around 1.7 percentage points with a total decline in interest rate of
about 2.5 percentage points after two quarters. This amount corresponds to roughly
half of the 4.75 percentage point decline in interest rates during 2001.

                                  [Table 3 about here.]

    Overall, both assumptions about the correlations among sectoral shocks produce
similar results. They show that a shock to Equipment-and-Software Investment gen-
erates a significant decline in aggregate output and interest rates. The decline in
interest rates resulting from the automatic response of the Monetary Authority–given
by its Taylor rule–is enough to stabilize the output of high interest rate sensitivity sec-
tors, such as Consumption of Durables and Residential Investment. If the Monetary
Authority also reacted with a shock to the interest rate designed to stabilize output
within a year, these sectors would experience a temporary boom. In none of these
case, however, is monetary policy able to quickly stabilize the output of sectors that
are less sensitive to monetary policy such as Equipment-and-Software or Structures.


5     Conclusion
In this paper we present a new methodology that allows us to investigate both the
sectoral effects of monetary policy and its role in the transmission of sectoral shocks.
We apply our methodology to the U.S. and demonstrate that there are interesting
differences in the response to monetary policy among U.S. sectors. Moreover, we
show that, due to these differences, a monetary policy rule aimed to stabilize aggre-
gate output and prices will have an asymmetric effect across sectors: high interest
rate sensitivity sectors will experience larger cyclical fluctuations than low sensitivity
ones. Our results also suggest that the sectoral “transfers” involved are potentially
significant. In other words, monetary policy will achieve stabilization only by in-
ducing relatively large expansions and contractions on high interest rate sensitivity
sectors.
    Our estimates indicate that the High-Tech crisis in 2001 represented a shock of
roughly 6.5 (2.6 + 3.9) standard deviations. According to our estimates the simulta-
neous automatic response of monetary policy would be between 6 and 17 basis points

                                            23
with a trough 4 quarters into the recession where the rate has been reduced between
70 and 117 basis points. On the other hand, if the monetary policy had an objective
to recover aggregate output within 8 quarters the reaction to the shock would have
been much larger. Our estimate suggest that the FED should have dropped interest
rates immediately in between 117 and 152 basis points. The path of interest rates
would have implied that the interest rate should have been reduced in something in
between 177 and 259 basis points. This estimates indicate that after the High-Tech
crisis we should have expected that a relatively concerned FED should have reduced
the interest rate in a maximum of 2.5 percentage points. This is remarkably close to
what the FED indeed reduced. Furthermore, this estimate includes only the High-
Tech shocks, clearly if we were able to disentangle the aggregate component implied
by the September 11 and ENRON collapse the predicted interest rate reduction would
have been much closer to the 4.5 percent it actually cut.
   From the policy point of view our results indicate that monetary policy, unfor-
tunately, is not well equipped to deal with sectoral shocks. It indeed produces large
reallocations. Therefore, it cannot deal with a sectoral recession, specially if that
sector is not interest sensitive, and if the recession is due to overcapacity. Monetary
policy is, therefore, well equipped to deal with aggregate shocks. The sectoral shocks
have to be dealt with fiscal policy. This is similar to the discussion that existed
in Europe before the reunification (Dornbusch, Favero, and Giavazzi (1998)). Fur-
ther research should apply the methodology developed here to evaluate the recent
experiences in the Euro zone.
   In this paper we have used demand components to make claims about sectors. This
is indeed a short cut, but one that we feel provides very interesting insights about the
dynamic response of the different components to monetary policy. However, future
research should replicate this results using sectoral output - or employment.
   Several other questions are left unanswered in this paper. Probably the most im-
portant is why different sectors have different sensitivities to monetary policy. We can
speculate that differences in the importance of financial constraints, price stickiness,
or durability are potential causes to be explored, and they should also form part of
future research.
   Finally, from a methodological point of view, we see our methodology as a use-
ful tool to explore some unanswered questions about the effects of monetary policy
and to test different hypothesis about the behavior of the Monetary Authority. For

                                          24
example, within academic and policy circles is frequently speculated that the Mone-
tary Authority pays more attention to some specific sectors (for example Residential
Investment) to decide the stance of monetary policy. This hypothesis can be easily
tested in our framework by relaxing the assumption that the Taylor rule followed by
the Monetary Authority depends only on aggregate output and prices. We plan to
tackle the question of distributional aspects in the Taylor rule in future research.




                                          25
References
Barth, M., and V. Ramey (2001): “The cost channel of monetary policy,” Mimeo,
  UC San Diego.

Bernanke, B., and A. Blinder (1992): “The Federal Funds Rate and the Chan-
  nels of Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review, 82(4), 901–921.

Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (1995): “Inside the Black Box: the credit channel
  of monetary policy,” Journal Economics Perspectives, 9(4), 27–48.

Bernanke, B., and I. Mihov (1998): “Measuring Monetary Policy,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 113(3), 869–902.

Christiano, L., and M. Eichenbaum (1992): “Identification and the Liquidity
  Effect of a monetary policy shock,” in Political economy, growth, and business
  cycles, ed. by A. Cukierman, and Z. Hercowitz, chap. 12, pp. 335–372. MIT Press.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (1996a): “The effects of mon-
  etary policy shocks: evidence from the flow of funds,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 78(1), 16–34.

         (1996b): “Identification and the effects of monetary policy shocks,” in Fi-
  nancial Factors in economic stabilization and growth, ed. by M. Blejer, Z. Eckstein,
  Z. Hercowitz, and L. Leiderman, chap. 2, pp. 36–74. Cambridge University Press.

         (1999): “Monetary policy shocks: what have we learned and to what end?,”
  in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1A,
  chap. 2. North Holland: Elsevier.

Dedola, L., and F. Lippi (2000): “The Monetary Transmission Mechanism: Evi-
  dence from the Industries of Five OECD Countries,” CEPR Discussion Paper.

Dornbusch, R., C. Favero, and F. Giavazzi (1998): “The Immediate Challenges
  for the European Central Bank,” NBER WP 6369.

Faust, J. (1998): “The robustness of identified VAR conclusions about money,”
  Carnegier-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 49, 207–244.



                                         26
Faust, J., J. Rogers, E. Swanson, and J. Rigth (2003): “Identifying the effects
  of monetary policy shocks on exchange rates using high frequency data,” NBER
  WP 9660.

Rigobon, R., and B. Sacks (1998): “Delay in Monetary policy. Theory and evi-
  dence,” Manuscript, MIT.

Romer, D., and C. Romer (1989): “Does monetary policy matters? A new test
  in the spirit of Friedman and Schwartz,” in NBER Macroeconomic Annual, 1989,
  pp. 121–170. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Rudebusch, G. (1998): “Do Measures of monetary policy in a VAR make sense?,”
  International Economic Review, 39(4), 907–931.

Sims, C. (1980): “Comparison of Interwar and Postwar business cycles: monetarism
  reconsidered,” American Economic Review, 70(3), 250–257.

         (1992): “Interpreting the macroeconomic time series facts: the effects of
  monetary policy,” European Economic Review, 36(5), 975–1000.

Strongin, S. (1995): “The Identification of Monetary Policy Disturbances: Ex-
  plaining the Liquidity Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 35(3), 463–497.

Uhlig, H. (1999): “What are the Effects of Monetary Policy on Output? Results
  from an Agnostic Identification Procedure,” Tilburg CentER for Economic Re-
  search Discussion Paper: 9928.




                                       27
A      Data
Data for the estimation was obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis and
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The GDP data is at quarterly frequency.
Quarterly values for the Federal Funds Rate and the CPI correspond to the quarterly
averages of monthly data. The GDP data is expressed in levels, deflated by the
CPI,25 and expressed as a fraction of the last 6 quarters average real GDP, which is
therefore defined as the baseline level. Therefore, the impulse responses corresponds
to percentage deviations of this baseline.26 The CPI and the FFR are expressed in
percentage points. The data was de-trended and demeaned previous to estimation
(using a linear trend). Results are similar if the trend and constants are estimated in
the VAR.


B      Estimation of bands
The confidence bands for the impulse response functions reported in the paper were
built b bootstrapping. The detailed procedure is as follows. Let θ be the vector of
parameters of the structural model. The estimators of these parameters (θ̂) were
obtained by Maximum Likelihood; therefore:

                                      θ̂ = arg max L(y | θ)
                                                 θ


This estimators are asymptotically normally distributed. Their asymptotic covariance
matrix corresponds to the information matrix:
                                                 (                     )−1
                                                      2
                                                     ∂ L(y | θ̂)
                              AsyVar(θ̂) = −                       0         ,
                                                       ∂ θ̂ ∂ θ̂

therefore:
                                      dist
                                    θ̂ Ã N (θ, AsyVar(θ̂)).
  25
    Results are similar if the GDP deflator is used instead.
  26
    Results are qualitatively similar if the VAR is estimated in logs. We checked this results only
using the two step procedure, as the estimation is computationally burdensome. It requires to use
the share data at each point in time to recover the aggregate log GDP from the sectoral log outputs.
This aggregation is necessary because both prices and the monetary policy rule are assumed to
depend only on aggregates. In the estimation, shares were considered as given.



                                                28
For the bootstrap, we draw 500 independent draws of the parameters according to
the normal distribution above. For each set of parameters we estimated the implied
impulse response function. To construct the bootstrap bands we filter the 90% of the
impulse responses with the smallest overall distance to the impulse response obtained
with the point estimators: let Ψ represent the impulse response function associated
with the point estimators. Ψ is a (N + 2)xL matrix containing the impulse response
function of each VAR series to an specific shock–where L is the number of periods
considered for the impulse response functions. Analogously, let Ψk represent the
impulse response matrix associated with the kth draw from the normal distribution.
Define the distance between these two impulse response matrices as:

                                                  N
                                                  X +2 X
                                                       L
                                                             ¡           ¢2
                          Dk = ||Ψk − Ψ||2 =                     Ψkij − Ψ .
                                                   i=1 j=1


Next, rank the bootstrap impulse responses according to this distance. The upper
band reported in the paper corresponds to the impulse response at the 95th percentile
level of this ranking, and the lower band corresponds to the impulse response at the
5th percentile level of this ranking. Therefore the bands represent a 90% confidence
interval around the point estimates.27
       A different procedure to estimate the confidence bands of the impulse response
functions that does not relies in the asymptotic normality of the parameters is per-
forming a non-parametric bootstrap on the residuals. Under this procedure, the
residuals are sampled with replacement, after which a fictitious data is generated us-
ing the sample residuals and the estimated parameters. Given that the asymptotic
variances of some of the coefficients of the lags matrices are large, this procedure will
tend to create smaller confidence intervals than those reported in the paper. However,
this procedure requires to re-estimate the structural parameters for each bootstrap
iteration, which, given the size of the problem, renders it computationally unfeasible.
However, we can get a flavor of the differences in the confidence intervals generated
with both procedures by comparing them for the aggregate VAR case (in which GDP
is not decomposed into sectors). Figure 18 reports this exercise.It shows the impulse
response of aggregate GDP to a two standard deviation shock to FFR and the confi-
  27
    We select the bands in this manner because the impulse response functions of the different series
in the VAR are not independent.



                                                 29
dence intervals under both procedures: bootstrap on the coefficients and bootstrap on
the residuals. It can be seen that although the upper bands obtained with both proce-
dures are similar, the lower band obtained bootstrapping the residuals is considerably
smaller than the analogous band obtained bootstrapping the coefficients.
       The difference between the two bootstrapping procedures should increase with
the imprecision of the ML estimators. Indeed, as mentioned in the paper, when
we estimate the model in which we restrict the correlation between sectoral shocks
to be driven by a common factor, the bands are extremely imprecise and tend to
be explosive. The reason is that when the parameters of the lag matrices are very
imprecise, some of the draws may imply a dynamic structure with a unit root.28,29


C        Results for the two-step procedure
We also estimated the parameters of the model and the impulse response functions
using a two-step procedure in which the first step consisted on estimating the parame-
ters of the reduced form VAR by OLS, and the second step consisted on the recovering
of the structural parameters via GMM. The advantage of this procedure is that it
is much less computationally burdensome. The disadvantage is that the degrees of
freedom in the first step (unrestricted) estimation are small so the structural param-
eters tend to be estimated very imprecisely. Despite the imprecision in the estimated
parameters, the bands generated using this procedure are relatively small because
its computational simplicity allows us to perform a non-parametric bootstrap in the
residuals. The results obtained using this procedure for all the exercises presented
in the paper is reported in Raddatz and Rigobon (2003). As a brief comparison, we
next report the estimated coefficients of the matrix A0 , the variances of the different
  28
      The intuition is clear when we think of a univariate process. For instance, consider the process
xt = αxt−1 +εt ; assuming α = 0.8 this process is stationary. Now assume that we obtain an estimator
α̂ = 0.8 with standard deviation of 0.1. Standard tests would correctly reject the hypothesis of a unit
root. However, when drawing a sample from a normal with mean 0.7 and standard deviation 0.1 it
is likely to obtain some explosive realizations. We conjecture that this is the reason of the explosive
bands obtained for the restricted case. We are currently working on obtaining the confidence bands
bootstraping over the residuals. Results using this procedure will be reported in future versions of
the paper.
   29
      We are confident however that the problem in the restricted estimation lies on the properties
of the Hessian and not on the point estimates. We checked for the presence of a unit root in a
coefficient by estimating the VAR in first differences. The point estimates and impulse response
functions obtained were similar to those in levels and did not exhibit explosive confidence bands.



                                                  30
structural shocks, and the impulse responses to a monetary policy shock obtained
with the two-step procedure, compared with the ML estimators. It can be seen that
both procedures generate qualitatively similar results.

                                [Table 4 about here.]




                                         31
[Figure 18 about here.]

[Figure 19 about here.]




          32
Table 1: Coefficients of contemporaneous effects

                  Parameters
             α
             b        b
                      β          bp
                                 β

            0.145   -0.238      -0.689
           (0.049) (0.140)     (0.205)




                      33
                            Table 2: Sacrifices ratios by sector
Sector                                                       Sacrifice ratio      Sacrifice ratio
                                                              (point est.)        (upper band)
 Consumption of Durables (CDU R)                                  -21.44               -3.83
Consumption of Non-Durables (CN DU R)                              -8.96               -1.47
Consumption of Services (CSER)                                     -2.54               -0.07
Residential Investment (IRES)                                     -54.41              -15.17
Investment in Structures (IST RU C)                                 1.89                 -
Equipment-and-Software Investment (IEQU IP )                      -16.29                 -
Note: The sacrifice ratio using the point estimates corresponds to the area between the x-axis
and the normalized impulse response function during the period elapsed between the monetary
policy shock and the minimum of the quarter in which the series returns to its baseline level or 20
quarters. The normalized impulse correspond to the standard impulse responses divided by the
average share of each sector in real GDP during the last 6 quarters of the data. The sacrifice ratio
using the upper band (column 3) is the area between the x-axis and the upper confidence band
of the normalized impulse response function computed during the quarters for which the impulse
response function is statistically different from zero.




                                                34
Table 3: Decline in FFR in response to a shock to E&S Investment (in basis points)
        Mon. Policy                  Correlated shock Independent shock
        Stance                          to E&S Inv        to E&S Inv

        Automatic Response                   5                  2
        Stabilization in a year             164                93
        Stabilization in two years           52                38
        Stabilization in three years        47




                                       35
Table 4: Comparison of two-step and ML procedures

          Coefficients     Two-step MLE
         A0 α                 0.094 0.145
             β               -0.266 -0.238
             βp              -0.778 -0.689

         Σ    σ CDU R           0.123   0.120
              σ CN DU R         0.083   0.073
              σ CSER            0.070   0.089
              σ IST RU C        0.061   0.050
              σ IEQU IP         0.093   0.086
              σ IRES            0.078   0.070
              σ REST            0.247   0.259
              σ CP I            0.218   0.294
              σF F R            0.655   0.825




                           36
1.2



  1



0.8



0.6



0.4



0.2



  0
       -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4     5     6    7     8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15

-0.2



-0.4



-0.6



-0.8

                                           CPI        FFR       GDP




       Figure 1: Effect of a shock to FFR on GDP, CPI, and FFR




                                                 37
2.50



2.00



1.50



1.00



0.50



0.00



-0.50



-1.00



-1.50



-2.00
     1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

                                                   CEE     MP SHOCKS




                 Figure 2: Measures of monetary policy shocks




                                                      38
0.15



 0.1



0.05



   0



-0.05



 -0.1



-0.15



 -0.2



-0.25
     1980        1985         1990         1995          2000




            Figure 3: Shocks to Equipment-and-Software




                                 39
        0.5



        0.4



        0.3



        0.2



        0.1



          0



        -0.1



        -0.2



        -0.3



        -0.4



        -0.5
               1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002




Figure 4: Sum of shocks to Durables, Non-durables, Services, and Residential Invest-
ment




                                                    40
                              CDUR                                                                  CNDUR

0.5                                                                   0.25

0.4                                                                    0.2
                                                                      0.15
0.3
                                                                       0.1
0.2
                                                                      0.05
0.1
                                                                         0
  0
                                                                      -0.05 1995     1996   1997   1998     1999   2000   2001   2002
       1995   1996   1997   1998   1999     2000   2001   2002
-0.1                                                                   -0.1
-0.2                                                                  -0.15
-0.3                                                                   -0.2




                              CSER                                                                  ISTRUC

  0.3                                                                 0.15
0.25
                                                                       0.1
  0.2
0.15
                                                                      0.05
  0.1
0.05                                                                     0
   0                                                                          1995   1996   1997   1998     1999   2000   2001   2002
                                                                      -0.05
-0.05 1995    1996   1997   1998     1999   2000   2001   2002
 -0.1
                                                                       -0.1
-0.15
 -0.2                                                                 -0.15




                              IEQUIP                                                                 IRES

0.3                                                                    0.1

0.2
                                                                      0.05
0.1

  0                                                                      0
       1995   1996   1997   1998   1999     2000   2001   2002                1995   1996   1997   1998     1999   2000   2001   2002
-0.1                                                                  -0.05
-0.2
                                                                       -0.1
-0.3

-0.4                                                                  -0.15




                                               Figure 5: Sectoral Residuals




                                                                 41
                                                                          CDUR                                                                                                                                            CNDUR




  0.1                                                                                                                                                  0.15

                                                                                                                                                         0.1
0.05

                                                                                                                                                       0.05
      0
           -4    -3    -2    -1       0       1       2   3   4   5   6     7      8   9   10 11     12   13   14   15 16     17   18   19 20                 0
                                                                                                                                                                   -4    -3    -2    -1       0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7     8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
-0.05
                                                                                                                                                       -0.05

 -0.1                                                                                                                                                   -0.1


-0.15                                                                                                                                                  -0.15

                                                                                                                                                        -0.2
 -0.2
                                                                                                                                                       -0.25
-0.25
                                                                                                                                                        -0.3

 -0.3
                                                                                                                                                       -0.35

-0.35                                                                                                                                                   -0.4




                                                                          CSER                                                                                                                                            ISTRUC




0.6                                                                                                                                                      0.1


                                                                                                                                                       0.05
0.4


                                                                                                                                                              0
0.2                                                                                                                                                                -4    -3    -2    -1       0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7     8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20


                                                                                                                                                       -0.05
  0
          -4    -3    -2    -1    0       1       2       3   4   5   6    7     8     9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17 18     19   20
                                                                                                                                                        -0.1

-0.2
                                                                                                                                                       -0.15

-0.4
                                                                                                                                                        -0.2


-0.6
                                                                                                                                                       -0.25


-0.8                                                                                                                                                    -0.3




                                                                          IEQUIP                                                                                                                                           IRES




0.4                                                                                                                                                    0.2


0.3
                                                                                                                                                       0.1

0.2
                                                                                                                                                         0
0.1                                                                                                                                                               -4    -3    -2    -1    0       1   2   3   4   5   6    7      8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20



  0                                                                                                                                                    -0.1
          -4    -3    -2    -1    0       1       2       3   4   5   6    7     8     9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17 18     19   20

-0.1                                                                                                                                                   -0.2

-0.2
                                                                                                                                                       -0.3
-0.3

                                                                                                                                                       -0.4
-0.4


-0.5                                                                                                                                                   -0.5




                                  Figure 6: Sectoral effects of a monetary policy shock




                                                                                                                                                  42
  1



0.5



  0
       -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4     5     6   7      8   9     10     11   12   13   14     15   16   17   18   19   20

-0.5



 -1



-1.5



 -2



-2.5



 -3



-3.5



 -4

                                   CDUR        CNDUR       CSER           ISTRUC        IEQUIP         IRES




                           Figure 7: Sacrifice ratios (shock to FFR)




                                                           43
0.1




  0
       -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4    5   6   7     8   9   10    11   12    13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20



-0.1




-0.2




-0.3




-0.4




-0.5




-0.6

                                               IEQUIP       CPI       FFR        GDP




            Figure 8: Aggregate effects of a correlated sectoral shock




                                                        44
   0
        -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4     5     6   7      8   9     10     11   12   13   14    15    16   17   18   19   20




-0.05




 -0.1




-0.15




 -0.2




-0.25

                                    CDUR        CNDUR       CSER           ISTRUC        IEQUIP         IRES




             Figure 9: Sectoral effects of a correlated sectoral shock




                                                            45
        0.2



        0.1



          0
               -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20


        -0.1



        -0.2



        -0.3



        -0.4



        -0.5



        -0.6



        -0.7

                                                               IEQUIP       GDP




Figure 10: Aggregate effect of a correlated sectoral shock. No monetary policy case




                                                               46
       0.05




          0
               -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4     5     6   7      8   9     10     11   12   13   14    15    16   17   18   19   20




       -0.05




        -0.1




       -0.15




        -0.2




       -0.25

                                           CDUR        CNDUR       CSER           ISTRUC        IEQUIP         IRES




Figure 11: Sectoral effects of a correlated sectoral shock. No monetary policy case




                                                                   47
          1




        0.5




          0
               -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1        2     3   4     5         6   7   8   9   10



        -0.5




         -1




        -1.5




         -2




        -2.5

                                       IEQUIP       CPI   FFR       GDP




Figure 12: Aggregate effect of output stabilization policy (correlated sectoral shock)




                                                    48
        0.3


       0.25


        0.2


       0.15


        0.1


       0.05


          0
               -4   -3   -2   -1      0   1       2          3    4       5        6   7      8   9   10

       -0.05


        -0.1


       -0.15


        -0.2


       -0.25

                                   CDUR   CNDUR       CSER       ISTRUC       IEQUIP   IRES




Figure 13: Sectoral effect of output stabilization policy (correlated sectoral shock)




                                                      49
0.05




   0
        -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1        2        3   4     5         6   7   8   9   10


-0.05




 -0.1




-0.15




 -0.2




-0.25




 -0.3




-0.35

                                IEQUIP        CPI     FFR       GDP




        Figure 14: Aggregate effects of independent sectoral shock




                                             50
0.05




   0
        -4   -3   -2   -1      0   1       2          3    4       5        6   7      8   9   10




-0.05




 -0.1




-0.15




 -0.2

                            CDUR   CNDUR       CSER       ISTRUC       IEQUIP   IRES




         Figure 15: Sectoral effects of independent sectoral shock




                                               51
         0.6



         0.4



         0.2



          0
               -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1        2     3   4     5         6   7   8   9   10

        -0.2



        -0.4



        -0.6



        -0.8



          -1



        -1.2



        -1.4

                                       IEQUIP       CPI   FFR       GDP




Figure 16: Aggregate effect of output stabilization policy (independent sectoral shock)




                                                    52
          0.2




         0.15




          0.1




         0.05




           0
                -4   -3   -2   -1      0   1       2          3    4       5        6   7      8   9   10


        -0.05




         -0.1




        -0.15




         -0.2

                                    CDUR   CNDUR       CSER       ISTRUC       IEQUIP   IRES




Figure 17: Sectoral effects of output stabilization policy (independent sectoral shock)




                                                       53
         0.6




         0.4




         0.2




          0
               -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40


        -0.2




        -0.4




        -0.6




        -0.8




          -1

                                                     L (coef)     Point        U (coef)   L (res)    U (res)




Figure 18: Sectoral effects of output stabilization policy (independent sectoral shock)




                                                                          54
1.2



  1



0.8


0.6



0.4



0.2



  0
       -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4     5     6    7     8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15

-0.2


-0.4



-0.6



-0.8

                                           CPI        FFR       GDP




       Figure 19: Effect of a shock to FFR on GDP, CPI, and FFR




                                                 55
