NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL INNOVATION, MARKET PARTICIPATION
AND ASSET PRICES
Laurent Calvet
Martín Gonzalez-Eiras
Paolo Sodini
Working Paper 9840
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9840
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

Earlier versions of this paper appear in the Ph.D. dissertations of M. Gonzalez-Eiras and P. Sodini. We
received helpful comments from D. Acemoglu, F. Alvarez, S. Basak, O. Blanchard, R. Caballero, J.
Campbell, J. Detemple, P. Diamond, A. Fisher, R. Giammarino, G. Mankiw, E. Maskin, M. Pagano, T.
Persson, S. Ross, R. Uppal, D. Vayanos, T. Vuolteenaho, J. Wang, and seminar participants at Boston
University, CEU, ESSEC, Gerzensee, Harvard, INSEAD, the London School of Economics, MIT, NYU,
Salerno, San Andrés, the Stockholm School of Economics, UBC, the University of Amsterdam, the
University of Cyprus, UTDT, the University of Trieste, the Rolf Mantel Memorial Conference, the 2000
LACEA Meeting, the 2001 European Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society and the 2002 NBER
Meeting on Economic Fluctuations and Growth. The paper also benefited from excellent research assistance
by Charles P. Cohen. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Laurent Calvet, Martín Gonzalez-Eiras, and Paolo Sodini. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Innovation, Market Participation and Asset Prices
Laurent Calvet, Martín Gonzalez-Eiras, and Paolo Sodini
NBER Working Paper No. 9840
July 2003
JEL No. D52, E44, G12
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the pricing effects of financial innovation in an economy with endogenous
participation and heterogeneous income risks. The introduction of non-redundant assets
endogenously modifies the participation set, reduces the covariance between dividends and
participants' consumption and thus leads to lower risk premia. In multisector economies, financial
innovation spreads across markets through the diversified portfolio of new entrants, and has rich
effects on the cross-section of expected returns. The price changes can also lead some investors to
leave the markets and give rise to non-degenerate forms of participation turnover. The model is
consistent with several features of financial markets over the past few decades: substantial
innovation; higher participation; significant turnover in investor composition; improved risk
management practices; a slight increase in interest rates; and a reduction in risk premia.

Laurent Calvet
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lcalvet@aya.yale.edu
Paolo Sodoni
Department of Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavägen 65
Box 6501
SE-113 83 Stockholm
Sweden
paolo.sodini@hhs.se

Martín Gonzalez-Eiras
Departamento de Economía
Universidad de San Andrés
Vito Dumas 284 (1644)- Victoria
Buenos Aires, Argentina
mge@udesa.edu.ar

1. Introduction
The introduction of a vast array of non-redundant securities has transformed financial markets over the past few decades. Derivative contracts now allow firms
to routinely manage their exposure to commodity and financial prices.1 New insurance and financial products provide additional diversification opportunities to
individual investors. Initial public oﬀerings have enabled entrepreneurs to diversify some of their wealth away from the companies in which they had managerial
interests.2 Financial theory suggests that these innovations might have profound
implications for portfolio choice, asset pricing and the cross-sectional allocation
of risk.3 For instance, new instruments allow agents to reduce their exposure to
idiosyncratic or background shocks, which increases the demand for stocks and
leads to a lower market premium (e.g. Kihlstrom, Romer and Williams, 1981;
Nachman, 1982; Campbell and Viceira, 2002).
This paper shows that new mechanisms arise when participation is endogenized
in an economy with heterogeneous income risks.4 The introduction of new securities changes the participation set, decreases the covariance between dividends and
participants’ consumption, and thus amplifies the reduction in the market premium. In multifactor economies, financial innovation also spreads across markets
through the diversified portfolio choices of new entrants and has rich eﬀects on the
cross-section of expected returns. The price changes can also lead some investors
to leave financial markets. Innovation then induces the simultaneous entry and
exit of investors, giving rise to non-degenerate forms of participation turnover.5
Our approach builds on the existence of fixed costs to participate in financial
markets. Corporate hedging requires the employment of experts able to eﬀectively
reduce the firm’s risk exposure using existing financial assets. Investors have to
sustain learning eﬀorts and expenses related to the opening and maintenance of
accounts with an exchange or a brokerage firm. Statutory and government reg1

See for instance Ross (1976).
Shiller (2003) provides a recent review of these developments.
3
Theoretical investigations of financial innovation include Allen and Gale (1994a, b), Calvet
(2001), Cass and Citanna (1998), Detemple and Selden (1991), Duﬃe and Jackson (1989),
Grossman (1989), Huang and Wang (1997), and Stein (1987). See Duﬃe and Rahi (1995) for a
review.
4
While the discussion focuses on the eﬀect of an increase in spanning, the paper also analyzes
the consequences of a reduction in transactions costs.
5
Hurst, Luoh and Staﬀord (1998) and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) report substantial rates of
entry and exit in US stockownership.
2

1

ulations often create costly barriers to the participation of institutional investors
in some markets.
We introduce a two-period economy with incomplete markets and endogenous
participation. Agents can borrow or lend freely, but have to pay a fixed entry
cost to invest in risky assets. They receive heterogeneous random incomes determined by a finite number of macroeconomic risk factors. Security prices and the
participation structure are jointly determined in equilibrium. The model is computationally tractable and leads to a closed-form system of equilibrium equations
in the CARA-normal case. As mentioned earlier, three new mechanisms arise in
this economy.
First, the introduction of non-redundant instruments encourages more investors to participate in financial markets for hedging and diversification purposes.
Under plausible conditions on the cross-sectional distribution of risk, the new entrants reduce the covariance between stock returns and the mean consumption of
participants, leading to a lower market premium. The model thus illustrates the
connection between the cross-sectional distribution of risk and the price impact
of new assets. It is also consistent with features that have characterized financial markets in the past few decades: substantial financial innovation, a sharp
increase in investor participation, improvements in risk-management practices, a
slight increase of real interest rates, and a reduction in the risk premium.6
Second, participation plays an important role in spreading the eﬀects of innovation across markets. When a common factor becomes tradable, some agents
decide to pay the entry fee and trade the new contract in order to manage their
risk exposure. The new participants achieve optimal diversification by trading
other assets, which modifies the risk premia even in sectors uncorrelated to the
new contract. Furthermore, the entrants tend to have a stronger impact on the
average exposure to the factor than on other sectors of the economy. As a result,
price changes are more pronounced for assets correlated with the new contract.
Financial innovation thus diﬀerentially aﬀects distinct sectors of the economy and
has a rich impact on the cross-section of expected returns.
Third, the price changes induced by financial innovation can give rise to nondegenerate forms of participation turnover. For instance, the introduction of a
new asset leads some agents to enter financial markets to manage their income
6

The decrease in the risk premium is reported in Blanchard (1993), Campbell and Shiller
(2003), Cochrane (1997) and Fama and French (2002). Similarly, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990)
and Honohan (2000) document a slight increase in real interest rates over the past three decades.

2

risk. Other agents, however, are adversely aﬀected by the induced changes in risk
premia and may find it optimal to stop trading. Innovation can therefore induce
simultaneous entry and exit. The paper thus helps relate participation turnover
with the cross-sectional distribution of risk in multisector economies.
Section 2 introduces a tractable asset pricing model with endogenous entry.
Section 3 demonstrates the pricing and participation eﬀects of financial innovation
in a one-factor model of risk exposure. Multiple factors are considered in Section
4. Simple simulations suggest that financial innovation substantially reduces the
equity premium, diﬀerentially spreads across security markets, and either increases
or decreases the interest rate. All proofs are given in the Appendix.
1.1. Review of Previous Literature
This paper builds on two strands of the asset pricing literature that have essentially been developed separately. First, researchers have examined how limited
investor participation aﬀects the prices of a fixed set of securities. Second, the
price impact of financial innovation has been examined both empirically and theoretically without consideration of participation. The novelty of this paper is to
combine these two lines of research in a simple and tractable framework.
Empirical research on stockmarket participation was pioneered by Blume,
Crockett and Friend (1974), Blume and Friend (1978), and King and Leape (1984).
Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) report that only 28% of households owned stocks in
1984, and that 47% of households with liquid assets in excess of $100, 000 held
any equity.7 The fraction of households owning stocks increases with income and
education, implying that there could be fixed information costs to participate in
financial markets. Stockholder consumption is also more highly correlated with
the market portfolio than aggregate consumption. The distinction between stockholders and non-stockholders therefore helps explain the equity premium puzzle.
The empirical validity of this mechanism is further confirmed by Vissing-Jørgensen
(1997). Poterba and Samwick (1995) and Vissing-Jørgensen (1997) also document
the sharp increase of stock market participation in the United States since 1945.
These empirical findings have prompted the development of theoretical models
that restrict participation exogenously. Saito (1995) and Basak and Cuoco (1998)
thus consider two-asset exchange economies in which the risky security spans individual income. At low participation levels, a small number of agents bears in
7

The structure of stockownership is further analyzed by Blume and Zeldes (1993) and Bertaut
and Haliassos (1995).

3

equilibrium the aggregate risk of the entire population. As a result, the market
premium is high and matches the historical average under reasonable levels of risk
aversion. Heaton and Lucas (1999) extend the analysis by considering heterogeneous incomes with a common nonmarketable factor. In contrast to this earlier
work, we consider multiple assets and factors, and endogenize the participation
structure by considering fixed costs to trading in financial markets. The entry-cost
approach has been widely used in finance to analyze issues such as portfolio choice
(Campbell, Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout, 2001), volatility (Pagano, 1989; Allen
and Gale, 1994b; Orosel, 1998), futures risk premia (Hirshleifer, 1988), market
size (Allen and Gale, 1990; Pagano, 1993), and the eﬀect of social security reform
on capital accumulation (Abel, 2001). We use this setup to analyze how financial
innovation aﬀects investor participation and asset prices.
The paper is also related to the literature that examines the price impact of
financial innovation without consideration of participation. Conrad (1989) and
Detemple and Jorion (1990) find empirically that the introduction of new batches
of options had a substantial price impact between 1973 and 1986. The eﬀect
is stronger for underlying stocks, but can also be observed for an industry index
that excludes the optioned stock as well as for the market index. Similar empirical
evidence is available for other countries and derivative markets (e.g. Jochum and
Kodres, 1998).
A rich theoretical literature has also explored the impact of innovation, and
three results are most directly related to our model. First, the introduction of
a new security permits agents to better share risk and thus weakens the precautionary supply of savings. This leads to a higher equilibrium interest rate,
which reduces the price of all assets in fixed-participation exchange economies
(Weil, 1992; Elul, 1997).8 In contrast, we will show that price changes induced
by innovation can cause some investors to exit the market. Lower participation
then encourages precautionary savings and reduces the equilibrium interest rate
in some economies.
Second, financial innovation does not aﬀect risk-pricing in standard meanvariance settings with fixed participation (Oh, 1996). Specifically in quadratic or
CARA-normal economies, the price of any risky security relative to the bond is
unaﬀected by changes in the span. For this reason, researchers have made little use
of mean-variance models to analyze the pricing implications of innovation.9 We
8
9

See Angeletos and Calvet (2000) for the analysis of production economies.
Detemple and Selden (1991) is a notable exception.

4

will show that CARA-normal economies can be quite useful when the participation
structure is endogenized. New assets induce the entry of new investors, which
lowers the systematic consumption risk of participants and therefore increases the
price of preexisting securities.
Third, financial innovation allows agents to reduce their exposure to idiosyncratic or background shocks, which stimulates the demand for stocks (e.g.
Kihlstrom, Romer and Williams, 1981; Nachman, 1982; Gollier, 2001; Campbell
and Viceira, 2002). As a result, equilibrium risk premia tend to be lower after the
introduction of new assets. In our model, however, agents have CARA utilities and
reductions in background risk do not aﬀect the demand for risky assets. Changes
in the systematic consumption risk of participants are the only contributing factors to lower premia in our setup, which will greatly simplify the interpretation
of the results. We anticipate that our mechanism complements and amplifies the
background risk channel when individual utilities are isoelastic or more generally
exhibit decreasing absolute risk aversion.

2. A Model of Endogenous Market Participation
We examine an exchange economy with two periods (t = 0, 1) and a single perishable good. The economy is deterministic at date t = 0 and stochastic at
t = 1. During her life, each agent h receives an exogenous random endowment
¡
¢
eh = eh0 , ẽh , which corresponds for instance to a stochastic labor income. Her
ch ) is represented by a utility function
preference over consumption streams (ch0 , e
U h (ch0 , e
ch ). We thus adopt the two-period setup that has widely been used in
the financial innovation literature for its tractability (e.g. Allen and Gale 1994
a, b). We anticipate that our model provides useful insights on the properties of
multiperiod economies with permanent shocks.10
This paper places no restriction on the set of agents H, which can be finite or
infinite. To provide a uniform treatment, we endow the space H with a measure
µ that satisfies µ (H) = 1. This is equivalent to viewing each element of H as a
type, and the measure µ as a probability distribution over all possible types.
At date t = 0, agents can exchange a finite number of real securities, whose
10

A large body of research shows that transitory shocks can be easily self-insured while persistent shocks have profound pricing and welfare implications in dynamic economies with incomplete markets (e.g. Bewley, 1977; Telmer, 1993; Constantinides and Duﬃe, 1996; Storesletten,
Telmer and Yaron, 1996; Levine and Zame, 2002). The extension of our framework to the
dynamic case, for instance following Calvet (2001), is a promising direction for future research.

5

initial prices and final payoﬀs are denominated in units of the consumption good.
The financial structure is exogenous and contains two types of assets. First,
agents can trade a riskless asset costing π 0 = 1/R in date t = 0 and delivering
one unit of the good with certainty at date t = 1. Note that R is the gross
interest rate. Second, there also exist J risky assets (j = 1, ...J) with price π j
and random payoﬀ ãj . We assume for simplicity that all assets are in zero net
supply.11 Investors can freely operate in the bond market but have to pay a fixed
entry cost κ in order to invest in one or more risky assets. This assumption is
consistent with complementarities of learning in trading activities, and the results
of the paper easily generalize to more flexible specifications of the entry cost.
Investors are price-takers both in their entry and portfolio decisions, and there
are no constraints on short sales. Let π denote the vector of risky asset prices,
and θh the vector of risky assets bought (or sold) by investor h. We also consider
the dummy variable 1{θh 6=0} equal to 1 if θh 6= 0, and equal to 0 otherwise. The
agent is subject to the budget constraints
ch0 + θh0 /R + π · θh + κ1{θh 6=0} = eh0 ,
c̃h = ẽh + θh0 + ã · θh .

These equations are standard, except for the presence of the entry cost in the
resource constraint at date 0. We determine the optimal choice (ch0 , c̃h , θh0 , θh ) by
calculating the consumption-portfolio decision under entry and non-entry. Comparing the resulting utility levels yields the optimal participation decision.
R
R
Let e0 = H eh0 dµ(h) and ẽ = H ẽh dµ(h) denote the average income of the
entire population.
Definition (Equilibrium). A general equilibrium with endogenous participation
(GEEP) consists of an interest rate R, a price vector π, and a collection of optimal
¡
¢
plans ch0 , c̃h , θh0 , θh h∈H such that:
R
(a) The good market clears in every state: H (ch0 + κ1{θh 6=0} )dµ(h) = e0 , and
R h
c̃ (ω) dµ(h) = ẽ (ω) for all ω ∈ Ω;
H
R
(b) The asset markets clear: H θhj dµ(h) = 0 for all j ∈ {0, ..., J}.

In the absence of entry fee (κ = 0), the definition coincides with the traditional
concept of general equilibrium under incomplete markets (GEI). When participa11

A positive supply of assets could be considered by redefining individual endowment as the
sum of a labor income and an exogenous portfolio of securities. This is a standard convention
in asset pricing theory, as discussed for instance in Magill and Quinzii (1996, ch. 3).

6

tion is costly, a GEEP diﬀers from a GEI through two diﬀerent channels. First,
agents endogenously decide whether to pay the entry fee in order to trade risky
assets. Second, trading activities use some of society’s resources and crowd out
private consumption, as seen in the market clearing condition at date t = 0. This
phenomenon, which we call the displacement eﬀect, probably plays a minor role in
actual economies. Extensions of our model could transfer a fraction of trading fees
to some consumers (such as exchange owners), or seek to provide a more detailed
description of the financial industry.
The existence of equilibrium is proven in Appendix A. As in the GEI case,
equilibrium allocations are usually Pareto ineﬃcient because missing markets induce incomplete risk-sharing. With two periods and a single good, however, GEI
allocations are known to satisfy a limited or constrained form of eﬃciency. No
social planner can improve the utility of all agents when income transfers are
constrained to belong to the asset span. This limited form of eﬃciency easily
generalizes to our setting when the planner pays the entry fee required to use the
risky asset.
Definitions (Constrained Eﬃciency). An allocation (ch0 , c̃h )h∈H is feasible if:
(a) For all h, there exists (θh0 , θh ) ∈ R × RJ such that c̃h = ẽh + θh0 + ã · θh .
R
R
(b) H (ch0 + κ1{θh 6=0} )dµ(h) = e0 , and H c̃h (ω) dµ(h) = ẽ (ω) for all ω ∈ Ω.
A feasible allocation is called constrained Pareto-eﬃcient if no other feasible allocation makes all agents strictly better oﬀ.
Appendix A shows that a GEEP allocation is constrained Pareto-eﬃcient. As a
result, the introduction of a non redundant asset cannot make all agents worse
oﬀ.
In order to analyze the eﬀect of financial innovation on participation and prices,
we now specialize to a tractable class of CARA-normal economies. Investors have
identical utility of the Epstein-Zin type:
U(c0 , e
c) = −e−χc0 − β[E e−γec ]χ/γ ,

where γ and χ are positive coeﬃcients. The agent maximizes −e−χc0 − βe−χc1
when she reallocates through time a deterministic income flow. On the other
hand, atemporal risky choices only depend on Ee−γec . When future consumption
is normally distributed, we can rewrite the utility as −e−χc0 − βe−χ[Eec−γV ar(ec)/2] .
The specification reduces to standard expected utility when χ = γ.

7

Individual endowments and the payoﬀs of risky assets are jointly normal. The
securities generate a linear subspace in the set L2 (Ω) of square-integrable random
variables. We assume without loss of generality that risky assets are centered and
mutually independent: (ã1 , .., ãJ ) ∼ N (0, I). Let A denote the span of the risky
assets, and A⊥ the subspace orthogonal to all securities (including the bond).
Projections play an important role in the discussion, and x̃V conveniently denotes
the projection of a random variable x̃ on a subspace V .
2.1. Individual Entry Decision
We solve the decision problem of a given trader h by calculating the consumption - portfolio choice under entry and non-entry. Consider the security m̃A ≡
P
−(R/γ) Jj=1 πj ãj , which is determined by risk aversion and market prices. We
can easily show:
Proposition 1 (Optimal Portfolio of Participant). A market participant
buys
½
i¾
R
ln (Rβ) γ h
h,p
h,p
h
h
hA⊥
A
e − E ẽ − κ − π · θ +
+
V ar(ẽ ) + V ar(m̃ )
θ0 =
1+R 0
χ
2
= −Cov(ãj , ẽh ) − Rπ j /γ units of risky asset j. Conunits of the bond, and θh,p
j
sumption is
A
hA⊥
e
ch,p = E ẽh + θh,p
(2.1)
0 + m̃ + ẽ
in the second period.

We infer from (2.1) that the investor exchanges the marketable component ẽhA of
her income risk for the tradable portfolio m̃A , which provides the optimal mix of
risk and return. Because markets are incomplete, she is also constrained to bear
⊥
the undiversifiable income risk ẽhA .
Investment in the riskless asset is the sum of two components, which correspond to intertemporal smoothing and the precautionary motive. First, the agent
uses the riskless asset to reallocate her expected income stream between the two
periods. Note that she compensates for any discrepancy between her subjective discount factor and the interest rate. Second, she saves more when future
prospects are more uncertain. As will be seen in the next section, financial innovation aﬀects the precautionary component by modifying the portfolio m̃A and
⊥
by reducing the undiversifiable income risk ẽhA .
8

The consumption of the non-participating investor is obtained from Proposition 1 by setting A = {0} and κ = 0. The agent saves
·
¸
¡ h¢
R
1
γ
h,n
h
h
θ0 =
e − E ẽ + ln(Rβ) + V ar ẽ
(2.2)
1+R 0
χ
2

in the first period, and consumes c̃h,n = ẽh +θh,n
0 in the second. She thus bears the
entire endowment risk in her final consumption, and her precautionary demand
for the bond depends on the whole variance of future income.
The investor makes her participation decision by comparing utility under entry and non-entry. In the CARA-normal case, this reduces to maximizing the
certainty equivalent Ee
ch − γV ar(e
ch )/2. We can easily check that the benefit of
¡ hA
¢
trading risky assets is γV ar ẽ − m̃A /2, while the opportunity cost is κR. This
leads to
Theorem 1 (Entry Condition). The investor trades risky assets when
¡
¢
γ
V ar ẽhA − m̃A > κR,
2

(2.3)

and is indiﬀerent between entry and non-entry if the relation holds as an equality.
Relation (2.3) has a simple geometric interpretation in L2 (Ω), which is illustrated
in Figure 1. The agent trades risky assets if the distance
between her income risk
p
hA
A
ẽ and her optimal portfolio m̃ is larger than 2κR/γ. The trader pays the
entry fee only if her initial position is suﬃciently diﬀerent from the optimum, as
is standard in decision problems with adjustment costs.
The theorem has a natural interpretation when all agents have a positive exposure to certain classes of risks. Participants with low exposure to marketable
shocks buy the corresponding assets to earn a risk premium; these agents are
called speculators or investors.12 On the other hand, agents with high exposure
hedge by shorting the corresponding risky assets; these agents are hedgers or issuers. The model thus closely matches the type of risk-sharing examined in the
futures literature.
12

Massa and Simonov (2002) document empirically the substantial impact of labor income
risk on individual participation. In particular, households are less likely to invest in financial
markets when their income has a higher correlation with a diversified stock portfolio. These
findings are consistent with entry condition (2.3) since the participation benefit can be rewritten
as γ[−2Cov(m̃A ; ẽh ) + V ar(ẽhA ) + V ar(m̃A )]/2.

9

2.2. Equilibrium
Let P ⊆ H denote the set of participants in the risky asset markets. When the
class of indiﬀerent agents has measure zero, we can write
ª
©
e A )/2 ≥ κR .
P = h ∈ H : γV ar(ẽhA − m

(2.4)

Market participants can have diﬀerent income risk characteristics than the entire
population. We will show in Sections 3 and 4 that this diﬀerence is a driving
element of the model.13 While ẽ denotes the mean income in the population, we
R
define the average endowment of participants as ẽp = P ẽh dµp (h), where µp is the
conditional measure µ/µ (P) .14
In equilibrium, the common consumption risk m̃A coincides with the average
tradable income risk of participants:
m̃A = ẽpA .

(2.5)

We also establish
Theorem 2 (Asset Prices). In equilibrium, an asset ã is worth
π(ã) = [E ã − γCov(ẽp , ã)]/R.

(2.6)

The interest rate satisfies
·
¸
Z
¡ hA
¢ p
γ
pA
V ar ẽ − ẽ
dµ (h) ,
ln R = ln R0 + χµ (P) κ +
2 P
¡ ¢
R
where ln R0 = ln (1/β) + χ(E ẽ − e0 ) − (χγ/2) H V ar ẽh dµ(h).

(2.7)

The participation set and asset prices are jointly determined by (2.4) − (2.7).
An asset is valuable if it provides a hedge against the consumption risk of participants. Since entry is endogenous, financial innovation can change the market
endowment ẽp , and therefore the price π(ã)/R−1 = E ã − γCov(ẽp , ã) of a risky
asset relative to the bond. As noted by Oh (1996), such a channel does not exist
in a CARA-normal economy with a fixed set of traders: an increase in the span
then has no eﬀect on Cov(ẽp , ã) and thus on the price of a risky asset relative to
13

Heaton and Lucas (2000) show the empirical validity of this distinction.
More specifically, the conditional measure µp is µ/µ (P) if µ (P) > 0, and identically zero
otherwise.
14

10

the bond. The possible eﬀect of financial innovation on the risk premium thus
crucially relies on the endogeneity of participation in our model.
The equilibrium interest rate R is influenced by two economic eﬀects corresponding to the last two terms of (2.7). First, the interest rate tends to be higher
when more first period resources κµ (P) are absorbed in the entry process. The
second term of (2.7) corresponds to the precautionary motive. The variance of
⊥
individual consumption is V ar(ẽpA ) + V ar(ẽhA ) if an agent participates, and
⊥
V ar(ẽhA ) + V ar(ẽhA ) otherwise. Entry thus reduces on average the variance of
consumption by
Z
Z
¡ hA ¢ p
¡ pA ¢
¡
¢
V ar ẽ
V ar ẽhA − ẽpA dµp (h).
(2.8)
dµ (h) − V ar ẽ
=
P

P

This term is large when many agents participate or many hedging instruments are
available. The financial markets then permit agents to greatly reduce their risk
exposure, which dampens their precautionary motive, reduces the demand for the
riskless asset, and leads to an increase in the equilibrium interest rate.15
The entry condition (2.3) suggests that a lower fee or improved spanning tends
to encourage entry. For instance when the cost κ is infinite, no agent trades risky
assets and the equilibrium interest rate equals R0 . The equilibrium set of participants, however, may not increase monotonically with the financial structure.
This is because the entry condition (2.3) depends on the endogenous variables
ẽp and R. When new assets are added, a participating agent h may leave the
market because the diversification benefit γV ar(ẽhA − eepA )/2 has dropped or the
opportunity cost has increased. Sections 3 and 4 will provide examples of such
behaviors.
The eﬀect of financial innovation on the interest rate is easily predicted when
the average endowment of participants remains constant.
Proposition 2. Financial innovation leads to a higher interest rate when the
mean endowment ẽp is unchanged.
The proof has a straightforward intuition. A lower interest rate would reinforce the
favorable eﬀect of financial innovation on entry and lead, by (2.7), to a higher interest rate - a contradiction. Thus if the participants’ average endowment does not
vary, existing asset prices necessarily decrease with financial innovation. Changes
15

This equation is thus consistent with the well-known eﬀect that financial innovation increases
the interest rate when the participation structure is exogenous (Weil, 1992; Elul, 1997).

11

in ẽp thus play a crucial role in determining the impact of financial innovation on
asset prices. To better understand this role, we now introduce a factor model of
risk exposure.

3. Economies with a Unique Risk Factor
We consider in this section an economy with a unique factor ε̃ that linearly aﬀects
all incomes. The endowment of each investor h is specified as
ẽh = E ẽh + ϕh ε̃,

(3.1)

where ϕh is the individual risk loading. The model is tractable when the shock
and the assets are jointly normal. Without loss of generality, we assume that ε̃ has
a standard distribution N (0, 1) and generates a non-negative average loading ϕ̄ in
the population.16 The cross-sectional distribution of ϕ is specified by a measure
µ on the real line. To clarify the exposition, we assume that the measure µ has a
continuous density f (ϕ), whose support is the nonnegative interval [0, ∞).17
When financial markets are incomplete, existing securities span only partially
P
the common shock. The projection of ε̃ on the asset span, ε̃A = Ji=1 Cov(ε̃A , e
aj )e
aj ,
is the tradable component of the factor. The corresponding variance
α = V ar(ε̃A )

quantifies the insurable fraction of the risk ε̃ and thus represents a useful index of
market completeness. Since ε̃ has unit variance, the index α is contained between 0
and 1. The values α = 0 and α = 1 respectively correspond to the absence of risky
assets (A = {0}) and the full marketability of the shock (ε̃ ∈ A). Intermediate
values of α arise when agents can only trade the bond and a risky asset imperfectly
correlated with the aggregate shock.
The portfolio ε̃A and the index α have direct empirical interpretations. We
obtain ε̃A by regressing the factor ε̃ on the asset payoﬀs. The determination coefficient R2 then provides an estimate of the completeness index α. This approach
is easily implemented when the factor represents GDP or an aggregate shock that
is not directly tradable on organized exchanges (Roll, 1977). The introduction of
a non-redundant asset increases the index α and helps market participants hedge
16

Purely idiosyncratic shocks are ruled out in this section for expositional simplicity.
The theorems of this section are in fact proved for densities f (ϕ) with arbitrary unbounded
supports.
17

12

more closely the risk ε̃. Since macroeconomic variables such as GDP are often
observed with measurement errors and lags, improvements in national accounting
can also lead to more precise hedging and thus a higher α.
3.1. Participation Structure
We infer from Section 2 the equilibrium of the one-factor economy. Let ϕp denote
the average loading of participants:
Z
p
ϕ =
ϕdµp (ϕ).
(3.2)
P

The participation set contains agents whose loading ϕ is suﬃciently diﬀerent from
ϕp :
P = {ϕ ∈ R : |ϕ − ϕp | ≥ Λ},
(3.3)
p
where Λ = 2κR/(αγ).18 We note that Λ is the half-width of the non-participation
region, and henceforth call it the non-participation parameter. Λ increases with
the entry cost κ and the interest rate R, and decreases with the completeness index
α and the risk aversion γ. Thus financial innovation, either in the form of a lower
entry fee or an increase in spanning, tends to decrease Λ. The participation set is
illustrated in Figure 2. Agents ϕ ≥ ϕp + Λ are hedgers who trade assets in order
to reduce their risk exposure. Conversely, agents with loadings ϕ ≤ ϕp − Λ are
speculators who increase their consumption risk in order to earn a higher return.
The equilibrium calculation is simplified by the following observation: ϕp is
both the average loading and the midpoint of the participation set.19 As shown
in Appendix B, these restrictions impose that a unique midpoint ϕp is consistent
with a given half-width Λ:
Property 1 (Participation Set). For any non-participation parameter Λ ≥ 0,
there exists a unique loading ϕp (Λ) satisfying conditions (3.2) and (3.3). The
corresponding participation sets PΛ = (−∞; ϕp (Λ) − Λ] ∪ [ϕp (Λ) + Λ; +∞) are
nested and decreasing in Λ: PΛ0 ⊆ PΛ for all Λ ≤ Λ0 .
18

Agent h trades risky assets if the participation benefit is larger than the opportunity cost:
αγ(ϕh − ϕp )2 /2 ≥ κR, or equivalently |ϕh − ϕp | ≥ Λ. When assets have no correlation with the
risk factor (α = 0), the participation set is empty under costly entry (κ > 0) and indeterminate
under free entry (κ = 0).
Z ϕp −Λ
Z ∞
19
p
p
The loading ϕ satisfies
(ϕ−ϕ )f (ϕ)dϕ+
(ϕ−ϕp )f (ϕ)dϕ = 0, which implicitly

defines ϕp as a function of Λ.

ϕp +Λ

−∞

13

When the midpoint ϕp is exogenously fixed, it is clear that the sets (−∞; ϕp −
Λ] ∪ [ϕp + Λ; +∞) are decreasing with the non-participation parameter Λ. We
show in the Appendix that the property also holds when the midpoint ϕp (Λ)
varies endogenously. Furthermore since the sets PΛ are nested, the half-width Λ
provides a precise ordering of the participation structure. A high Λ corresponds
to a small set PΛ and thus a low participation rate µ(PΛ ).
The midpoint ϕp controls the pricing of risk. Entrants have average income
⊥
ẽp = E ẽp + ϕp (ε̃A + ε̃A ) and individual random consumption
⊥

ch + ϕp ε̃A + ẽhA .
e
ch = E e

We note that the marketable consumption risk ϕp ε̃A is identical for all participants. In equilibrium, the average loading ϕp determines the covariance between
a) = ϕp Cov(ε̃, e
a), and
a marketed security e
a and individual consumption: Cov(e
ch , e
therefore the risk premium.
Financial innovation, either in the form of new assets or lower entry costs,
aﬀects ϕp through changes in Λ. The impact of innovation on the average loading
ϕp and the risk premium therefore depends on the cross-sectional distribution of
risk, as is now shown.
Property 2 (Monotonicity of Average Loading). When the loading density
verifies the skewness condition
f (ϕp − Λ) > f (ϕp + Λ),

(3.4)

the average loading ϕp locally increases with the non-participation parameter Λ.
Figure 2 illustrates the mechanism underlying this key result. When Λ decreases,
the skewness of the loading density implies that more agents enter to the left
(speculators) than to the right (hedgers) of ϕp , which pushes down the average
consumption loading ϕp .
To develop intuition, we now analyze the eﬀect of financial innovation on the
risk premium in an economy
in which the interest rate is exogenously fixed. The
p
entry condition Λ = 2κR/(αγ) expresses the non-participation parameter as a
function of purely exogenous quantities. A higher completeness index α (or a lower
transaction cost κ) reduces the half-width Λ and thus increases the participation
set PΛ . The implied movement in ϕp controls changes in risk pricing. Consider an
ea = e
asset e
a that has positive correlation with the factor, and let R
a/π(e
a) denote
14

the random (gross) return. By Theorem 2, the relative risk premium satisfies
ea − R
ER
a, ε̃)
γϕp Cov(e
=
.
R
Ee
a − γϕp Cov(e
a, ε̃)

The higher α (or lower κ) due to financial innovation reduces the participation
parameter Λ and induces the entry of new agents. Under skewness condition
(3.4), a majority of the new entrants has a low exposure and reduces the covariance
between the participants’ average loading and the asset. Financial innovation thus
simultaneously induces higher participation and a reduction in the risk premium.
These results illustrate the role of the loading density f (ϕ) for the comparative
statics of asset prices.
3.2. General Equilibrium
We now extend the analysis to the case of an endogenous interest rate. The entry
condition can be rewritten
R1 (Λ) = αγΛ2 /(2κ).

(3.5)

The equilibrium of the bond market implies
R2 (Λ) = R0 exp{χµ(PΛ ) [κ + αγ(V arPΛ ϕ)/2]},
(3.6)
R
where V arPΛ (ϕ) = PΛ (ϕ − ϕp )2 dµp (ϕ) denotes the variance of the participants’
loadings. In Figure 3, we graph these functions in the (Λ, R) plane. An equilibrium
corresponds to the intersection of these two curves. The quadratic function R1 (Λ)
is increasing, while R2 (Λ) monotonically decreases with Λ. This helps establish
Theorem 3 (Existence and Uniqueness). There exists a unique equilibrium.
Figure 3 allows us to analyze the impact of financial innovation. An increase in
α pushes up both curves in the figure, implying a higher interest rate and an
ambiguous change in the non-participation parameter Λ.
Proposition 3 (Impact of Financial Innovation). The riskless rate R increases with financial innovation. As the completeness index α increases from 0
to 1, the set of participants P has two possible behaviors. It is either monotonically increasing; or there exists α∗ ∈ (0, 1) such that P increases on [0, α∗ ] and
decreases on [α∗ , 1].
15

The two behaviors are illustrated in Figure 4. The ambiguous eﬀect of financial
innovation on market participation has a simple intuition. On one hand, a higher
α increases the diversification benefit αγ(ϕh − ϕp )2 /2 of trading risky assets and
encourages entry. On the other hand, new assets reduce the precautionary motive
and increase the interest rate, thus discouraging participation. In empirical settings, we expect that the favorable eﬀect of improved diversification, which stems
from risk aversion, will tend to dominate the adverse eﬀect of the precautionary
motive.20
The one-factor model may help explain a number of features that have characterized financial markets in the past three decades. New financial instruments
encouraged investors to participate in financial markets, which led to a reduction
in the precautionary motive and in the covariance between stockholder consumption and the aggregate shock. These two eﬀects in turn increased the interest rate
and reduced the risk premium.21 Note that this argument is consistent with earlier
empirical findings. Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) thus show that the consumption of
stockholders tends to be more correlated with the market than the consumption of
non-stockholders. As financial innovation leads more people to enter the market,
the risk premium falls. We leave the empirical exploration of this mechanism to
further research.
In this section, financial innovation consists of providing a better hedge against
a common risk factor. In practice, however, households and firms face multiple
sources of income shocks, and innovation often permits to hedge classes of risk that
had been previously uninsurable. For this reason, we next examine a multifactor
model of risk.
20

The global monotonicity results of Proposition 3 are proven in Appendix B using a single
crossing argument. Additional insights can be gained by examining the local sensitivity of R1 and
R1 to the completeness index α. Let η X,α = d ln X/d ln α denote the elasticity of an endogenous
quantity X. We infer from (3.5) that ηΛ,α = (ηR,α − 1)/2. Financial innovation increases the
set of participants (η Λ,α < 0) if it has a weak impact on the interest rate (ηR,α < 1). Condition
(3.5) also implies that the elasticity of R2 (Λ) with respect to α increases with the dispersion of
the participants’ loadings V arPΛ ϕ. When traders have very heterogeneous incomes, financial
innovation allows agents to greatly reduce their average consumption risk, and thus has a strong
impact on the interest rate. This explains why participation is non-monotonic in Figure 4 for
the loading density with the highest variance.
21
As shown in Appendix B, a higher entry cost implies a higher risk premium under condition
(3.4). Like models with exogenously restricted participation (e.g. Basak and Cuoco, 1998), our
framework thus helps explain the equity premium puzzle.

16

4. Multifactor Economies
We now investigate an economy with a finite number of risk factors (ε̃1 , .., ε̃L ),
which correspond to macroeconomic or sectoral shocks aﬀecting individual income.
For instance, ε̃1 could be an aggregate risk, and ε̃2 , .., ε̃L industry or sector-specific
shocks. We specify the income of each investor h as
h

h

ẽ = E ẽ +

L
X

ϕh ε̃ ,

(4.1)

=1

and denote by ϕh = (ϕh1 , ..., ϕhL ) the vector of individual loadings. The model is
tractable when the risk factors and the asset payoﬀs are jointly normal. Without
loss of generality, we normalize the factors to have unit variances and no mutual correlation: (ε̃1 , .., ε̃L ) ∼ N (0, I) . The distribution of factor loadings in the
population is specified by a continuous density f (ϕ) on RL .
The factors may not be fully tradable when financial markets are incomplete. As in the previous section, it is useful to consider their projections ε̃A =
PJ
A
j=1 Cov (ε̃ , ãj ) ãj on the asset span. We interpret ε̃ as the marketable component of factor , which can be estimated by regressing ε̃ on asset payoﬀs. We
A
conveniently stack the projected factors in a vector ε̃A = (ε̃A
1 , .., ε̃L ). The covari¡
¢
ance matrix ΣA = V ar ε̃A is a generalized index of market completeness, whose
¡ ¢
diagonal coeﬃcients α = V ar ε̃A quantify the insurable fraction of each factor.
We assume for simplicity that the projected factors are mutually uncorrelated:
Cov(ε̃A , ε̃A
and k. In the next subsections, this hypothesis
k ) = 0 for all distinct
will make it more striking that the improved marketability of factor aﬀects the
risk premium on an uncorrelated component ε̃A
k . The covariance matrix is then
diagonal:


α1


...
ΣA = 
,
αL
¡ A¢
with coeﬃcients α = V ar ε̃ contained between 0 and 1. We note that ΣA is
equal to zero when there are no assets, and to the identity matrix when markets
are complete.
The equilibrium calculation follows directly from Section 2. By (4.1), the mean
P
endowment of participants satisfies ẽp = E ẽp + L=1 ϕp ε̃ , where ϕp represents
the traders’ average exposure to factor . The equilibrium of financial markets
17

implies the relations π(ã) = [E ã − γCov(ẽp , ã)]/R and
"
#
L
γX
ln R = ln R0 + χµ(P) κ +
αi V arP (ϕi ) ,
2 i=1

(4.2)

P
where ln R0 = ln(1/β) + χ(Ee
e − e0 ) − (γχ/2) Li=1 E(ϕ2i ). These equations suggest
that when the utility coeﬃcients γ and χ−1 are large, financial innovation generates
both substantial variations in the pricing of risk and small movements in the
interest rate.
By entry condition (2.3), the participation set depends on the completeness
index of each factor:
(
)
L
γX
P= ϕ:
α (ϕ − ϕp )2 ≥ κR .
(4.3)
2 =1
located outWhen all the coeﬃcients α are strictly positive, the participants arep
p
p 22
p
side an ellipsoid centered at ϕ = (ϕ1 , .., ϕL ). The half-widths Λ = 2κR/(α γ)
of the ellipsoid along each axis depend on the completeness index α and the endogenous interest rate. We show in Appendix C:
Theorem 4 (Existence and Uniqueness). There exists a unique equilibrium.
The proof begins by establishing that the vector Λ = (Λ1 , .., ΛL ) define a unique
participation set PΛ . In contrast to the one-factor case, however, PΛ can move
in more than one direction and thus need not be decreasing (as a set) in each
component Λ . The market clearing ofpthe bond uniquely determines the interest rate R and the half-widths Λ = 2κR/(α γ). The proof also provides a
useful algorithm for the numerical computation of equilibrium. We now examine
the comparative statics of participation and asset prices with respect to financial
innovation.
4.1. Financial Innovation and the Risk Premium
The one-factor model shows that financial innovation can reduce the risk premium
of securities correlated with the aggregate shock. In a multifactor economy, the
improved marketability of a factor can also have pricing eﬀects on uncorrelated
assets. Consider for instance an economy with two factors: e
ε1 is an aggregate
22

The participants are located outside a cylinder when some coeﬃcients α are equal to zero.

18

risk to which all investors are positively exposed, and e
ε2 is purely idiosyncratic
,
π(ã)
>
0,
denote
an asset or stock that is
or distributional. Let ã = E e
a + ε̃A
1
23
only correlated with the aggregate risk. By equation (2.6), the stock has relative
premium
ea − R
γϕp1 α1
ER
=
.
(4.4)
R
Ee
a − γϕp1 α1

When participation is exogenously fixed, the consumption loading ϕp1 is constant
and the improved marketability of the idiosyncratic shock ε̃2 does not aﬀect the
premium (4.4). In our model, however, innovation can aﬀect the set of participants, the consumption loading ϕp1 and therefore the equity premium.
To further illustrate this mechanism, assume that the stock ã is the only asset
initially traded (α2 = 0). By (4.3), non-participants
have loadings ϕ1 that are close
p
p
to the market average: |ϕ1 − ϕ1 | ≤ 2κR/(α1 γ). When the index α2 increases,
some agents become willing to pay the entry cost because their exposure ϕ2 to
the idiosyncratic risk is suﬃciently diﬀerent from the average ϕp2 . These new
participants also trade the stock ã to achieve optimal diversification. The risk
premium on ã declines if a majority of the new entrants have low exposure to the
aggregate shock (ϕ1 < ϕp1 ) and increase the demand for the stock. We expect this
logic to hold when the distribution of ϕ1 is skewed towards the origin, consistent
with the intuition developed in the one-factor case.
A simple simulation of the cross-sectoral eﬀect is presented in Figure 5. We
assume for simplicity that exposures to the aggregate and idiosyncratic risks
are independent in the population. The cross-sectional loading density is then
f (ϕ1 , ϕ2 ) = f1 (ϕ1 )f2 (ϕ2 ). This hypothesis makes it perhaps more surprising that
increased marketability of the idiosyncratic risk modifies the equity premium. We
specify f2 (ϕ2 ) to be symmetric around zero, which implies that ϕp2 = 0 in equilibrium. We discuss the choice of parameters in Appendix C. The average payoﬀ
ea − R equal to 7% before the
of the stock is selected to obtain a risk premium ER
introduction of new contracts (α2 = 0). In the absence of a futures market, the
ea )]1/2
net interest rate equals 1% and the standard deviation of the stock [V ar(R
is 15%, implying an initial Sharpe ratio of about 1/2.
In Figures 5A-5D, the solid lines illustrates equilibrium in the endogenous participation economy as α2 increases from 0 to 1. The dashed lines illustrate the
23

While the assets are assumed to be in zero net supply, we easily reinterpret the model
in terms of equity by viewing endowment as the sum of a labor income and an exogenous
endowment of stocks.

19

corresponding outcomes when participation is exogenously fixed. For comparison
purposes, the participation sets in both economies coincide when α2 = 0. Under
fixed participation, innovation only has a very modest impact on the equity premium, the interest rate and volatility.24 In contrast, substantial movements are
observed when entry is endogenous. The risk premium on the stock declines from
7% to 4.5%. Providing insurance against the idiosyncratic shock thus substantially decreases the risk premium through changes in participation. Consistent
with empirical evidence, the standard deviation of the stock return is almost constant at 15%.25 We observe that most of the decline in the risk premium occurs
when the hedging coeﬃcient α2 increases from 0 to 0.5. The value α2 = 0.5 also
yields values for participation (60%) and the real net interest rate (2.5%) that
are reasonable for the current US economy. This suggests that the cross-sectoral
eﬀects induced by financial innovation may be quantitatively significant.26 We
leave to further research the full empirical assessment of this mechanism.
4.2. Diﬀerential Eﬀects, Participation Turnover and Interest Rate
We now explore three additional consequences of innovation in the multifactor
model: diﬀerential changes in sectoral risk premia, simultaneous entry and exit,
and a possible reduction of the interest rate.
The previous simulations assumed that the loading density f2 (ϕ2 ) is symmetric
around zero. Participants insure the marketable component of the idiosyncratic
shock at no cost, and an asset correlated only with e
ε2 yields no risk premium
p
(ϕ2 = 0). We now examine an economy in which the loading density f2 (ϕ2 )
24

We know from equation (4.4) that financial innovation has no impact on the relative risk
premium (ERa − R)/R. Figure 5 shows that the interest rate R and thus the risk premium
ERa − R are also approximately constant in the calibrated economy when the idiosyncratic risk
becomes tradable.
25
Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001) document that the volatility of stock market
indices have been stationary over the past century.
26
An increase in α2 reduces the idiosyncratic or background risk of all participants. When
utilities are isoelastic (or more generally exhibit decreasing absolute risk aversion), the reduction
in background risk increases the demand for the stock and thus further reduces the risk premium.
We anticipate that this additional channel substantially amplifies the pricing eﬀect of financial
innovation in more general setups. A similar argument is made by Heaton and Lucas (1999,
pp. 237-239). Their framework, however, only considers a unique risk factor and asset, and
therefore does not permit the distinction between background risk and aggregate shock. We
anticipate that their numerical results would be strengthened by the simultaneous reduction of
trader exposure to the aggregate and idiosyncratic risks considered in this paper.

20

has a positive support and is skewed towards the origin. The risks e
ε1 and e
ε2
are independent sources of aggregate uncertainty that yield positive and possibly
distinct premia. Financial innovation can diﬀerentially aﬀect asset prices across
sectors, and thus have rich eﬀects on the cross-section of expected returns.
The comparative statics analysis of Figure 2 easily extends to the two-factor
case. We consider a financial structure with completeness indices α1 and α2 , and
assume for simplicity that interest rate R is exogenous. The ellipse delimiting the
participation set is illustrated
by a solid line in Figure 6A. It is centered at ϕp and
p
has half-width Λ = 2κR/(α γ) along each axis. Consider an increase in the
second index from α2 to α02 . Since the interest is fixed, the limiting boundary in
the new equilibrium has the same horizontal Λ1 but a shorter vertical half-width
Λ02 . We represent the intermediate ellipse centered at ϕp with parameters Λ1
and Λ02 in dotted lines. Agents in the shaded area have smaller average loadings
than ϕp1 and ϕp2 , and thus tend to push the new equilibrium set towards the origin.
Because these agents are more spread out vertically than horizontally, the induced
movement in ϕp tends to be stronger along the vertical axis, i.e. in the direction of
innovation. The increased marketability of the shock e
ε2 may thus predominantly
influence the risk premium in the second sector.
The new set of participants is delimited by the ellipse centered at ϕpnew with
half-widths Λ1 and Λ02 , as illustrated in Figure 6B. Financial innovation induces
simultaneous entry and exit. Agents in the shaded area are initially out of the
market. When the new asset is introduced, these agents face lower hedging costs
and decide to participate. Agents in the dashed area, on the other hand, are
initially investing in financial assets. Lower risk premia reduce the profitability of
their investments and result in their leaving the market. The possibility of simultaneous entry and exit is thus an attractive feature of the multifactor model.27 In
future work, this property may prove useful to relate the cross-sectional distribution of risk with patterns of entry and exit in US stockownership (e.g. Hurst,
Luoh and Staﬀord, 1998; Vissing-Jørgensen, 2002).
The diﬀerential eﬀect is illustrated in Figure 7 on a numerical example. The
marginal densities of the factor loadings are identical log-normals. The initial
economy has hedging coeﬃcients α1 = α2 = α. We assume that the interest
εA ( = 1, 2) with
rate is endogenous and consider two fixed assets e
a = x +e
a risk premium of 7%. The symmetry of the economy imposes that x1 = x2 .
27

Participation tunover also arises when the distribution of ϕ2 is symmetric, as shown in the
proof of Proposition 4.

21

As α2 increases from α to 1, both risk premia fall and the eﬀect is stronger for
the second asset. The results of the figure are almost unchanged when the net
interest rate is exogenously set at 2%. The diﬀerential eﬀect is an important
feature of the multifactor economy. It distinguishes the introduction of sectorspecific securities from changes aﬀecting all security markets, such as a reduction
in taxes or transaction costs.
Multifactor economies also imply novel results for the comparative statics of
the interest rate. As discussed in Section 2, the introduction of new assets increases
risk-sharing opportunities and weakens the precautionary demand for savings. In
models with exogenous participation, this leads to a higher equilibrium interest
rate under many specifications, including CARA-normal (Weil, 1992; Elul, 1997).
In contrast, the Appendix establishes that when participation is endogenous,
Proposition 4. The interest rate locally decreases with financial innovation in
some multifactor economies.
This result has a simple geometric intuition. When new assets are introduced, the
movement of ϕp pushes the ellipse towards a region containing a large number of
participants. In some economies, this eﬀect is suﬃciently strong to reduce overall
participation and the interest rate.

5. Conclusion
This paper develops a tractable asset pricing model with incomplete markets and
endogenous participation. Agents receive heterogeneous random incomes determined by a finite number of risk factors. They can borrow or lend freely, but must
pay a fixed entry cost to invest in risky assets. Security prices and the participation set are jointly determined in equilibrium. The introduction of non-redundant
assets encourages investors to participate in financial markets for hedging and
diversification purposes. Under plausible conditions on the cross-sectional distribution of risk, the new entrants reduce the covariance between dividends and trader
consumption, which induces a reduction in the risk premium.
This logic is easily demonstrated in a simple one-factor model. Financial
innovation also has cross-sectoral eﬀects in economies with multiple sources of risk.
When a factor becomes tradable, new agents are drawn to the market in order
to manage their risk exposure. Under complementarities in learning or increasing
returns to trading activities, the new agents also become active in preexisting
22

markets and can modify the risk premia of securities uncorrelated to the factor.
This mechanism diﬀerentially aﬀects distinct sectors of the economy and thus may
have a rich impact on the cross-section of expected returns. Simultaneous entry
and exit is another attractive feature of the multifactor model, which could be
useful for the analysis of participation turnover in economies with heterogeneous
income risks.
This paper suggests several directions for empirical research. Future work
could assess the contribution of financial innovation to the decline of the equity
premium in the past few decades. Participation changes may also help explain
the pricing eﬀects of new derivatives reported in the empirical literature. From
a policy perspective, the mechanisms examined in this paper provide useful insights on current debates in public and international economics. When countries
face fixed costs to financial integration, the model implies that the creation of
new markets can have profound pricing, participation and welfare consequences.
An extension of this work could investigate the political economy of the macro
markets advocated by Shiller and others. Further research may also evaluate government policies aﬀecting asset creation and participation costs, such as financial
regulation, taxes, and social security reform.

23

6. Appendix A - Existence and Constrained Eﬃciency
6.1. Existence
We prove existence for a convex economy with a finite state space Ω = {1, .., S}.
and non-negative consumption sets. The utility U h of every agent is continuous,
strongly monotonic and strictly quasi-concave on RS+1
+ . At prices where agents
h
are indiﬀerent between entry (θ 6= 0) and non-entry (θh = 0), individual demand
consists of two distinct points. We avoid discontinuities in aggregate demand by
assuming that there is a finite number of types h = 1, .., H, and a continuum of
agents in each type.
b h (q) denote the set of plans (c0 , θ0 , θ) satisfying the
Given q = (p0 , π 0 , π), let B
budget constraints p0 (c0 + κ1{θh 6=0} ) + π 0 θ0 + π · θ ≤ p0 eh0 and ẽh + θ0 + ã · θ ≥ 0.

The no-arbitrage set is the open cone Q = {(p0 , Λ.a0 , ..., Λ.aJ ); (p0 , Λ) ∈ RS+1
++ }.
hp
hp
Given q ∈ Q, we can calculate the optimal excess demands Z (q) ≡ [c0 (q) +
hp
hn
hn
h hn
κ − eh0 , θhp
0 (q), θ (q)] and Z (q) ≡ [c0 (q) − e0 , θ 0 (q), 0] under entry and nonentry. The excess demand correspondence Z h (q) is defined as Z hd (q) when decision
d ∈ {p, n} is strictly optimal, and as the interval [Z hp (q), Z hn (q)] when the agent
is indiﬀerent between entry and non-entry. Z h (q) is homogeneous of degree 0,
upper hemi-continuous and satisfies Walras’ law. Consider a vector q 6= 0 on the
frontier of Q, and a sequence {q n }∞
n=1 of elements of Q converging to q. Following
Hens (1991), it is easy to show that inf{kzk ; z ∈ Z h (q n )} → ∞ and
· inf{kzk
¸ ;z ∈
1
NZ h (q n )} → ∞ as n → ∞, where M = [a0 , .., aJ ] and N =
. Since
M
consumption is non-negative, the set NZ h (q n ) ≥ −eh is also bounded below. We
conclude by standard arguments that an equilibrium exists (Hens, 1991).
6.2. Constrained Eﬃciency of Equilibrium
¢
¡
We consider an equilibrium (R, π, ch0 , c̃h , θh0 , θh h∈H ), and assume that there exists
a feasible allocation (dh0 , deh )h∈H such that U h (dh0 , deh ) > U h (ch0 , c̃h ) for all h. For
every agent, there exists (η h0 , η h ) such that deh = ẽh + η h0 + ã · η h . Since (dh0 , deh ) is
strictly preferred to (ch0 , c̃h ), it must be that dh0 + π 0 η h0 + π · η h + κ1{ηh 6=0} > eh0 .
R
We infer H (dh0 + κ1{ηh 6=0} )dµ(h) > e0 , which contradicts feasibility.

24

7. Appendix B - One-Factor Economies
7.1. Participation Set (Proof of Properties 1 and 2)
R ϕp −Λ
R +∞
For every fixed Λ ≥ 0, the function GΛ (ϕp ) = −∞
(ϕ−ϕp )dµ+ ϕ +Λ (ϕ−ϕp )dµ is
p
continuous and strictly decreasing on R. It also satisfies limϕp →−∞ GΛ (ϕp ) = +∞
and limϕp →+∞ GΛ (ϕp ) = −∞. The equation GΛ (ϕp ) = 0 has thus a unique solution
ϕp (Λ). By the implicit function theorem, the function ϕp (Λ) has derivative
dϕp
f (ϕp + Λ) − f (ϕp − Λ)
=−
,
dΛ
f (ϕp + Λ) + f (ϕp − Λ) + µ(PΛ )/Λ
which is contained between −1 and 1. We conclude that ϕp (Λ) − Λ and ϕp (Λ) + Λ
are respectively decreasing and increasing in Λ, and thus that PΛ is decreasing.
7.2. Equilibrium Properties (Proof of Theorem 3 and Proposition 3)
Existence and Uniqueness. Appendix A establishes the existence of equilibrium
in an economy with finite state space and non-negative consumption. We now
prove existence and uniqueness in the one-factor CARA-normal case. Consider
H0 (Λ) = µ(PΛ ) and H1 (Λ) = µ(PΛ )(V arPΛ ϕ). The monotonicity of PΛ imR ϕp −Λ
plies that H0 (Λ) is decreasing in Λ. Similarly, the function H1 (Λ) = −∞ (ϕ −
R +∞
ϕp )2 f (ϕ)dϕ + ϕp +Λ (ϕ − ϕp )2 f (ϕ)dϕ has derivative H10 (Λ) = Λ2 H00 (Λ) < 0. Equilibrium is determined by (3.5) − (3.6). The function R1 is strictly increasing, and
R2 is decreasing. The diﬀerence function R1 (Λ) − R2 (Λ) is therefore strictly increasing and maps [0, +∞) onto [−R2 (0), +∞). We conclude that there exists a
unique equilibrium.
Impact of Financial Innovation. Using Cramer’s rule, we check that financial
> 0. On the other hand, dΛ
has the
innovation increases the interest rate: dR
dα
dα
same sign as G(α) − 2 ≡ αχγH1 [Λ(α)] − 2. Since G(0) = 0, the function Λ(α) is
decreasing on a neighborhood of α = 0. We also oberve that if G(α) = 2, then
G0 (α) > 0. The equations G(α) = 2 and dΛ
= 0 thus have at most one solution
dα
on (0, 1].
Impact of Entry Fee. Cramer’s rule implies that
thus reduces the participation set PΛ .

25

dΛ
dκ

> 0. A higher entry cost κ

8. Appendix C - Multifactor Economies
8.1. Existence and Uniqueness of Equilibrium (Proof of Theorem 4)
½
¾
PL ³ ϕi −ϕpi ´2
p
≥ 1 is defined for any ϕp ∈ RL and
The set P(ϕ , Λ) = ϕ : i=1
Λi

Λ = (Λ1 , .., ΛL ) ∈ RL++ . We observe

R
Fact C1. For any Λ ∈ RL++ , the equation P(ϕp ;Λ) (ϕ − ϕp )dµ(ϕ) = 0 has a unique
solution ϕpΛ ∈ RL .
Proof. We rewrite
the equation ¸as a convex optimization problem. Consider
·
³
´2
P
ϕi −ϕpi
L
p
k(ϕ; ϕ , Λ) =
− 1 1P(ϕp ,Λ) (ϕ), where 1P(ϕp ,Λ) denotes the indii=1
Λi

cator function of P(ϕp , Λ). Since k(ϕ; ϕp , Λ) is convex in ϕp and µ has an unR
bounded support, the function K(ϕp , Λ) = 12 RL k(ϕ; ϕp , Λ)dµ(ϕ) is strictly con∂K
vex in ϕp . A vector ϕp thus minimizes K(ϕp , Λ) on RL if and only if ∂ϕ
p =
R
p
p
(ϕ − ϕ )dµ(ϕ) = 0. Since K diverges to +∞ as kϕ k → +∞, there exists
P(ϕp ;Λ)
a unique minimizer ϕp .
¥

Λ (R) =
p For every R > 0, let Λ(R) denote the vector with pcomponents
p
2κR/(α γ) (1 ≤ ≤ L). It is convenient to define ϕ (R) ≡ ϕΛ(R) , the set
P(R) ≡ P[ϕpΛ(R) , Λ(R)], and the function
z(R) ≡ ln R0 + χ

Z

P(R)

(

)
L
γX
2
p
κ+
αi [ϕi − ϕi (R)] dµ(ϕ).
2 i=1

, which is weakly negative by Fact C2
We check that z 0 (R) = χκ(1 + R) dµ[P(R)]
dR
below. We conclude that the equilibrium equation z(R) = ln R has thus a unique
solution.
Fact C2. The mass of participants µ[P(R)] is a decreasing function of R.
Proof. We first show that the property holds under complete markets: α = 1 for
all . For any R, the boundary of the participation set P(R) is a sphere, which is
denoted S(R). Given two positive numbers R and δ, δ < R, we seek to show that
µ[P(R)] ≤ µ[P(R−δ)]. The inequality is trivially satisfied when P(R) ⊆ P(R−δ).
When P(R) Ã P(R − δ), the intersection of the spheres S(R) and S(R − δ) is
contained in a hyperplane H. Consider axes such that H is described by the
equation ϕ1 = 0, and the center of gravity ϕp (R) = (x, 0 . . . 0) has a positive first
coordinate x. We check that ϕp (R − δ) has coordinates (y, 0 . . . 0), where y < x.
26

When the interest rate moves from R to R − δ, agents in P+ = P(R − δ)\P(R)
enter, agents in P− = P(R)\P(R − δ) exit, and agents in PC = P(R) ∩ P(R − δ)
participate under both interest rates (Figure 8). Since P(R) = P− ∪ PC and
R
R
P(R − δ) = P+ ∪ PC , we infer that P− ϕ1 dµ(ϕ) + PC ϕ1 dµ(ϕ) = x µ[P(R)], and
R
R
ϕ dµ(ϕ) + PC ϕ1 dµ(ϕ) = y µ[P(R − δ)]. Substracting these equalities implies
P+ 1
Z

P+

ϕ1 dµ(ϕ) −

Z

P−

ϕ1 dµ(ϕ) = y µ[P(R − δ)] − x µ[P(R)].

The left-hand side of the equation is positive because P+ is contained in the
half-space ϕ1 > 0 and P− is contained in the half-space ϕ1 < 0. Since x > y,
we infer that x µ[P(R)] ≤ y µ[P(R − δ)] ≤ x µ[P(R − δ)], and conclude that
µ[P(R)] ≤ µ[P(R − δ)] holds under complete markets.
When markets are incomplete, consider the linear rescaling ϕ∗ = Φ (ϕ) =
√
ϕ α and the corresponding measure µ∗ = µ ◦ Φ−1 . Note that these transformations are independent of R. For every R > 0, the rescaled set P ∗ (R) = Φ[P(R)]
has a spherical boundary. We conclude that µ[P(R)] = µ∗ [P ∗ (R)] is decreasing
in R.
¥
8.2. Numerical Simulation
This subsection presents the microeconomic framework used in the simulation of
Figure 5. Individual random income is specified as eeh = eh0 (1 + σ 1e
ε1 ) + ϕh2 e
ε2 . The
individual loading ϕh1 = σ 1 eh0 > 0 is therefore proportional to expected income.28
The aggregate endowment in period 1 satisfies ee = e0 (1 + σ 1e
ε1 ). Without loss of
generality, mean income is normalized to unity: e0 = 1.
We specify the cross-sectional distribution of income to be lognormal: ln eh0 ∼
N (µz , σ 2z ). Since mean income is normalized to 1, µz and σ 2z satisfy the restriction
µz + σ 2z /2 = 0. We choose µz = −0.25, which corresponds to a reasonable Gini
coeﬃcient of 0.4. The standard deviation of aggregate income growth σ 1 is set at
0.04. Since ϕh1 = σ 1 eh0 , the loading density f1 (ϕ1 ) is now fully specified.
The loading density f2 (ϕ2 ) is assumed to be a centered Gaussian N (0, σ 22 )
with standard deviation σ 2 = 0.10. The discount factor is β = 0.96. Since e0 = 1,
the coeﬃcients γ and χ−1 coincide with relative risk aversion and intertemporal
elasticity at the mean endowment point. We choose γ = 10 and χ−1 = 2. The
fraction of mean income used in the entry process is set equal to κ = 0.8%.
28

We assume for simplicity that there is no expected growth between the two periods.

27

The aggregate shock is partially tradable. We choose α1 = 0.5, which is
roughly consistent with the correlation between the NYSE value-weighted return
and the permanent aggregate labor income shock reported in Campbell, Cocco,
Gomes and Maenhout (2001). The stock is a traded asset of the form e
a = x +e
εA
1.
ea − R equal to 7% before financial
We select x to obtain a risk premium ER
innovation (α2 = 0).
8.3. Proof of Proposition 4
We provide an example in an economy with two uncorrelated factors (ε1 , ε2 ).
Letting δ = 0.01, we consider ϕA = (−2, 0), ϕB = (1 + δ, 0), ϕC = (2, 0), ϕ− =
(0, −1 + δ) and ϕ+ = (0, 1 − δ), with respective weights mA = mB = 1/5, mC =
1/10, m+ = m− = 1/4. The other parameters of the economy are γ = χ = 0.7,
κ = 0.3, e0 = Ee
e = 1, α2 = 0.9.
A straightforward extension of Theorem 4 implies that a unique equilibrium
exists for any α1 . When α1 = 0.55, we check that the participation set contains
all the agents of type A, C, + and −, and the net interest rate is approximately
7.9%. On the other hand when α1 = 0.9, the participation set contains all the
agents of type A, B, C, and the net interest rate has fallen to 5.7%.

28

References
[1] Abel, A., “The Eﬀects of Investing Social Security Funds in the Stock Market
When Fixed Costs Prevent Some Households from Holding Stocks,” American
Economic Review, 91 (2001), 128-148.
[2] Allen, F., and Gale, D., “Incomplete Markets and Incentives to Set Up an
Options Exchange,” Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory, 15 (1990),
17-46.
[3] Allen, F., and Gale, D., Financial Innovation and Risk Sharing, MIT Press,
(1994a).
[4] Allen, F., and Gale, D., “Limited Market Participation and Volatility of Asset
Prices,” American Economic Review, 84 (1994b), 933-955.
[5] Angeletos, G. M., and Calvet, L. E., “Incomplete Markets, Growth and the
Business Cycle”, HIER Working Paper #1910, Harvard University (2000).
[6] Barro, R., and Sala-i-Martin, X. , “World Interest Rates,” in O. J. Blanchard
and S. Fischer eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15-61, MIT Press (1990).
[7] Basak, S., and Cuoco, D., “An Equilibrium Model with Restricted Stock
Market Participation,” Review of Financial Studies, 11 (1998), 309-341.
[8] Bertaut, C., and Haliassos, M., “Why do so few hold stocks?,” Economic
Journal, 105 (1995), 1110-1129.
[9] Bewley, T., “The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formulation,” Journal of Economic Theory, 16 (1977), 252-292.
[10] Blanchard, O. J., “Movements in the Equity Premium,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2 (1993), 75-118.
[11] Blume, M., Crockett, J., and I. Friend, “Stock Ownership in the United
States: Characteristics and Trends”, Survey of Current Business 54 (1974),
16-40.
[12] Blume, M., and Friend, I., The Changing Role of the Individual Investor: A
Twentieth Century Fund Report, New York: Wiley (1978).

29

[13] Blume, M., and Zeldes, S., “The Structure of Stockownership in the United
States”, Working Paper, Wharton School (1993).
[14] Calvet, L., “Incomplete Markets and Volatility,” Journal of Economic Theory, 98 (2001), 295-338.
[15] Campbell, J. Y., Cocco, J., Gomes, F., and Maenhout, P., “Investing Retirement Wealth: A Life-Cycle Model”, Chapter 11 in Risk Aspects of InvestmentBased Social Security Reform, J. Campbell and M. Feldstein eds., University
of Chicago Press (2001). Also reproduced in Campbell and Viceira (2002).
[16] Campbell, J. Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B., and Xu, Y., “Have Individual
Stocks Become More Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic
Risk,” Journal of Finance, 56 (2001), 1-43.
[17] Campbell, J. Y., and Shiller, R. J., “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run
Stock Market: An Update”, in Advances in Behavioral Finance, Volume II,
N. Barberis and R. Thaler eds., Russell Sage Foundation (2003).
[18] Campbell, J. Y., and Viceira, L., Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice
for Long-Term Investors, Oxford University Press (2002).
[19] Cass, D., and Citanna, A., “Pareto Improving Financial Innovation in Incomplete Markets,” Economic Theory 11 (1998), 467-494.
[20] Cochrane, J., “Where is the Market Going? Uncertain Facts and Novel Theories,” Economic Perspectives XXI (November/December): Federal Bank of
Chicago (1997). Also NBER Working Paper No. 6207.
[21] Conrad, J., The Price Eﬀect of Option Introduction, Journal of Finance, 44
(1989), 487-498.
[22] Constantinides, G. M., and Duﬃe, D., “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous
Consumers,” Journal of Political Economy, 104 (1996), 219-240.
[23] Detemple, J., and Jorion, P., “Option Listing and Stock Returns,” Journal
of Banking and Finance, 14 (1990), 781-801.
[24] Detemple, J., and Selden, L., “A General Equilibrium Analysis of Option
and Stock Market Interactions,” International Economic Review, 32 (1991),
279-303.
30

[25] Duﬃe, D., and Jackson, M., “Optimal Innovation of Futures Contracts”,
Review of Financial Studies, 2 (1989), 275-296.
[26] Duﬃe, D., and Rahi, R., “Financial Market Innovation and Security Design:
An Introduction,” Journal of Economic Theory 65 (1995), 1-42.
[27] Elul, R., “Financial Innovation, Precautionary Saving and the Risk-Free
Rate,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 27 (1997), 113-131.
[28] Fama, E., and French, K., “The Equity Premium,” Journal of Finance, 57
(2002), 637-659.
[29] Gollier, C., The Economics of Risk and Time, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
(2001).
[30] Gonzalez-Eiras, M., Chapter 2 in “Essays in Incomplete Markets, Liquidity
and Risk-Sharing”, Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT, February 2000.
[31] Grossman, S., “An Analysis of the Implications for Stock and Futures Price
Volatility of Program Trading and Dynamic Hedging Strategies,” in S. Grossman ed.: The Informational Role of Prices, Wicksell Lectures, MIT Press
(1989).
[32] Heaton, J., and Lucas, D., “Stock Prices and Fundamentals,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual Vol. 14, (1999), 213-242.
[33] Heaton, J., and Lucas, D., “Portfolio Choices and Asset Prices: The Importance of Entrepreneurial Risk,” Journal of Finance, 55 (2000), 1163-98.
[34] Hens, T., “Structure of General Equilibrium Models with Incomplete Markets and a Single Consumption Good”, Discussion Paper No. A-353, Bonn
University (1991).
[35] Hirshleifer, D., “Residual Risk, Trading Costs, and Commodity Futures Risk
Premia,” Review of Financial Studies, 1 (1988), 173-193.
[36] Honohan, P., “How Interest Rates Changed under Financial Liberalization:
A Cross-Country Review”, World Bank Working Paper No. 2313 (2000).
[37] Huang, J., and Wang, J., “Market Structure, Security Prices and Informational Eﬃciency,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1 (1997), 169-205.
31

[38] Hurst, E., Luoh, M. C., and Staﬀord, F. P., “The Wealth Dynamics of American Families, 1984-1994,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (1998),
267-329.
[39] Jochum, C., and Kodres, L. (1998), “Does the Introduction of Futures on
Emerging Market Currencies Destabilize the Underlying Currencies?”, IMF
Working Paper.
[40] Kihlstrom, R., Romer, D., and Williams, S., “Risk Aversion with Random
Initial Wealth,” Econometrica, 49 (1981), 911-920.
[41] King, M., and J. Leape, “Wealth and Portfolio Composition: Theory and
Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 1468, Cambridge, MA (1984).
[42] Levine, D., and Zame, W., “Does Market Incompleteness Matter?,” Econometrica, 70 (2002), 1805-1840.
[43] Magill, M., and Quinzii, M., Theory of Incomplete Markets, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press (1996).
[44] Mankiw, N. G., and S. Zeldes, “The Consumption of Stockholders and NonStockholders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29 (1991), 97-112.
[45] Massa, M., and Simonov, A., “Do Investors Hedge? Stock Market Participation and Hedging,” Working Paper, Stockholm School of Economics (2002).
[46] Mehra, R., and Prescott, E., “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle”, Journal of
Monetary Economics 15 (1985), 145-162.
[47] Nachman, D., “Preservation of "more risk averse" under expectations,” Journal of Economic Theory 28 (1982), 361-368.
[48] Oh, G., “Some Results in the CAPM with Nontraded Endowments,” Management Science, 42 (1996), 286-293.
[49] Orosel, G., “Participation Costs, Trend Chasing, and Volatility of Stock
Prices,” Review of Financial Studies, 11 (1998), 521-557.
[50] Pagano, M., “Endogenous Market Thinness and Stock Price Volatility,” Review of Economic Studies, 56 (1989), 269-288.

32

[51] Pagano, M., “The Flotation of Companies in the Stock Market,” European
Economic Review, 37 (1993), 1101-1135.
[52] Poterba, J., and Samwick, A., “Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market
Fluctuations and Consumption,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2
(1995), 295-357.
[53] Roll, R., “A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory’s Tests - Part 1: On Past
and Potential Testability of the Theory,” Journal of Financial Economics, 4
(1977), 129-176.
[54] Ross, S., “Options and Eﬃciency,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90
(1976), 75-89.
[55] Saito, M., “Limited Participation and Asset Pricing”, Working Paper, University of British Columbia (1995).
[56] Shiller, R, The New Financial Order, Princeton University Press (2003).
[57] Sodini, P., Chapter 1 in “Essays in Capital Markets”, Ph.D. Dissertation,
MIT, August 2001.
[58] Stein, J., “Informational Externalities and Welfare-Reducing Speculation,”
Journal of Political Economy, 95 (1987), 1123-1145.
[59] Storesletten, K., Telmer, C., and Yaron, A., “Persistent Idiosyncratic
Shocks and Incomplete Markets”, Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University (1996).
[60] Telmer, C., “Asset Pricing Puzzles and Incomplete Markets,” Journal of Finance, 48 (1993), 1803-1832.
[61] Vissing-Jørgensen, A., “Limited Stock Market Participation”, Working Paper, MIT (1997).
[62] Vissing-Jørgensen, A., “Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio
Choice Heterogeneity: Non-Financial Income and Participation Cost Structures”, Working Paper, University of Chicago (2002).
[63] Weil, P., “Equilibrium Asset Prices in Economies with Undiversifiable Labor
Income Risk,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 16 (1992), 769790.
33

e% h

~A
m

~A
e~ hA − m

e% hA

Risky Asset Span

Figure 1: Geometry of the Entry Condition. An agent with random income ~
eh
participates in risky asset markets if the distance between the tradable component
~ A is larger than 2κR / γ
of her endowment e~ hA and the tradable security m

ϕp −Λ

OUT

ϕp

new entry

IN

new entry

Loading Density

f (ϕ)

ϕp +Λ

IN

ϕ

Factor Loading

Figure 2: Effect on Participation of a Decrease in Λ. Financial innovation, either
in the form of improved spanning or lower transaction costs, reduces the nonparticipation parameter Λ= 2κR /(αγ ) . When the cross-sectional distributional of
risk is skewed to the left, a majority of entrants have low risk exposure. As a result,
the participants’ average loading ϕp and the risk premium fall.

Interest Rate

R

R1(Λ) - Entry Decision

E´

E

Non-Participation Parameter

R2(Λ) -

Bond Market
Equilibrium

Λ

Figure 3: Equilibrium of the One-Factor Economy. The equilibrium E of the
endogenous participation economy is determined by the intersection of the curves
R1(Λ) and R2(Λ), which respectively express the entry condition and the
equilibrium of the bond market. The introduction of a new asset pushes up both
curves. In the new equilibrium E’, the interest rate R is higher and the shift in the
non-participation parameter Λ is generally ambiguous.

µ(P)
σ=1

Participation Rate

0.4

0.3

σ = 0.8

0.2

0.1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

α

Index of Market Completeness

Figure 4: Effect of Financial Innovation on Market Participation. We consider a
one-factor economy with a lognormal cross-sectional distribution or risk: ln(ϕ) ~
N(0, σ2). The solid curve corresponds to σ = 0.8, and the dashed curve to σ = 1.
Τhe other parameters of the economy are: γ = c = 1, κ = 1 and β = 1. When the
completeness index α increases from 0 to 1, participation monotonically increases in
one economy (σ=0.8), and reaches a maximum for an intermediate value of α in the
the other (σ=1). Non-monotonicity arises from the larger heterogeneity of individual
incomes in the second economy. Financial innovation then induces a sharp reduction
in the precautionary supply of savings, which leads to a strong increase of the
interest rate and the exit of some participants.

B. Interest Rate (%)

A. Equity Premium (%)
7

4

6

3
2

5

0.25

0.75
0.5
Completeness Index α2

16

1

C. Volatility of Stock Return (%)

1

75

0.25
0.75
0.5
Completeness Index α2

1

D. Participation Rate (%)

60

15

45
14

30

13

15

12
0.25
0.75
0.5
Completeness Index α2

1

0.25
0.75
0.5
Completeness Index α2

1

Figure 5: Comparative Statics in a Two-Factor Economy. Individual labor income
is exposed to an aggregate shock ε~1 and an idiosyncratic risk ε~2 . The aggregate shock is
partially insurable (α1 = 0.5). The idiosyncratic risk is uncorrelated to existing assets
when α2 = 0 and is fully insurable when α2 = 1. The other parameters are β = 0.96, γ =
10, c = 0.5, κ = 0.8%, σ1 = 4% and σ2 = 10%. The solid lines illustrate equilibrium in
the endogenous participation economy as the coefficient α2 varies from 0 to 1. The
dashed lines are plotted assuming a fixed set of traders. For comparison purposes, the
participation sets in both economies coincide when α2 = 0. The effects of innovation on
the risk premium is substantially stronger under endogenous entry.

A. Intermediate Set

ϕ2
entry

.j

p

.j

p

new

entry

ϕ1
B. New Participation Set

ϕ2
entry

exit

.j

p

new

ϕ1
Figure 6: Effect on Participation of an Increase in α2. Initial participants are located outside
the large ellipse of Panel A. When α2 increases, the boundary shrinks vertically (small ellipse),
and new entrants move the average loadings from ϕp to ϕpnew. The new participation set is
delimited by the small ellipse of Panel B. The dotted area contains the new entrants, and the
dashed area the agents who left the markets.

Market Premium (%)
7.0

6.5

6.0
Asset 1
5.5
Asset 2
5.0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Completeness Index α2

Figure 7: Differential Effects of Financial Innovation. The cross-sectional loading
density is the product: f(ϕ1, ϕ2) = g(ϕ1) g(ϕ2), where g is the density of a log-normal
variable Z: lnZ ~ N(-3.5, 1). Note that exposures to the aggregate and idiosyncratic
risks are independent in the population. The other parameters of the economy are: γ =
10, c = 0.5, β = 0.96 and κ = 0.8%. The initial economy has completeness indexes α1 =
α2 = 0.2, and contains two fixed assets a~l = x + ε~lA (l = 1,2). As α2 increases from 0.2 to
1, both risk premia fall. The effect is stronger for the second asset, which is in the
sector experiencing financial innovation.

H

Py
ϕ p(R-d )

ϕ1

x
ϕ p(R)

P+

Pc

Figure 8: Geometry of the Participation Sets. When the interest rate falls from R to
R – δ, the average loading moves from ϕp(R) to ϕp(R-d ). Agents in P+ enter the market,
agents in P- exit, and agents in Pc trade in both equilibria.

