                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              IS THE SOCIAL SECURITY TRUST FUND WORTH ANYTHING?

                                           Kent Smetters

                                         Working Paper 9845
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9845


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2003




Research for this paper began while I was a visiting professor at the Economics Department at Stanford
University during the 2000-1 academic year. Financial support from the Kaiser Family Foundation, Spencer
Thompson, and SIEPR are gratefully acknowledged. I benefited from helpful conversations with Alan
Auerbach, June O’Neill, John Shoven, and Spencer Thompson. Andrew Biggs, Eric Engen, John Hambor,
Kevin Hassett, Randall Mariger and an anonymous referee provided very detailed and useful comments, as
did the participants at the American Enterprise Institute Conference in November 2002. Constructive
criticisms by Peter Diamond and Peter Orszag helped sharpen the paper’s focus. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research

©2003 by Kent Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Is the Social Security Trust Fund Worth Anything?
Kent Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 9845
July 2003
JEL No. H5, H6

                                            ABSTRACT

With over $1 trillion in assets, the U.S. Social Security trust fund is the largest pension reserve in
the world, and potentially a model for other developed countries facing future financing problems.
But are those assets actually “worth anything?” This question has generated a heated debate in the
U.S. as policymakers debate options for Social Security reform, with the understanding that the
characterization of the trust fund influences these decisions. Some observers claim that the trust fund
is not worth anything while others argue that it is valuable. However, different reasons are given for
the same position.
This paper provides a unified conceptual framework for thinking rigorously about the assets
accumulated in the trust fund. Multiple perspectives of the trust fund are identified and are
summarized under two categories: (I) storage technology arguments and (II) ownership arguments.
Storage technology arguments focuses on whether the trust fund surpluses actually reduce the level
of debt held by the public or, alternatively, are used to “hide” smaller on-budget surpluses.
Ownership arguments focus on property rights, i.e., how trust fund credits should be allocated
regardless of whether they reduce the debt held by the public.
Only the storage technology argument can be empirically tested, as we do herein. We find that there
is no empirical evidence supporting the claim that trust fund assets have reduced the level of debt
held by the public. In fact, the evidence suggests just the opposite: trust fund assets have probably
increased the level of debt held by the public. Moreover, the adoption of a “unified budget”
framework in the late 1960s appears to play a statistically significant role in this result. We show
how this counterintuitive result can be explained by a simple “split the dollar game” where
competition between two political parties exploits the ignorance of voters who don’t understand that
the government’s reported budget surplus actually includes the “off-budget” Social Security surplus.
To be sure, this evidence is based on a limited annual time series (1949 n 2002) and so the results
should be interpreted with caution. But the empirical tests are, if anything, biased toward finding a
reduction in the level of debt held by the public, and not the increase that we find.

Kent Smetters
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk, CPC 302
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
smetters@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                 I. Introduction


         Following an approximate two-percentage point increase in payroll taxes starting in 1983,

the Social Security trust fund has grown from $14 billion in assets to over $1.3 trillion today.

The trust fund invests primarily in Treasury securities that are issued specially for the trust fund.1

Although the trust fund buildup was projected during the early 1980s to keep Social Security

solvent until around 2060, the most current 2003 Social Security Trustees’ Report estimates that

the trust fund will be depleted in 2042 (Figure 1). However, as Figure 1 suggests, Social

Security benefit payments are projected to exceed payroll tax revenue in the year 2018.

         The inter-related issues of whether the $1.3 trillion trust fund is “worth anything” and

whether the important date for public policy purposes is the cost-revenue crossover date (2018)

or the trust fund exhaustion date (2042) has been a source of considerable debate for many years.

This debate was heightened after The Commission to Strengthen Social Security, established by

President Bush, released its Interim Report in July 2001 and its Final Report in December 2001.

The Commission recommended to the President that voluntary personal accounts, similar to

401(k)s, can be used to augment traditional Social Security benefits.

         While the projected trust fund exhaustion date has traditionally been the popular focus in

the press, the Commission’s Interim Report highlighted the cost-revenue crossover date (at that

time, estimated as 2016 by the Social Security Trustees) as more relevant. (The Trustees

estimated the trust fund exhaustion date as 2038 when the Commission wrote its report.) The

Commission argued that assets in the trust fund failed to increase national saving and so could

not count toward pre-funding of future benefits.


1
  Technically, the Managing Trustee of the trust fund has the right to purchase other risk-less government securities,
but the exact choice is economically immaterial and the choice is not germane to the debate considered herein.
Currently, the Disability Insurance trust fund holds a very small amount of marketable securities.


                                                          1
        The Commission’s claims about the trust fund drew a flood of responses from academics

and policymakers. A Lexis-Nexis search reveals that the Commission’s remarks about the trust

fund generated several dozen articles in newspapers and magazines worldwide.

        Opponents of personal accounts have accused the Commission of, in the words of House

Minority Leader Richard Gephardt (D-Mo.), “misstating facts” by questioning the worthiness of

trust fund assets. Gephardt continued: “If the full faith and credit of the United States

government is not an asset, I don’t know what is.”2 Noting that the trust fund will have $5

trillion worth of assets in 2016, Alan Blinder stated that “It’s irresponsible to frighten people.”3

Along with co-authors, Henry Aaron, Alicia Munnell, and Peter Orszag (2001, p. 11), he wrote:

                The Social Security Trust Fund currently holds more than $1 trillion in Treasury
        securities. These assets are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. Government.
        … The Treasury bonds held by the Social Security Trust Fund are every bit as “real” as
        the Treasury bonds held by private investors. … These [trust fund] cash-flow surpluses
        have raised national saving and investment and thus have helped to expand national
        income. They have bolstered our ability to pay Social Security benefits in the future…


Paul Krugman (2001, p. 13) called the Commission report “sheer, mean-spirited nonsense” and

“twisted logic”:

                Just as a private pension fund uses earnings on its assets to pay benefits, the
        Social Security system can use earnings from this trust fund to pay benefits. … Social
        Security benefits can be paid out of the general budget – a transfer of revenue that is
        clearly justified if payroll tax receipts have meanwhile been used to pay off the national
        debt, releasing large sums that would otherwise have been consumed by interest
        payments.


        Alicia H. Munnell and R. Kent Weaver (2001, p.11) wrote:

               The real crisis date, [the Commission] now say[s] is not 2038, but 2016. … This
        argument is incorrect. It implies that the taxes in excess of benefit payments that working
        people have paid to prefund the system since 1983 are worthless. … The excess payroll

2
  In “U.S. Representative Richard Gephardt (D-MO) Holds Radio Roundtable.” Federal Document Clearing House,
Inc., July, 20, 2001.
3
  In Heidi Przbyla, “Critics Ramp Up Campaign Against Bush’s Social Security Plan.” Bloomberg, July 23, 2001.


                                                     2
        taxes that have been used to build up reserves in the trust funds have increased national
        saving. … The argument that the federal government will have to raise taxes or cut
        spending to redeem Social Security in 2016 does not make the system’s assets any less
        “real.” If General Motors or IBM redeemed the government bonds in their pension
        funds, the Treasury would also have to raise new funds to pay them off.


        But other people see it differently. Newsweek columnist Allan Sloan (2001) wrote:

                Let’s say that you set up a $1 million trust fund to pay for your retirement. But
        instead of putting in $1 million of cash or stocks, you give the fund a $1 million IOU
        from yourself. When your Golden Years arrive, you want the million bucks. To get it,
        you need to fork over $1 million to redeem the IOU. The fact that the fund has the IOU
        doesn’t make it any easier for you to come up with the money.


Smetters (1999), Diamond (2000, 2003), O’Neill (2002), and Shoven (2003) give less heated

thoughts.

        Interestingly, these debates are not new. The meaning and purpose of the trust fund has

been hotly debated even before Roosevelt approved the Social Security Act on August 14, 1935

(Schieber and Shoven, 1999). Moreover, the debate was so contentious that the first academic

article on the issue, published in The Quarterly Journal of Economics in 1937, was unsigned in

order to protect the author’s identity:4

                The writer of this article has asked that his name be not signed to it. We believe it
        to deserve careful attention. – The Editors


Overview

        The current paper provides a unified framework for thinking rigorously about the Social

Security trust fund. Debate over the trust fund’s worth is much subtler than a matter of

accounting; indeed, there is implicit agreement about the math. The disagreement is really about

how to characterize the trust fund with an understanding that its characterization may affect

policy decisions. In particular, if the trust fund is perceived as “real,” this belief helps create a




                                                   3
“pecking order” for future spending, moving Social Security toward the front of the line since

trust fund assets represent monies “owed” to Social Security (e.g., Schlesinger, 1959). Indeed,

Senator Moynihan in 1990 even suggested reducing the Social Security payroll tax in order to

move Social Security to a strict pay-as-you-go system in order to reduce the political strength of

these claims – claims that he believed were not backed by real assets.

           This paper identifies the multiple perspectives of the trust fund and organizes the

arguments under two categories: (I) storage technology arguments and (II) ownership arguments.

Storage technology arguments focus on whether the trust fund reduced the level of debt held by

the public. Ownership arguments focus on property rights, i.e., how trust fund credits should be

allocated regardless of whether they reduced debt held by the public.

           Only the storage technology argument can be empirically tested, as we do herein. We

find that there is no empirical evidence supporting the claim that trust fund assets have reduced

the level of debt held by the public. In fact, the evidence suggests just the opposite: trust fund

assets probably actually increased the level of debt. We show how this counterintuitive result

can be explained by a simple “split the dollar game” where competition between two political

parties exploits the ignorance of voters who don’t understand that the government’s reported

budget surplus actually includes the “off-budget” Social Security surplus. To be sure, this

empirical evidence is based on a limited time series that is subject to the standard criticisms of

time-series evidence. But the econometrics specification is, if anything, somewhat biased toward

finding a reduction in the level of debt held by the public, and not the increase that we find.




4
    I am grateful to Andrew Rettenmaier and Tom Saving for pointing me to this article.

                                                           4
                                                      II. Budget Arithmetic

        The following equation gives the primary “unified budget surplus” at time t, which is

decomposed into the “on-budget” (non-Social Security) surplus and “off-budget” (Social

Security) surplus:

                                      On − Budget       Off − Budget
                                                                  
(1)                           (
                         St ≡ Tt NS   − Gt − rTF
                                          NS
                                              t
                                                      S
                                                          ) (
                                                t + Tt + rTFt    t − Bt                )           ,

where

•       St :     unified primary budget surplus at time t.

•       Tt NS : non-Social Security tax revenue at time t.

•       GtNS : non-Social Security government spending at time t.

•       rt :     interest rate paid on trust fund assets, TFt .

•       Tt S :   Social Security tax revenue received at time t.

•       Bt :     Social Security benefits paid at time t.

•       TFt :    Beginning-Of-Year (B.O.Y.) trust fund value at time t:

                                                                t −1
                                                  (         )∏ (1 + r )
                                           t −1
(2)                               TFt = ∑ TsS − Bs                         u               ,
                                           s =0              u = s +1


where t = 0 is the first period of consideration.

        The B.O.Y. debt held by the public at time t+1, Dt +1 , equals

                                                                        t −1    t −1
(3)                               Dt +1 = (1 + rt )Dt − S t = −∑ S s           ∏ (1 + r )      u   .
                                                                        s =0   u = s +1


        In budget nomenclature, Social Security (along with a small postal fund) is considered

“off budget” while the rest of the unified surplus is deemed “on budget.”




                                                            5
                                          III. Points of Agreement

        As summarized in Table 1, scholars on both sides of the debate seem to agree on some

basic tenets. First, each side agrees that Social Security has been running fairly large primary

surpluses since 1983 – i.e., Tt S > Bt for t = 1983, 1984, … , 2003. These surpluses plus interest

have produced a trust fund that today holds over one trillion dollars of government bonds (i.e.,

TF2003 ≈ $1.3 trillion) that are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. Actual

pieces of paper are printed, and those pieces of paper happen to be stored in West Virginia.

        Second, each side relies upon, even if just for the sake of argument, the Social Security

Trustees’ “intermediate” cost projections. The latest projections state that the value of payroll

contributions collected by Social Security will exceed the value of benefits paid by Social

Security ( Tt S > Bt ) until t = 2018, at which point contributions will fall below benefit payments

( Tt S < Bt ; t > 2018). By 2018, the trust fund, TF2017 , will hold approximately $5 trillion in

bonds.5 The trust fund is projected to be depleted of assets in 2042.

        Third, for a given level of debt held by the public, the Social Security trust fund is not an

asset to the government as a whole. For example, the Clinton Administration, in its 2000 fiscal

year budget, wrote:

                These [trust fund] balances are available to finance future benefit payments and
        other trust fund expenditures – but only in a bookkeeping sense. … They do not consist
        of real economic assets that can be drawn down in the future to fund benefits. (p. 337)

In particular, the entire trust fund enters on both sides (assets and liabilities) of the government’s

balance sheet or, equivalently, not at all. Beginning in 2018, Social Security benefits must be

financed, in part, from interest income paid by Treasury on bonds held in the trust fund. A few


5
  As shown in Figure 1, the trust fund continues to grow in value for about seven years after benefit payments begin
to exceed revenue in 2018 because of interest income earned on its outstanding stock of assets.


                                                         6
years later, when payroll revenue plus interest falls below benefit payments, the bonds in the

trust fund itself must be redeemed in order to finance Social Security benefits. By equations (1)

and (3), the government can avoid the increasing the debt held by the public in 2018 only by

increasing taxes or by decreasing spending.

       Fourth, for a given level of debt held by the public, 2018 is the latest date in which fiscal

action must be taken to address the demographic problems facing Social Security. As mentioned

above, in 2018 the federal government must come up with resources by increasing taxes,

decreasing spending, or issuing additional debt to the public.

       Fifth, whether investment by the trust fund into non-government securities could

influence the federal government’s tax and spending decisions might depend on the accounting

treatment of such investments. Under accrual type of accounting, the purchase of these assets

would not affect the unified budget surplus; only, interest income, dividends and capital gains or

losses would be shown to reduce or increase outlays (CBO, 2003a). There is little reason,

therefore, to believe that the government’s spending and tax decisions would be influenced if it

decided to purchase non-government securities. However, if, alternatively, the purchase of non-

government securities were treated under standard “cash accounting” principles then these

purchases must be treated as an outlay (OMB Circular A-11), thereby reducing the reported

unified surplus. In this case, the government might choose higher levels of taxes or lower levels

of spending. In other words, the actual accounting methodology applied to the purchase of non-

government securities could have important political-economy ramifications. The federal

government typically uses cash accounting for most of its activities that do not interact with the

securities market. But accrual accounting is more often used in interactions with the securities

markets, including loans and loan guarantees. While accrual accounting would more accurately




                                                 7
reflect the underlying costs of the purchase of non-government securities, federal accounting

rules do not currently indicate the accounting approach that would be used (CBO, 2003a). As a

result, some of the proposals to invest the trust fund in private equities explicitly specify accrual

accounting treatment in order to avoid the appearance of a reduced unified surplus.



                           IV. Storage Technology Based Arguments

       The debate over whether the $1.3 trillion trust fund is worth anything is more fascinating

than simple accounting. Table 2 summarizes my characterization of the different perspectives of

the trust fund. The perspectives are broadly grouped by those arguments that are storage based

(this section) and those arguments that are ownership based (the next section). Within both

broad categories, two opposing views of the trust fund emerge, for a total of four perspectives.

       The storage-based perspective of the trust fund assumes that the distinction between off-

budget surpluses and on-budget surpluses is made in the hope that these two separate “mental”

accounts provides a storage technology that prevents Social Security surpluses from being used

to finance larger amounts of non-Social Security spending or tax cuts. Whether this hope is

naïve or well founded is investigated empirically later in this paper.



View: The Trust Fund is Valuable

       This perspective assumes that the trust fund has increased national saving by reducing the

debt held by the public. Equation (1) shows that an increase in the value of the payroll tax, Tt S ,

as in the early 1980s, increases the size of the unified surplus, assuming, quite critically, ceteris

paribus, i.e., no change in government spending ( GtNS or Bt ) or other taxes ( Tt NS ). This view is

compatible with the idea that policymakers focus only on the on-budget surplus when setting



                                                  8
non-Social Security spending and taxes. By equations (2) and (3), the trust fund increases dollar-

for-dollar with the decrease in the debt held by the public, assuming no change in other fiscal

variables.

       Hence, according to this view, the trust fund should be “mentally credited” to Social

Security because it has reduced the value of the outstanding debt held by the public. To be sure,

the government still has to make some difficult fiscal policy decisions on or before 2018. But

these decisions are not made any more difficult by the need to repay Social Security. So any

shortfall to the government as a whole, starting in 2018, should be viewed as a general revenue

problem and so should not particularly influence the discussion of Social Security benefits or

taxes or reform options. So, if hypothetically, the cost-revenue crossover date were projected to

occur at some finite point in the near future but the trust fund itself was forecasted to never

become exhausted (due to interest income), Social Security benefits and payroll taxes should not

be adjusted. This perspective is the position taken by many of the critics of the Social Security

Commission’s Interim Report, as quoted earlier.



View: The Trust Fund isn’t Valuable

       This view takes issue with the ceteris paribus assumption above. As argued by

Elmendorf and Liebman (2000), historically, the unified surplus has received much more

attention in the popular press and by policymakers than the on-budget surplus. As a result,

policymakers might focus on the size of the unified surplus when making spending and tax

decisions. Recall from equation (1), that the unified budget surplus combines Social Security

surpluses with non-Social Security surpluses. According to this view, that unification has

allowed the political process in the past to spend more on non-Social Security programs, GtNS , or




                                                  9
reduce non-Social Security taxes, Tt NS , while still allowing policymakers to report a smaller

unified deficit (e.g., Buchanan, 1990, argues that this outcome is likely).

           Policymakers have gotten away with the extra spending because the general population

doesn’t realize that unified surpluses include off-budget, Social Security surpluses. As

Brookings Institution scholar Barry Bosworth (1996, p. 104) put it:

                   Most Americans are normally very surprised to learn that the surplus is being
           used to finance other programs, and that in most public discussions the budget deficit is
           defined to include the finances of social security.


           The issue of whether the trust fund increased national saving or increased non-social

security spending was also the focus of a debate more than a decade ago. As noted earlier,

Senator Moynihan in 1990 even suggested reducing payroll taxes in order to basically eliminate

the trust fund. Like many social activists, he was concerned about the regressive nature of

payroll taxes that he felt were simply being used as a substitute for more progressive taxation:

                 We cannot continue to use regressive payroll taxes to finance general government
           expenses. That is not acceptable.6


Getting rid of the trust fund, he thought, would create an impetus for serious reform and remove

what he believed were claims to the trust fund that were not backed by real increases in saving.

           Indeed, since personal accounts were viewed as politically untenable during the 1990s,

many leading liberals were quite open about their distrust of the government’s ability to save

trust fund assets. In 1990, Congressman Richard Gephardt, for example, stated that:

                  [The government] should stop borrowing on workers retirement benefits …
           People should be secure in the knowledge that the system will be able to send out their
           monthly Social Security checks. If the practice of borrowing against Social Security
           monies continues, that security is threatened.7

6
    Quoted by Pat Wechsler, “Will Social Security be there for you?” Newsday, Jan., 14, 1990: 79.
7
    “Senate begins debating $1.1 trillion fiscal 1990 budget.” UPI, May 2, 1989.


                                                         10
               What Democrats want to do is we want to stop the stealing of [trust] funds to
        mask the deficit.8


In 1996, Senator Tom Daschle (D-SD) remarked:

                Right now we are using Social Security trust funds to pay for other spending in
        the federal budget, and that to me is unacceptable. That isn't what we should be doing.
        That money should be held in trust. … No, there is no such fund per se.9


        Under this view, therefore, Social Security surpluses did not generate a smaller level of

debt held by the public, and so there is little additional debt capacity to credit to Social Security.

Therefore, Social Security should not automatically be off the table in discussing the fiscal

shortfalls starting in 2018. This view was that taken in the Interim Report by the President’s

2001 Social Security Commission (2001, p. 9) (relying on the 2001 Trustees Report):10

                Bonds were deposited in the Trust Fund over time, resulting in a Fund balance
        now exceeding $1 trillion. The problem is that when Social Security begins running cash
        deficits in 2016 and must begin redeeming the Fund’s bonds, the nation will face the
        same difficult choices as if there had been no Trust Fund all … This situation arose
        because past payroll taxes were not truly saved.


        Members of the Clinton Administration seemed to tacitly agree with this view. In 1999,

the Clinton Administration proposed a Social Security “lock box” in which Social Security

surpluses would, in theory, no longer be used to finance on-budget spending. In their plan, the

Social Security trust fund would receive an additional “credit” for the saved surpluses. Social

Security experts across the political spectrum criticized the Clinton proposal as an act of “double

counting.” But members of the Clinton Administration argued that their additional credit was a



8
  “GOP is 'messing around' with Social Security tax cut.” The Washington Times, February 2, 1990: A4
9
  Interviewed by Robert Novak, “There really is no SS trust fund,” The State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL),
December 5, 1996: 6.
10
   To the extent that future Social Security surpluses are also spent, one could argue that Social Security begins
imposing fiscal problems when future Social Security surpluses reach their peak, prior to 2018. However, this view
is fairly extreme since the Social Security surpluses remain positive until 2018, even if smaller in size.


                                                        11
logical way of giving Social Security credit for “saving” surpluses relative to a baseline policy in

which the money would have been spent on larger values of GtNS . In other words, the lock-box

mechanism would have been redundant under the view that trust fund surpluses increased

national saving. (To be sure, to some policymakers, this proposal no doubt sounded like

rewarding a thief for not stealing anymore.) The Clinton proposal, though, was naïve in that it

did not offer a clear lock-box mechanism to ensure new saving. But it is noteworthy that the

Clinton Administration seemed to agree that trust fund surpluses were not being saved.



                                    V. Ownership Arguments

       The arguments presented in the previous section hinge on whether Social Security

surpluses reduced the debt held by the public. In contrast, the ownership argument presented in

this section does not. It contends that the trust fund is the property of Social Security

beneficiaries regardless of whether Social Security surpluses were saved. The counterargument

is that a property claim does not exist; hence, generational equity is all that matters.



View: The Trust Fund is Valuable

       According to this perspective, trust fund surpluses should be credited to Social Security

even if the government spent the surpluses elsewhere. In equation (1), this spending would take

the form of non-Social Security spending, GtNS , becoming larger with larger payroll taxes Tt S .

       This perspective contends that the government has to come up with resources to pay off

the Social Security trust fund in the same way it would have to come up with the resources to

pay off any private pension. The government would have to pay back a private pension




                                                  12
regardless of what the government did with the proceeds. So, according to this view, why should

Social Security be treated differently? As Aaron (1999) has stated it,

                 Social Security holds real reserves that can be sold to meet benefit obligations …
       [I]t is illogical to deny the reality of those assets because fiscal policy outside Social
       Security was mismanaged for most of the last twenty years.

Hence, assets in the trust fund are intended to finance Social Security benefits, and so there is no

particular reason why Social Security policy variables should be on the negotiation table except

to the extent that the trust fund itself is projected to become exhausted. In particular, the cost-

income crossover date itself is immaterial when deciding Social Security policy.



View: The Trust Fund isn’t Valuable

       A contrarian view, though, is that, even if some or all of the trust fund surpluses were

saved (i.e., on-budget surpluses did not decline in response), what matters for judging pay-as-

you-go fiscal programs is their impact on generational equity. Since, for a given level of debt

held by the public, the trust fund is not a net asset to the government as a whole (Section III), its

value is irrelevant for determining generational incidence. So, even if all previous surpluses

were saved, those surpluses maybe did not do enough to relieve the generational burden being

placed on future generations under reasonable demographic and economic projections. A “fair”

allocation, therefore, might involve changing Social Security taxes or benefits even before the

trust fund is exhausted. This view is implicit in the Generational Accounting literature.



The Heat Source?

       Notice that these two arguments are statements about property. The first perspective

essentially argues that a “promise made is a promise kept.” Specifically, if the government




                                                 13
convinced one generation to accept an increase in payroll taxes in order to finance their future

Social Security benefits, the government should make good on its promise, regardless of what

the government did with the money.

       The second perspective, in sharp contrast, argues that the “government” is really just a

conduit for future generations, and future generations never agreed to a mostly pay-as-you-go

policy that extracts resources from them, i.e., there is no property right. While previous

generations could have made the situation even worse for future generations by not saving trust

fund surpluses, the baseline policy itself might still be bad under reasonable projections. Fiscal

policy, therefore, must be judged by what is fair, quite independently of trust fund accounting.

       The more philosophical nature of these property-based arguments does not mean that

they are less important than the storage-based arguments. But it is likely that the philosophical

nature of these arguments underlie some of the frustration in the trust fund debate.

       Indeed, even those who appear to cling to the particular storage-based argument, by

claiming that the trust fund has reduced the amount of debt held by the public, seem to also be

influenced by the belief that not counting the trust fund assets as “real” would allow the

government to renege on past promises. After all, one would hardly refer to the scientific claim

that off-budget surpluses have hidden larger on-budget expenditures as “sheer, mean-spirited

nonsense,” to quote Paul Krugman (referenced earlier). The tone of these types of remarks

suggests that the Social Security trust fund debate is about more than just testable hypotheses.



        VI. Did Past Social Security Surpluses Reduce the Debt Held by the Public?

       It has sometimes been argued that one could never know what would have happened if

there was no trust fund since that counterfactual world is unobservable. But that argument is




                                                14
incorrect. To be sure, we will never know what the world would have looked like if, e.g., the

Microsoft Windows operating system were an open platform instead of closed. But, in our case,

the annual variation in the on-budget and off-budget surpluses allows us to test whether Social

Security surpluses have been used to mask smaller on-budget surpluses.



Empirical Test

         Denote the “modified primary” on-budget surplus shown in equation (1) as,

(4)                                 StON ≡ StON + rTF
                                                    t t = Tt
                                                             NS
                                                                − GtNS           .

In particular, T NS includes interest payments except to the off-budget accounts. Similarly,

denote the “primary” off-budget surplus as

(5)                                 StOFF ≡ StOFF − rTF
                                                      t t = Tt − Bt .
                                                              S




         In this section, we estimate the following linear regression equation:

(6)                                 StON = α + β ⋅ StOFF + Θt + εt

α is the intercept term, Θt is a vector of control variables, and εt is the random error.11

         If past Social Security surpluses were used to reduce the debt held by the public in the

past, we would expect there to be no relationship between StON and StOFF , i.e., for β = 0 . In this

case, every dollar of off-budget surplus was used to reduce the level of debt held by the public by

one dollar, increasing the government’s borrowing capacity. If, however, larger off-budget

surpluses were historically used to pay for larger non-Social Security spending or non-Social

Security tax cuts, we would expect StON and StOFF to move in opposite directions, i.e., for β < 0 .



11
   The regression analysis focuses on the “modified primary” surpluses in order to be consistent with theory in the
presence of a trust fund with interest income. However, the empirical results reported herein are unchanged if
attention is instead restricted to the standard off-budget and on-budget surplus definitions.


                                                         15
For example, if β = −1 then every dollar of Social Security surplus was used to hide one less

dollar of one-budget surplus; the debt held by the public was not reduced. As shown later in the

paper, the inequality β < −1 is also theoretically possible, i.e., off-budget surpluses were more

than spent on the on-budget accounts, producing a larger level of debt held by the public.



Estimation Issues

       To be sure, the estimates herein are based on a limited time series. For this reason, the

results herein should be interpreted with some caution. However, the ability to establish

causality, which typically represents one of the major issues confronting time series evidence, is

less important for our purpose. For example, suppose that β < 0 is estimated. This finding

could be interpreted in two different ways. It could imply that policymakers increased off-

budget surpluses in response to smaller (often negative) on-budget surpluses. But it could mean

that policymakers reduced on-budget surpluses in response to larger off-budget surpluses. The

exact interpretation isn’t clear. Yet, for our purposes, it is also not very relevant. In both cases,

we are testing whether policymakers hide smaller on-budget surpluses with off-budget surpluses.

       The potential for omitted variable bias, though, is an important concern. In particular, it

is possible that some common factor could cause on-budget and off-budget surpluses to either

move together or in opposite directions even though policymakers did not purposely use off-

budget surpluses to mask smaller (possibly negative) on-budget surpluses. For example, the

presence of a negative on-budget surplus is not itself an indication that off-budget surpluses are

being spent if policymakers would have still chosen a negative on-budget surplus if the off-

budget surpluses did not exist; such a situation might arise during a recession. Similarly, the

presence of a positive on-budget surplus is not itself an indication that off-budget surpluses are



                                                  16
saved; the on-budget surplus could have been even higher without the off-budget surplus. Hence,

we must attempt to control for these other potential determinants with the control variables, Θt .

       However, while the potential for omitted variable bias is an important issue, the estimated

value of β is, if anything, likely to be biased upward for two reasons. First, external

macroeconomic shocks are likely to produce a positive relationship between StON and StOFF . For

example, as the economy expands, the Social Security and non-Social Security tax bases more or

less expand together; moreover, non-Social Security transfer payments will decrease. As a

result, both surpluses will tend to increase in response to this common macroeconomic shock,

potentially producing the appearance of β > 0. Similarly, after a negative economic shock, both

surpluses will tend to decline together, again producing the appearance of β > 0. While we can

attempt to control for macroeconomic shocks, any control will not work perfectly; some positive

bias, therefore, will likely remain. Second, changes over time in general attitudes toward

government spending and taxes can also produce an upward bias in the value of β . While time

variables can be used to try to control for changes in attitudes over time, any control will not be

perfect, and so some positive bias presumably remains.

       In sum, the appearance of a negative value for β , which is what we actually find below,

is much more suggestive than a zero or positive value. In particular, if we estimate a zero or

positive value for β , it could simply mean that our analysis has failed to properly control for

macroeconomic shocks and changes in general attitudes over time. A negative value for β ,

however, is much more difficult to explain without reference to purposeful political choices.




                                                 17
OLS Estimation

         Although the trust fund was almost depleted by the early 1980s, Social Security surpluses

have been a non-trivial share of the government’s total surplus since the late 1940s.12 The data,

therefore, begins in 1949 and ends in the most recent year, 2002. It is measured on an annual

basis. All relevant variables are converted to 1996 dollars using the GDP chain-weighted

deflator. But, due to economic growth, variables closer to 2002 are still much larger than those

closer to 1949. Hence, to control for heteroskedasticity and to insure roughly equal weighting,

all variables, except for the time indices, are divided by the relevant year’s real potential GDP as

constructed by CBO (2003b).13 (The qualitative results were unaffected by this normalization.)

The hypothesis that the StON series contains a unit root can be rejected at the 5% significance

level by the augmented Dickey-Fuller test. We, therefore, focus on “traditional” standard errors.

         Table 3 presents OLS regression results corresponding to equation (6) for several

different sets of control variables. Robust (Huber/White/sandwich estimators) of the standard

errors are shown in parentheses.14 In Specification 1 in Table 3, there are no macroeconomic or

time control variables. In particular, the on-budget surplus is simply regressed on the off-budget

surplus and an intercept term. Notice that β = 0.524 , although it is not statistically significant

from zero at the 5 percent error level. In other words, the on-budget and off-budget surpluses

generally tend to move together when we have not controlled for any type of macroeconomic

shocks or for changes in general attitudes toward government spending and taxes over time.


12
   A previous version of this paper focused on the time period since 1979, which produces similar results. I am
grateful to Peter Orszag for pointing out the importance of the on- and off-budget surpluses before this date.
13
   The results were also robust to normalizing by actual GDP. However, theoretically, dividing by actual GDP
presents potential endogeneity problems whereas potential GDP provides a more exogenous normalization. I am
grateful to Alan Auerbach for suggesting this normalization to me.
14
   The shown robust standard errors are very similar to the non-robust; consistently, the White’s test reveals that the
non-robust errors are not heteroskedastic. The null hypothesis of no serial correlation also cannot be rejected using
the Durbin-Watson test, the Breush-Godfrey LM test (with three lags), or Durbin’s alternative test.


                                                          18
Although we can have very little confidence in this relationship (since it is not statistically

significant), this estimate shows that the relationship between on-budget and off-budget

surpluses is certainly not biased downward before adding the control variables.

       Specifications 2 through 4 add additional control variables: actual GDP; time; time

squared; and, the wages and salary base. The time variables help control for changes in attitude

over time. The wage and salary base is also useful because Social Security revenue is sensitive

to fluctuations in this base while on-budget revenue also depends on capital income that is more

closely reflected in GDP. Notice that as more control variables are added, the value of β turns

negative and becomes statistically significant from zero at the 2 percent error level. With all of

the control variables in place (Specification 4), the value of β is estimated as -2.755. In words, a

one-dollar increase in off-budget surpluses is correlated with a roughly $2.76 decrease in on-

budget surpluses -- and, hence, a $1.76 decrease in the unified surplus.

       Hence, off-budget Social Security surpluses not only appear to have failed to decrease the

debt held by the public, each dollar of Social Security surplus appears to have actually increased

the debt held by the public in the past by $1.76. At first glance, this dramatic overspending of

Social Security surpluses seems entirely implausible. However, the next section presents a

simple game theory model that is consistent with this result.

       The signs of the other variables are reasonable in Specification 4. A larger “GDP” and

“Wages and Salaries” increase the on-budget surplus. (These two variables, however, are highly

collinear and, therefore, only jointly significant.) The negative linear time trend suggests that

politicians became more comfortable with declining surpluses over a large part of the sample

(that includes the 1980s and 1990s) but at a rate that was decreasing in magnitude (the positive

non-linear time trend). The results herein are fairly robust to the selected time period. In



                                                 19
particular, β = -2.446 (significant at 2%) even after dropping the Reagan years, 1981 – 1988.15

         The fact that the value of β is not significantly different from zero without the control

variables and only becomes highly significantly and negative once the control variables are

added is fairly telling. This set of facts makes it particularly hard to claim that on-budget and

off-budget surpluses just happened by chance to move in opposite directions over time. The

results herein could only be forcefully challenged if additional control variables caused the

estimated value of β to once again become insignificant. I found that other potential control

variables (in particular, political variables including the president’s party and whether Congress

and the president were of the same political party) had little effect on the results.



Alternative Estimation Strategies

         Table 4 shows the results of Specification 4 (with all of the control variables) using

quantile (median) regressions. Relative to OLS, median regressions are less sensitive to outliers.

The point estimate for β is now -3.533 and is statistically significant from zero at the 2 percent

error level. However, this number is not statistically significantly different from the point

estimate, -2.755, from the OLS analysis above. Hence, we cannot conclude with much

confidence that reducing the impact of outliers actually strengthens the results relative to before.

         Although there is little evidence of either heteroskedasticity or serial correlation in the

errors (see the footnote above), Table 4 also shows the results corresponding to maximum

likelihood estimation of a model in which the error term, εt , can take a General Autoregressive

(with 2 lags) Conditional Heteroskedastic (with 3 moving average terms) form. The results of


15
  A previous draft of this paper used a shorter time series and less sophisticated estimation techniques. Bosworth
and Burtless (2003) argue that the results in that draft are not robust to limiting the sample to years 1983 – 2002.
But their estimates don’t incorporate as many controls. The results herein hold even over this short period.


                                                          20
the GARCH(2,3) specification are almost identical to the OLS estimates. These results were

robust to additional lags and additional MA terms.



Johnson’s Commission on Budget Concepts

       When President Johnson’s Commission on Budget Concepts released its report in 1967, it

argued for drawing the primary focus of the nation’s budget on the unified surplus measure. As

President Clinton’s 2000 Budget States, “the principle of a ‘unified,’ all-inclusive budget was

established by President Johnson’s Commission on Budget Concepts largely to forestall a trend

toward moving favored programs off-budget – which had been done explicitly to shield those

programs from scrutiny and funding discipline.” (Analytical Perspectives, p. 21). The

Commission’s recommendations were first implemented in Fiscal Year 1969, corresponding

approximately to calendar year 1970 herein. One of the potential problems with the move to a

unified measure, however, is that the public and policymakers might have failed to distinguish

between its components, allowing Social Security surpluses to finance other fiscal priorities.

       Tables 5 and 6 investigate the potential importance of the adoption of the unified budget

measure. Table 5, in particular, reports the results from all three estimation strategies when the

data is restricted to the 1970 – 2002 period. This Table shows that the estimated value for β is

negative, statistically significant from zero, and similar in magnitude relative to the entire 1949 -

2002 period shown in the earlier Tables. Table 6 shows the results corresponding to the period

1949 – 1969. Now the estimated value for β , while still negative, is not significant from zero

even at a high error level. Moreover, it is smaller in magnitude for the OLS and median

regressions than for the whole sample; for the GARCH regression, the point estimate is around

zero. These results suggest that the switch to the unified measure in 1970 might have introduced



                                                 21
a new era in which Social Security surpluses were used to mask larger amounts of non-Social

Security spending and tax cuts. Prior to 1970, there appears to be little evidence of such activity.

       The last row of Table 6 presents more rigorous evidence of a structural break between the

1949 – 1969 and 1970 – 2002 time periods for all three estimation strategies. For each strategy,

a Wald statistic is constructed corresponding to a test of equal parameter values between the two

periods. The last row in Table 6 shows that the null hypothesis of equal parameters is rejected at

the 0.4% significance level for the robust OLS model; it is rejected at the 1.3% significance level

for the median regression; and, at the 0.03% level for the more robust GARCH model.16



                    VII. A Simple Model of “Excessive Spending” ( β < −1 )

       The remainder of this section presents a very simple “Divide the (cheap) dollar” game

that explains how off-budget surpluses could be excessively spent in the on-budget account, that

is, β < −1 .   The model relies on voter’s ignorance: voters do not realize that government’s

reported surplus measure also includes “off budget” Social Security surpluses. In other words,

voters observe the size of the Social Security trust fund but they do not realize that truly saving

the Social Security surpluses also requires that the level of debt held by the public is reduced

dollar for dollar. It is not too surprising that voters might not understand this “double counting”

aspect of the federal government’s budget. Commenting on this particular complexity, Shoven

(2001, p. 11) notes, “Compared with the set of U.S. government budget documents issued every

April, War and Peace is a short story. It also is much easier to follow.”

       Social Security surpluses, therefore, represent a potential “internal” source of government

spending that is cheaper politically for politicians to spend relative to “external” sources of




                                                 22
financing such as higher tax rates. Indeed, although the exact mechanisms differ, asymmetric

information also underlies most principal-agent models in the corporate finance literature on the

relative costs of internal versus external financing. In those models, the Modigliani-Miller

theorem fails, as shareholders fail to accurately see through the corporate veil. In the model

herein, though, political competition between two parties (i.e., the agents) enhances the cost of

the principals’ (i.e., voters’) ignorance: competition entices agents to chase cheap internal

dollars, producing excessive spending that is driven by off-equilibrium payoffs.



Split the Dollar Game

         To be specific, consider two political parties, D and R, with different ideological goals,

maybe reflecting their different constituencies. Party D wants to increase government spending

while Party R wants to decrease tax rates. Given the current level of tax rates and government

spending, swing (and say decisive) voters are fairly indifferent to either policy change but they

do care about decreasing the government’s reported surplus. These voters, therefore, “blame”

(or “credit”) Party D or R for a reduction (or increase) in the reported surplus in proportion to the

amount of the perceived change in the surplus caused by that party. This “blame” (or “credit”),

therefore, places some restraint on the ideological desires of each Party.



Case 1: No Trust Fund

         Consider first the case in which there is no trust fund and, hence, no source of cheap

internal off-budget surplus funds. Higher amounts of government spending or a reduction in



16
   It is well known that the probability of a type I error (incorrectly rejecting the null hypothesis) under this Wald
statistic exceeds the underlying critical level. Still, the shown critical levels are much smaller than the expansions
sometimes done to the critical levels.


                                                          23
taxes, therefore, require using costly external dollars or to report a smaller surplus. Since either

financing option is observable to voters, suppose that the government reports a higher surplus.

       Table 7a shows the payoffs to a simple normal form coordination game corresponding to

$1 tax expenditure at the margin. Purely for exposition purposes, we assume a linear payoff

structure and so we restrict the strategy space of each Party. Specifically, Party D can either “do

nothing” or attempt to “grab $1” for its own purposes, namely, increasing government spending.

Similarly, Party R can either “do nothing” or attempt to “grab $1” for its own purposes, namely

decreasing taxes.17 In each case, however, the Party’s actions are also penalized according to the

negative dollar impact that they are perceived to make on the reported surplus.

       Consider first Cell 4 in Table 7a. Both parties take no fiscal policy action, producing no

change in their net scores. Now consider Cell 3 in which Party D grabs $1 by increasing

government spending while Party R does nothing. While Party D gets $1, it is also fully blamed

for decreasing the reported surplus by $1, producing a net score of $0. Cell 2 shows the similar

situation for Party R in which they grab $1 in the form of a tax cut but also receives the full

blame for reducing the surplus, producing a net score of $0. In Cell 1, both parties grab $1 and

so the unified surplus now decreases by $2. In this case, both parties share equal blame, equal to

$1 each, and so the net scores to both Parties is $0. In sum, the Parties are indifferent between

the different strategies at the margin since each Party bears the full cost of its impact on the

unified surplus. So we can think of Table 7A as describing the initial equilibrium.




                                                 24
Case 2: The Presence of a Trust Fund

        Now let’s introduce a “cheap” $1 of Social Security surplus into this economy and see

how Parties R and D compete for spending it. The payoffs to different strategies are shown in

Table 7b, which, as we will now show, has a unique Nash equilibrium (Cell 1).

        Let’s first consider the off-equilibrium strategies starting with Cell 4 where the $1 Social

Security surplus is devoted to increasing the reported surplus. By assumption, the public does

not know that the reported surplus includes the new $1 Social Security surplus and so we assume

that they credit the $1 increase in the reported surplus to some other event outside of either

Party’s control such as a “revenue surprise” like in the late 1990s in the United States. Both

parties are credited $0.50 for saving the money.

        But alas Cell 4 will not be chosen. The reason is that both Parties would want to grab the

$1 Social Security surplus for their own use. In particular, devoting the extra $1 Social Security

surplus to either an increase in government spending or a decrease in taxes produces the same

unified surplus as before the “cheap” extra dollar arrived. Since the public does not realize that

the reported surplus includes Social Security surpluses, it would not realize that the Social

Security surplus has been spent. So both Parties have the incentive to try to grab the dollar. In

particular, Party R has the incentive to reduce taxes (Cell 2) while Party D has the incentive to

increase government spending (Cell 3). But neither Cells 2 nor 3 can be equilibriums: the Party

that does not grab a dollar in either of these Cells has the incentive to grab.

        Cell 1, therefore, emerges as the unique Nash equilibrium. At Cell 1, neither Party has an

incentive to change their strategy. At Cell 1, the reported unified surplus is $1 lower than it was

before the arrival of the $1 Social Security surplus. So, each Party is blamed $0.50 for

17
  The analysis herein simply focuses on the incentive facing each Party. A more complete model with logrolling or
other mechanisms is needed to show how these incentives are implemented into law. The analysis herein ignores


                                                       25
increasing the government’s reported surplus by $1, which reduces their respective net scores to

$0.50. But notice that the $1 Social Security is more-than-fully spent in equilibrium, producing

an actual reduction in the unified surplus. In other words, the $1 of Social Security surplus has

not only failed to reduce the debt held by the public, it actually increased this debt by $1.

         In terms of our earlier regression formulation, this political competition would produce a

value of β = −2 . However, with a larger strategy space (i.e., Parties can attempt to grab more

than $1), it is quite straightforward to show that β < −2 is also possible. Instead of restricting the

strategy space, an alternative but more complicated model would produce a unique equilibrium

with concave payoff functions. But this more complicated setting is not needed for our purposes.

         The above analysis quite critically assumes that voters blame each Party for the reduction

in the reported surplus according to the perceived amount grabbed by each Party. However, if

voters thought hard about the issue, they might more rationally blame each Party according to the

actual number of dollars grabbed by each Party regardless of the change in the reported surplus.

In this case, the incentive for each Party to attempt to grab Social Security surplus dollars would

be undermined. In reality, however, it is more likely that most voters simply respond to changes

in the reported surplus and cast their blame (or credit) accordingly. Indeed, politicians in the past

have routinely made an effort to divorce their fiscal policies from their true costs by attempting

to convince voters that the changes in taxes or spending could even pay for themselves, either in

full or in part, as part of “supply side economics” or the “reinvention of government.” In face of

these complexities, it is not surprisingly, therefore, that voters might look at some simple

summary metrics when judging fiscal policy. It is even less surprising that politicians might

exploit the voters’ ignorance in order to advance various fiscal objectives.



this complication and assumes that Parties can choose their preferred strategy within the stated strategy space.


                                                          26
                                         VIII. Conclusions

       This paper provides a unified conceptual framework for thinking rigorously about the

assets accumulated in the Social Security trust fund. Multiple perspectives of the trust fund are

identified and are summarized under two categories: (I) storage technology arguments and (II)

ownership arguments. Only the storage technology argument can be empirically tested. We find

that there is no empirical evidence supporting the claim that trust fund assets have reduced the

level of debt held by the public. In fact, the evidence suggests just the opposite: trust fund assets

may have actually increased the level of debt. To be sure, this empirical evidence is based on a

limited annual time series (1949 – 2002); hence, the results should be interpreted with caution.

But the empirical tests are, if anything, biased toward finding a reduction in the level of debt held

by the public, and not the increase that we find. Still, these empirical results would do little to

convince those observers who believe that the trust fund establishes irrevocable property rights

regardless of the fiscal behavior by the rest of the government. Hence, the heated debate over

the meaning of the trust fund may not be resolved by empirical testing alone.

       Nonetheless, going forward, the results herein suggest that a newer mechanism might be

needed in order to prevent Social Security surpluses from being spent elsewhere. In 1999, the

Clinton Administration proposed the creation of a “lock box” whose purpose was to provide a

better storage technology. The “lock box” was defined as “broken” if the on-budget surpluses

ever turned negative. However, this definition was somewhat naïve and, for example, could

even rule out automatic stabilizers and other countercyclical actions during recessions -- fiscal

policies that might have been undertaken even without the availability of Social Security

surpluses. Whether Social Security surpluses are spent or saved does not depend on whether the

on-budget surplus is negative or even positive. Instead, this determination depends on how the




                                                 27
on-budget surplus (positive or negative) changes in response to the presence of off-budget

surpluses. It is unlikely that a complicated budget rule that incorporated this feedback, as

captured in the regression analysis herein, could ever be implemented. Creating a more safe

storage technology, therefore, might require the adoption of personal accounts that augment the

current Social Security system (Mariger, 1999; Smetters, 1999, and Shoven, 2001).




                                                28
                                                    Figure 1
                               Social Security Income, Costs and Trust Fund




             $8,000


                                 Income
             $7,000
                                 Outgo
                                 Assets (EOY)

             $6,000



             $5,000
$ Billions




             $4,000



             $3,000



             $2,000



             $1,000



                $0
                 2002   2007        2012        2017      2022          2027   2032   2037




                                            - Tables and Figures: 1 -
                                             Table 1
                                       Points of Agreement


•   The Social Security trust fund currently holds over $1.3 trillion of bonds that are backed by
    the “full faith and credit” of the U.S. government.

•   2018 is the projected year in which Social Security benefits will exceed contributions; the
    trust fund is projected to be depleted in 2042.

•   For a given level of debt held by the public, the trust fund is not a net asset to the government
    as a whole.

•   For a given level of debt held by the public, 2018 is the latest date in which some fiscal
    action must be taken to address the demographic-driven problems facing Social Security.

•   The portfolio held by the trust fund would have little impact on the government’s spending
    and tax decisions under the accrual accounting methodology that the federal government
    currently uses for loans and loan guarantees. However, if standard cash flow accounting
    were used then the purchases of non-government securities would reduce the reported surplus
    and, therefore, could influence government spending and tax policies.




                                     - Tables and Figures: 2 -
                                                     Table 2
                                       Characterization of the Disagreement


             The Storage Technology View                                       The Ownership View

               The Trust Fund is Valuable                                   The Trust Fund is Valuable

•   Trust fund surpluses decreased the debt held by the      •   Whether trust fund surpluses decreased the debt
    public, thereby increasing the government’s debt             held by the public is irrelevant.
    capacity.
                                                             •   Trust fund surpluses should be mentally credited
•   This increase in debt capacity should be “mentally           to Social Security even if the government spent
    credited” as assets to Social Security and so                the trust fund surpluses. Why should Social
    shortfalls between 2018 and 2042 are a general-              Security be held liable for the actions of the rest
    revenue problem.                                             of the government? A promise made is a promise
                                                                 kept.

             The Trust fund isn’t Valuable                                 The Trust fund isn’t Valuable

•   Including “off budget” surpluses in the                  •   Whether trust fund surpluses decreased the debt
    government’s reported surplus measure allowed the            held by the public is irrelevant.
    government to run a smaller on-budget surplus
    (maybe negative). Hence, there is no (or little)         •   The trust fund is not a net asset to the government
    additional debt capacity to credit to Social Security.       as a whole (Table 1) and so it does not impact
                                                                 generational equity. The “government” is just a
•   Social Security, therefore, should not be off the            conduit for future generations, which did not
    table in discussing fiscal shortfalls starting in 2018       promise anything. Fiscal policies must be judged
    since Social Security is the primary cause of those          on the basis of a fair resource allocation between
    shortfalls.                                                  generations.




                                               - Tables and Figures: 3 -
                                                Table 3
                  Least Squares Regression with (Robust) Standard Errors: 1949 - 2002
                   (Dependent Variable: Modified Primary On-Budget Surplus, StON )

   Independent                                                     Specification
     Variable                     1                         2                           3            4
      S   OFF                   0.524                    -0.643                     -2.292**     -2.755**
          t
                               (0.736)                  (0.688)                     (0.877)      (0.649)
      GDPt                                              0.449**                     0.431**       0.006
                                                        (0.094)                     (0.084)      (0.119)
     Year (t)                                                                      -0.0036**    -0.0043**
                                                                                   (0.0008)     (0.00074)
    Year2 (t 2)                                                                    0.000047**   0.000066**
                                                                                   (0.000012)   (0.000011)
Wages and Salaries                                                                               0.582**
                                                                                                 (0.128)
    Intercept                 -0.019**                  -0.458**                    -0.377**     -0.256**
      Term                    (0.002)                   (0.093)                     (0.078)      (0.077)

        R2                      0.01                     0.27                         0.54         0.69


     Notes: Robust Standard errors shown in parentheses
            Two asterisks (**) indicates significance at the 2% level




                                               - Tables and Figures: 4 -
                                Table 4
                Other Estimation Strategies: 1949 - 2002
    (Dependent Variable: Modified Primary On-Budget Surplus, StON )

                                                     Specification
      Independent                      Quantile
        Variable                  (Median) Regression                GARCH(2,3)
          S   OFF                       -3.533**                       -2.763**
              t
                                        (1.001)                        (0.786)
          GDPt                           0.115                          0.156
                                        (0.145)                        (0.087)
         Year (t)                       -0.005**                       -0.004**
                                       (0.0008)                       (0.0005)
        Year2 (t 2)                     0.00007**                     0.000063**
                                        (0.00001)                      (0.0000)
  Wages and Salaries                     0.662**                       0.473**
                                         (0.151)                       (0.082)
        Intercept                        -0.394**                      -0.350**
          Term                           (0.096)                       (0.069)


Notes: Standard errors shown in parentheses
       Two asterisks (**) indicates significance at the 2% level




                                - Tables and Figures: 5 -
                                            Table 5
                             All Estimation Strategies: 1970 - 2002
                (Dependent Variable: Modified Primary On-Budget Surplus, StON )

         Independent                                          Specification
           Variable                                          Quantile
                                  Robust OLS            (Median) Regression   GARCH(2,3)
            S   OFF                 -2.83**                   -3.733**          -2.542**
                t
                                     (0.73)                   (1.487)           (0.864)
            GDPt                      0.059                     0.013             0.196
                                    (0.162)                   (0.327)           (0.217)
           Year (t)                  -0.003                    -0.003            -0.006
                                    (0.004)                  (0.0065)          (0.0059)
          Year2 (t 2)                0.00005                   0.00006          0.00008
                                    (0.00004)                 (0.00006)        (0.00005)
   Wages and Salaries                0.737**                    0.854*           0.561
                                     (0.25)                    (0.429)          (0.353)
          Intercept                  -0.417**                  -0.449**         -0.393**
            Term                      (0.14)                   (0.211)          (0.166)


Notes:      Standard errors shown in parentheses
            One asterisk (*) indicates significance at the 5% level
            Two asterisks (**) indicates significance at the 2% level




                                          - Tables and Figures: 6 -
                                            Table 6
                             All Estimation Strategies: 1949 - 1969
                (Dependent Variable: Modified Primary On-Budget Surplus, StON )

                                                              Specification
         Independent                                          Quantile
           Variable                Robust OLS            (Median) Regression             GARCH(2,3)
            S   OFF                   -0.476                    -1.986                      0.217
                t
                                     (1.413)                   (2.116)                     (3.655)
            GDPt                      0.208                     0.232                       0.187
                                     (0.157)                   (0.187)                     (0.612)
           Year (t)                   0.001                    0.0002                       0.003
                                     (0.003)                   (0.005)                     (0.007)
          Year2 (t 2)                 -0.00003                  -0.00002                   -0.00008
                                     (0.00009)                  (0.0001)                   (0.0001)
   Wages and Salaries                  -0.161                     -0.227                     -0.167
                                      (0.233)                    (0.263)                    (0.588)
          Intercept                    -0.133                     -0.111                     -0.131
            Term                      (0.114)                    (0.151)                    (0.354)
  1970 Structural Break
   (Prob > Wald Stat.)                0.004**                    0.013**                    0.0003**


Notes:      Standard errors shown in parentheses
            Two asterisks (**) indicates significance at the 2% level

            “1970 Structural Break” indicates the test for a structural break between the periods 1949 – 1969 and
            1970 – 2002. “Prob > Wald Stat.” indicates the significance level of the rejection of the null
            hypothesis of identical parameters between the two periods. For the GARCH model, “Wages and
            Salaries” during both time periods were excluded from the test in order to avoid a flat log likelihood
            function.




                                          - Tables and Figures: 7 -
                                  Table 7a
                             Case 1: No Trust Fund
                   The “Divide the Extra (Costly) Dollar” Game



   R, D                            Payoffs to Party D

                         1                                       2

          Tax ↓ ,                             Tax ↓ ,
          Spending ↑ :   +1.0, +1.0           Spending ↑ :   +1.0,      0.0

Payoffs   Surplus ∆:    -1.0, -1.0            Surplus ∆:    -1.0, 0.0
To        ------------------------            ------------------------
Party R   Net effect:   +0.0, +0.0            Net effect:   +0.0, 0.0


                         3                                       4

          Tax ↓ ,                             Tax ↓ ,
          Spending ↑ :    0.0, +1.0           Spending ↑ :       0.0,   0.0

          Surplus ∆:     0.0, -1.0            Surplus ∆:    +0.0, +0.0
          ------------------------            ------------------------
          Net effect:    0.0, +0.0            Net effect:   +0.0, +0.0




                             - Tables and Figures: 8 -
                                    Table 7b
                     Case 2: The Presence of the Trust Fund
                   The “Divide the Extra (Cheap) Dollar” Game



   R, D                            Payoffs to Party D

                         1                                      2

          Tax ↓ ,                             Tax ↓ ,
          Spending ↑ :   +1.0, +1.0           Spending ↑ :   +1.0,     0.0

Payoffs   Surplus ∆:    -0.5, -0.5            Surplus ∆:     0.0, 0.0
To        ------------------------            ------------------------
Party R   Net effect:   +0.5, +0.5            Net effect:   +1.0, 0.0


                         3                                      4

          Tax ↓ ,                             Tax ↓ ,
          Spending ↑ :    0.0, +1.0           Spending ↑ :      0.0,   0.0

          Surplus ∆      0.0, 0.0             Surplus ∆:    +0.5, +0.5
          ------------------------            ------------------------
          Net effect:    0.0, +1.0            Net effect:   +0.5, +0.5




                             - Tables and Figures: 9 -
                                          References

Aaron, Henry J., Alan S. Blinder, Alicia H. Munnell and Peter R. Orszag, “Perspectives on the
Draft Interim Report of the President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security.” Center on
Budget and Policy Priorities and The Century Foundation (Washington, DC), July 23, 2001: 11,
13.

Aaron, Henry. “Testimony of Henry J. Aaron before the Senate Committee on the Budget,”
January 19, 1999.

Bosworth, Barry. "Fund Accumulation: How Much? How Managed?" in Social Security: What
Role for the Future. Peter Diamond, David Lindeman and Howard Young, eds. Distributed by
the Brookings Institution for the National Academy of Social Insurance, 1996: 104.

Bosworth, Barry and Gary Burtless. “Pension Reform and Saving.” Mimeo, The Brookings
Institution, 2003.

Buchanan, James. “The Budgetary Politics of Social Security,” in Social Security’s Looming
Surpluses: Prospects & Implications, Carolyn Weaver, Editor, (Lanham, MD: University Press
of America, 1990).

Congressional Budget Office. “Evaluating and Accounting for Federal Investment in Corporate
Stocks and Other Private Securities.” CBO Paper, January, 2003a.

Congressional Budget Office. “Data Underlying Table 2-5: ‘Key Assumptions in CBO's
Projection of Potential Output’ (By calendar year), The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal
Years 2004-2013,” January, 2003b. Available at www.cbo.gov.

Diamond, Peter. “Social Security Trust Funds–Presentation at the AEA Session: In Memoriam:
Bob Eisner.” MIT Dept of Economics, 2000.

Diamond, Peter. “Social Security, the Government Budget and National Savings.” MIT Dept of
Economics, 2003.

Elmendorf, Douglas and Jeffrey Liebman. “Social Security Reform and National Saving in an
Era of Budget Surpluses.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 2000: 1- 71,

Krugram, Paul. “2016 and All That.” New York Times, July 22, 2001: 13.

Mariger, Randall. “Social Security Privatization: What are the Issues?” National Tax Journal,
December 1999, 52 (4): 783-802.

Munnell, Alicia H. and R. Kent Weaver, “Social Security’s false Alarm.” The Christian Science
Monitor. July 19, 2001: 11.




                                        - References: 1 -
O’Neill, June. “The Trust Fund, The Surplus and The Real Social Security Problem.” Social
Security Privatization Paper #26. Cato Institute: Washington, DC, 2002.

Ricardo, David. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3rd Edition, reprinted in P.
Sraffa, ed., The Works of David Ricardo, v. I, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Report of the President's Commission on Budget Concepts (Washington: October 1969)

Schieber, Sylvester and John Shoven. The Real Deal: The History and Future of Social Security.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1999.

Schlesinger, Arthur Jr. The Coming of the New Deal. Houghton Mifflin Company, 1959: 308-
309.

Shoven, John. “Do We Have a Surplus?” On Investing, Fall, 2001: 11-12.

Shoven, John. “If the Trust Funds are Real, the Surplus Numbers are Wrong.” Paper Presented at
the SIEPR Conference on U.S. Budget Policy and Practice, Washington, DC, May, 8, 2003.

Sloan, Allan. “A Lot of Trust, But No Funds.” Newsweek, July 30, 2001.

Smetters, Kent. “Thinking about the Trust Fund.” In Prospects for Social Security Reform,
Eds., Olivia Mitchell, Robert Myers and Howard Young., eds., Pension Research Council and
the University of Pennsylvania Press: 1999.

The Commission to Strengthen Social Security, The Interim Report. Washington, DC, 2001: 9.

Unsigned, “The Old-Age Reserve Account – A Problem in Government Finance.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 51, 3 (May, 1937): 444 – 468.




                                        - References: 2 -
