                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                UNDERSTANDING TREND AND CYCLE IN ASSET VALUES:
                REEVALUATING THE WEALTH EFFECT ON CONSUMPTION

                                             Martin Lettau
                                           Sydney Ludvigson

                                          Working Paper 9848
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9848


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




Lettau acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation; Ludvigson acknowledges
financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the National Science Foundation. This material
is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0224944. We are
especially grateful to Serena Ng and Mark Watson for feedback on this project. We also thank John Y.
Campbell, Simon Potter, Richard Rogerson, James Stock and seminar participants at Boston College, Duke
University, Harvard University, the John F. Kennedy School at Harvard University, MIT, New York
University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Northwestern University, the University of California
Berkeley, the University of California Los Angeles, and the University of Chicago, the University of
Minnesota, and the Wharton School for many helpful comments. Nathan Barczi and Adam Kolasinski
provided excellent research assistance. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the authors, and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research

©2003 by Martin Lettau and Sydney Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.
Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset Values: Reevaluating the
Wealth Effect on Consumption
Martin Lettau and Sydney Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 9848
July 2003
JEL No. G12, E21, E44

                                            ABSTRACT

Both textbook economics and common sense teach us that the value of household wealth should be
related to consumer spending. At the same time, movements in asset values often seem disassociated
with important movements in consumer spending, as episodes such as the 1987 stock market crash
and the contraction in equity values that occurred in the fall of 1998 suggest. An important first step
in understanding the consumption-wealth linkage is determining how closely the two variables are
actually correlated, and whether there exist important movements in asset values that are not
associated with changes in consumption.
This paper provides evidence that a surprisingly small fraction of the variation in household net
worth is related to variation in aggregate consumer spending. We use empirical techniques that allow
us to quantify the relative importance of permanent and transitory innovations in the variation of
consumer spending and wealth and find that transitory shocks dominate post-war variation in wealth,
while permanent shocks dominate variation in aggregate consumption. Although transitory
innovations are found to have little influence on consumer spending, they have long-lasting effects
on wealth, exhibiting a half life of a little over two years. The findings suggest that most macro
models – which make no allowance for transitory variation in wealth that is orthogonal to
consumption – are likely to misstate both the timing and magnitude of the consumption-wealth
linkage.

Martin Lettau                                          Sydney Ludvigson
Stern School of Business                               Department of Economics
44 W. 4th St., Suite 9-190                             269 Mercer St.
New York, NY 10012                                     New York, NY 10003
and NBER                                               and NBER
mlettau@stern.nyu.edu                                  sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
1         Introduction
Both textbook economics and common sense teach us that the value of household wealth
should be related to consumer spending. Early academic work by Modigliani (1971) sug-
gested that a dollar increase in wealth (holding fixed labor income) leads to an increase in
consumer spending of about five cents. Since then, the so-called “wealth effectÔ on con-
sumption has increasingly crept into both mainstream and policy discussions of the macroe-
conomy.1 Today, it is commonly presumed that significant movements in wealth will be as-
sociated with movements in consumer spending, either contemporaneously or subsequently.
Quantitative estimates of roughly the magnitude reported by Modigliani are routinely cited
in leading macroeconomic textbooks,2 and are important features of many contemporary
macroeconomic models, including those still widely studied by both academic economists
and practitioners.3
        In this paper, we reevaluate the empirical foundation for such estimates of the consumption-
wealth link. Contrary to conventional wisdom, we find that a surprisingly small fraction of
the variation in household net worth is related to variation in aggregate consumer spending.
A variance-decomposition shows that the vast majority of quarterly fluctuations in asset
values are attributable to transitory innovations that display virtually no association with
consumption, contemporaneously, or at any future date. Such innovations have long-lasting
affects on wealth, however, exhibiting a half life of a little over two years.
        We begin by noting that a general household budget constraint, in which asset returns are
allowed to fluctuate in an arbitrary manner, implies that log consumption, ct , log asset wealth
(net worth), at , and log labor income, yt share a common trend (they are cointegrated). We
find evidence to support this hypothesis in US data.
        Our results can be understood intuitively by observing that, since consumption, wealth
and labor income are cointegrated, their annualized growth rates must be tied together
    1
     Recent examples in which the link between wealth and consumption was highlighted include the Federal
Reserve’s conference on “New Challenges for Monetary Policy,”Jackson Hole Wyoming, August 26-28, 1999,
and public remarks by Alan Greenspan, as in his February 17, 2000 testimony before the House Committee
on Banking and Financial Services.
   2
     For example, Abel and Bernanke (2001), Chapter 4, cite a four cent on the dollar figure, while Gordon
(1993), Chapter 17, says that the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth is between three and six
cents on the dollar. Poterba (2000) provides a non-technical discussion of the wealth effect, and simple
calculations of the amount by which a household might increase its consumption if it received a favorable
wealth shock. His benchmark calculations for a thirty-year planning horizon imply a change in consumption
of between 3.8 and 7.5 cents for each $1 increase in wealth.
   3
     Examples of such models include the Data Resources, Incorporated (DRI) model, the Washington Uni-
versity Macroeconomic Model (WUMM) model, and the new Federal Reserve (FRB/US) model.



                                                    1
in the very long run, and therefore so must their volatilities. Measured over short-horizons,
however, wealth growth is far more volatile than both consumption and labor income growth.
The short-run and long-run properties of these variables can only be reconciled if either, (i)
the volatility of consumption and/or labor income growth increases with the horizon over
which they are measured, or (ii) the volatility of wealth growth decreases with the horizon
over which it is measured. The second possibility implies that wealth is not a random walk,
but instead displays mean-reversion and adjusts over long horizons to match the smoothness
of consumption and labor income. Our evidence suggests that the second possibility better
describes US data than the first, signaling the existence of a significant transitory component
in wealth that is unrelated to consumer spending and labor income.
   This intuition can be formalized by employing the methodologies developed in King,
Plosser, Stock and Watson (1991), Gonzalo and Granger (1995) and Gonzalo and Ng (2001).
These studies show how innovations distinguished by their degree of persistence can be empir-
ically identified in cointegrated systems. We use the insights from these papers to empirically
identify the permanent and transitory elements–the “trendÔ and “cycleÔ–of household net
worth, and investigate how these elements are related to consumer spending. (The terms
“permanentÔand “transitoryÔ are defined precisely below.) Restrictive assumptions about
preferences or the behavior of asset returns are unnecessary, and the findings generated are
applicable to a wide variety of theoretical structures. The approach allows us to identify
a large fraction of variation in wealth that is ultimately unsustained and unrelated to ag-
gregate consumption, without having to explicitly identify the independent causal effect of
wealth on consumption.
   This paper reports two main results. First, we find that up to 88 percent of the post-war
variation in household net worth is generated by transitory innovations, primarily associated
with fluctuations in the stock market component of wealth. Second, although transitory
shocks dominate post-war variation in wealth, variation in aggregate consumption is domi-
nated by permanent shocks. It follows that the majority of innovations in household networth
are found to be unrelated to aggregate consumer spending, both contemporaneously and at
any future horizon. This does not mean that wealth has no affect on consumer spend-
ing, but rather that only permanent changes in wealth are associated with movements in
consumption.
   Yet the transitory changes in wealth we identify not only account for most of the variation
in asset values, they are also quantitatively large, and in some episodes staggeringly so.
For example, during the stock market boom of the 1990s, our estimates imply that wealth
exceeded its long-run trend by as much as $17,000 per person in 1996 dollars, a magnitude
equal to 50 percent of real per capita GDP in 2002.


                                              2
       An implication of these findings is that conventional estimates of the wealth effect greatly
overstate the response of consumption to a change in wealth. This is because conventional
estimates, like those cited above, are commonly based on parameters of the shared trend
in consumption, labor income, and wealth. If most changes in wealth are not trend move-
ments but are instead transitory movements unrelated to consumption, as we find here, such
estimates will significantly exaggerate the true correlation between consumption and wealth.
       Perhaps the more relevant finding of this paper is not the observation that conventional
estimates overstate the wealth effect, but rather that consumption responds differently to
temporary changes in wealth than to permanent changes. It follows that no single number,
or “marginal propensityÔ(as it is often referred to in textbooks and popular commentary),
can accurately summarize the response of consumption to wealth. Although a permanent
$1 change in wealth may be associated with a four to five cent change in consumption, the
results presented here imply that most movements in wealth are transitory and unrelated to
consumer spending.
       The transitory component of wealth we uncover is not a feature of daily, weekly or even
monthly volatility, but is instead quite persistent, displaying long-term “bull marketsÔ in
the late 1960s and 1990s, and a long-term “bear marketÔ in the 1970s. In each of these
episodes, a significant movement in stock prices caused wealth to deviate from its long-run
trend with consumption and labor income, and was ultimately restored to that trend–not
by a subsequent movement in consumption or labor earnings–but by a subsequent reversal
in wealth. The extraordinary stock market boom of the 1990s differs from other episodes
only in that it was the most dramatic example of this historical pattern. We note that
most macroeconomic models, including the large-scale models mentioned above, make no
allowance for important transitory fluctuations in wealth that are orthogonal to consumption,
and are therefore likely to misstate both the timing and magnitude of the consumption-wealth
correlation.
       The results presented here have implications for financial economics as well as macroe-
conomics. A large and growing body of empirical literature in financial economics finds that
aggregate stock market returns are forecastable over long horizons, implying the existence
of transitory variation in wealth of the sort that we uncover here. Such predictability evi-
dence does not reveal how quantitatively important that transitory component is, however.4
   4
     See Cochrane (2001), Chapter 20, for a comprehensive review of the predictability evidence, and for
discussion on the connection between predictability and transitory variation in asset values. Recent the-
oretical research in financial economics has shown that it is possible to construct models with rational,
utility-maximizing investors in which the equilibrium return on risky assets varies over time in a way con-
sistent with the presence of a transitory component in asset values (e.g., Constantinides and Duffie (1996),
Campbell and Cochrane (1999)). An open question concerns the extent to which such models are capable


                                                     3
A contribution of this paper is to quantify the relative importance of transitory shocks in
the variation of household net worth, and document how closely related are such shocks to
aggregate consumer spending.
    A number of other papers explore issues related to those considered here. King et al.
(1991); Cochrane (1994); Galı́ (1999); Francis and Ramey (2001) invoke restrictions implied
by cointegration to identify specific innovations in a range of structural models. Cochrane
(1994) studies two bivariate, cointegrated systems to characterize the permanent and tran-
sitory components in GNP and stock prices. Ludvigson and Steindel (1999) estimate the
cointegrating relation between consumption, asset wealth and labor earnings, but do not
investigate further implications of this system. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) show that the
cointegrating residual for this system is informative about the future path returns on aggre-
gate stock market indexes in excess of a Treasury bill rate, but not about future consumption
growth.5 However, Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) do not formally identify the permanent
and transitory elements of asset wealth, document their relative quantitative importance, or
highlight the consumption implications of those findings–the focus of this paper.
    In the next section, we motivate our use of the trivariate cointegrating system for con-
sumption, asset wealth and labor income by deriving cointegration from a linearized budget
constraint. Section 3 presents the econometric framework and Section 4 presents our main
empirical results. Section 5 addresses the issue of stability in the cointegrating relation.
Section 6 concludes.


2     The Common Trend in Consumption, Wealth and
      Labor Income
It is perhaps obvious that consumption, labor income and household wealth should move
together over the long-term. This section motivates this intuition more formally by consid-
ering the cointegration implications of a standard budget constraint. We build off of work
in Campbell and Mankiw (1989); see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) for additional details.
    We consider a representative agent economy in which all wealth, including human capital,
is tradable. Let Wt be beginning of period aggregate wealth (defined as the sum of human
capital, Ht , and nonhuman, or asset wealth, At ) in period t; Rw,t+1 is the net return on
aggregate wealth. For expositional convenience, we consider a simple accumulation equation
of capturing the magnitude of the transitory component documented here.
   5
     More recently, similar findings have been reported for U.K. data (Fernandez-Corugedo and Price (2002)).




                                                     4
for aggregate wealth, written

                                  Wt+1 = (1 + Rw,t+1 )(Wt − Ct ).                                   (1)

Labor income Yt does not appear explicitly in this equation because of the assumption that
the market value of tradable human capital is included in aggregate wealth.6 Throughout
this paper we use lower case letters to denote log variables, e.g., ct ≡ ln(Ct ).
      Defining r ≡ log(1 + R), Campbell and Mankiw (1989) derive an expression for the log
consumption-aggregate wealth ratio by taking a first-order Taylor expansion of (1), solving
the resulting difference equation for log wealth forward, imposing a transversality condition
and taking expectations. The resulting expression is:7
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                ct − wt = Et         ρiw (rw,t+i − ∆ct+i ),                         (2)
                                               i=1

where ρw ≡ 1 − exp(c − w). The consumption-wealth ratio embodies rational forecasts of
returns and consumption growth.
      Although this expression is intuitively appealing, it is of little use in empirical work
because aggregate wealth includes human capital, which is not observable. Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001) address this problem by reformulating the bivariate cointegrating relation
between ct and wt as a trivariate cointegrating relation involving three observable variables,
namely ct , at , and labor income yt . To understand this reformulation, denote the net return
to nonhuman capital Ra,t and the net return to human capital Rh,t , and assume that human
capital takes the form, Ht = Et ∞
                                P Qj                      −i
                                  j=0    i=0 (1 + Rh,t+i ) Yt+j . A log-linear approximation
of Ht yields ht = κ + yt + vt , where κ is a constant, vt is a mean-zero, stationary random
variable given by vt = Et ∞         j
                           P
                               j=1 ρh (∆yt+j − rh,t+j ) and ρh ≡ 1/(1 + exp(y − h). Assume
that ρh = ρw . (The equations below can easily be extended to relax this assumption but
nothing substantive is gained by doing so.) Then the expression ht = κ + yt + vt , along
with an approximation for log aggregate wealth as a function of its component elements,
wt ≈ (1 − ν)at + νht (where (1 − ν) is the steady state share A/W ) furnish an approximate
expression using only observable variables on the left hand side:
                                      ∞
                                      X    ²                              ³
                                         i
              ct − αa at − αy yt ≈ Et   ρw (1 − ν)rat+i − ∆ct+i + ν∆yt+1+i .                        (3)
                                         i=1

      Several points about equation (3) deserve emphasis. First, if labor income follows a
random walk and the expected return to human capital is either constant or proportional
  6
     None of the derivations below are dependent on this assumption. In particular, equation (3), below,
can be derived from the analogous budget constraint in which human capital is nontradeable: At+1 =
                                            P∞ Q j
(1 + Ra,t+1 )(At + Yt − Ct ), where, Ht = Et j=0 i=0 (1 + Ra,t+i )−i Yt+j .
   7
     We omit unimportant linearization constants in the equations throughout the paper.


                                                     5
to the expected return to nonhuman wealth, ct − αa at − αy yt is proportional to the log
consumption-wealth ratio, ct − wt . For this reason we loosely refer to ct − αa at − αy yt as
a proxy for the log consumption-wealth ratio. Second, under the maintained hypothesis
that rwt , ∆ct , and ∆yt are stationary, (3) implies that ct , at , and yt are cointegrated and
ct − αa at − αy yt is a cointegrating residual. The parameters αa and αy should in principle
equal the shares (1−ν) and ν, respectively, but in practice may sum to a number less than one
because only a fraction of total consumption based on nondurables and services expenditure
is observable (Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)). Third, if the cointegrating residual on the left-
hand-side of (3) is not constant, it must forecast either changes in log asset wealth (returns),
changes in log labor income, changes in log consumption growth, or some combination of
the three. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) find that it is a strong predictor of excess returns
on aggregate stock market indexes, a component of rat , but not of consumption growth. In
this paper we document that it is also not a predictor of labor income growth.
   Notice that the framework above implies an additional restriction, namely that the log
consumption-wealth ratio, (2), and therefore the cointegrating residual ct − αa at − αy yt in
(3), should be covariance stationary, and not merely stationary around a deterministic trend.
If this were not the case, the deterministic trend would imply that either consumption or
aggregate wealth must eventually become an infinitesimal fraction of the other, violating
the budget constraint identity. It follows that the cointegrating parameters which eliminate
the common trends in ct , at , and yt should eliminate both the stochastic and deterministic
trends, corresponding the concept of deterministic cointegration emphasized by Ogaki and
Park (1997).
   By combining the approximate budget constraint relation (3) with models of consumer
preferences, one may obtain approximate consumption functions. For example, equation (3)
provides a loglinear generalization of Campbell’s (1987) “rainy-dayÔ equation when com-
bined with the specific formulation of preferences explored in Flavin (1981), Campbell and
Deaton (1989), and Galı́ (1990). In that model, both expected asset returns and expected
consumption growth are constant, so the right-hand-side of (3) is a function only of expected
future labor income changes.
   Importantly, however, the empirical approach described next does not require imposing
such additional structure. The empirical results we obtain exploit only cointegration, a
phenomenon that can be motivated by the logic of a simple budget constraint identity,
applicable to a wide variety of theoretical structures.




                                               6
3         Econometric Framework
The contribution of this paper is the use of cointegration to identify permanent and transi-
tory components of consumption, wealth, and labor earnings. To explain our approach, this
section describes how we isolate the permanent and transitory shocks of a generic cointe-
grated vector of variables, xt , that has n elements. In our application, xt = (ct , at , yt )0 . In
the discussion below, we refer the reader to the papers cited for a detailed description of the
permanent-transitory decomposition, and only briefly summarize the methodology here.


3.1        Data and Preliminary Analysis
Appendix A contains a detailed description of the data used in this study. The log of asset
wealth, at , is a measure of real, per capita household net worth, which includes all financial
wealth, housing wealth, and consumer durables. Durable goods are properly accounted for
as part of nonhuman wealth, At , a component of aggregate wealth, Wt , and so should not
be accounted for as part of consumption or treated purely as an expenditure.8 The budget
constraint (1) therefore applies to the flow of consumption, Ct ; durables expenditures are
excluded in this definition because they represent replacements and additions to a capital
stock (investment), rather than a service flow from the existing stock. The total flow of
consumption is unobservable because we lack observations on the service flow from much of
the durables stock. We therefore follow Blinder and Deaton (1985) and Campbell (1987)
and use the log of real, per capita, expenditures on nondurables and services (excluding
shoes and clothing), as a measure of ct .9 An internally consistent cointegrating relation may
then be obtained if we assume that the log of (unobservable) real total flow consumption is
cointegrated with the log of real nondurables and services expenditures. The log of after-tax
labor income, yt , is also measured in real, per capita terms. Our data are quarterly and span
the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter of 2003.
        Wealth is measured at the end of the period. A timing convention for wealth is needed
because the level of consumption is a flow during the quarter rather than a point-in-time
estimate as is wealth (consumption data are time-averaged). If we think of a given quarter’s
consumption data as measuring spending at the beginning of the quarter, then wealth for the
quarter should be measured at the beginning of the period. If we think of the consumption
    8
      Treating durables purchases purely as an expenditure (by, e.g., removing them from At and including
them in Ct ) is improper because it ignores the evolution of the asset over time, which must be accounted for
by multiplying the stock by a gross return. (In the case of many durable goods this gross return would be
less than one and consist primarily of depreciation.)
    9
      This measure of consumption typically comprises over 85 percent of total personal consumption expen-
ditures.


                                                     7
data as measuring spending at the end of the quarter, then wealth for the quarter should
be measured at the end of the period. None of our main findings discussed below (estimates
of the cointegrating parameters, error-correction specification, or permanent-transitory de-
composition) are sensitive to this timing convention. Given our finding that most of the
variation in wealth is not associated with consumption, this timing convention is conserva-
tive in that the use of end-of-period wealth produces a higher contemporaneous correlation
between consumption growth and wealth growth. The contemporaneous correlation between
quarterly growth in household net worth, ∆at , and the real return on the Center for Research
on Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted stock market index is 0.87 in our sample. This
shows that quarterly fluctuations in household net worth are dominated by movements in
stock market returns.
       How can we identify the permanent and transitory components of the three variable
system, xt ? Identification is possible because cointegration places restrictions on the long-
run multipliers of the shocks in a structural model where innovations are distinguished by
their degree of persistence, (King et al. (1991), Gonzalo and Granger (1995)). The procedure
has several steps. The first is to estimate a vector-error-correction model (VECM) for the
cointegrated system. The estimated VECM parameters may then be used to back out the
long-run restrictions.
       To obtain a correctly specified error-correction model, we begin by testing for both the
presence and number of cointegrating relations in xt . These results are contained in Appendix
B. We assume all of the variables contained in xt are first order integrated, or I(1), an
assumption confirmed by unit root test results, available upon request. In addition, the
results presented in the Appendix B suggest the presence of a single cointegrating vector;
we impose this in our VECM specification from now on. The cointegrating coefficient on
consumption is normalized to one, and we denote the single cointegrating vector for xt =
[ct , at , yt ]0 as α = (1, −αa , −αy )0 .
       The cointegrating parameters αa and αy must be estimated. We use a dynamic least
squares procedure, which generates “superconsistentÔ estimates of αa and αy (Stock and Wat-
son (1993)).10 We estimate αb = (1, −0.30, −0.60)0 . The Newey-West corrected t-statistics
for these estimates are 12 and 27, respectively. As discussed in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001),
these coefficients are not expected to sum to unity because total consumption is unobservable
and nondurables and services expenditure (a subset of the total) is used as a proxy. Yet the
estimates themselves are intuitively appealing: they imply that the share of capital income
  10
    We use eight leads and lags of the first differences of ∆yt and ∆at in the dynamic least squares regression.
Monte Carlo simulation evidence in both Ng and Perron (1997) and our own suggested that the DLS
procedure can be made more precise with larger lag lengths.



                                                       8
in total output is about 0.34, very close to values used in the real business cycle literature.
       We are now in a position to estimate the VECM representation of xt which takes the
form
                                            b 0 xt−1 + Γ(L)∆xt−1 + et ,
                                ∆xt = υ + γ α                                                                (4)

where ∆xt is the vector of log first differences, (∆ct , ∆at , ∆yt )0 , υ, and γ ≡ (γ c , γ a , γ y )0 are
(3×1) vectors, Γ(L) is a finite order distributed lag operator, and α     b ≡ (1, −b
                                                                                   αa , −b αy )0 is the
(3×1) vector of previously estimated cointegrating coefficients.11 Throughout this paper, we
use “hatsÔ to denote the estimated values of parameters.
   The term α b 0 xt−1 gives last period’s equilibrium error, or cointegrating residual; γ is
the vector of “adjustmentÔ coefficients that tells us which variables subsequently adjust to
restore the common trend when a deviation occurs. The Granger Representation Theorem
states that, if a vector xt is cointegrated, at least one of the adjustment parameters, γ c , γ a ,
or γ y must be nonzero in the error-correction representation (4). Thus if xj does at least
some of the adjusting needed to restore the long-run equilibrium subsequent to a shock that
distorts this equilibrium, γ j should be different from zero in the equation for ∆xj of the
error-correction representation (4).
       The results of estimating a first-order specification of (4) are presented in Table 1.12
The estimates of the adjustment parameters in γ are given in the next-to-last row of Table
                                                                b 0 xt−1 . Consumption and
1 and are the coefficients on the lagged cointegrating residual α
labor income are predictable by lagged consumption and wealth growth, but not by the
                       b 0 xt−1 . Thus, estimates of γ c and γ y are economically small and
cointegrating residual α
insignificantly different from zero. By contrast, the cointegrating error is an economically
large and statistically significant determinant of next quarter’s wealth growth: γ a is estimated
to be about 0.36, with a t-statistic above 3. Although there is some short-run predictability
in the growth of consumption and labor income (as exhibited by the dependence of these
variables on lagged growth rates), it is wealth growth that exhibits error-correction behavior
and therefore predictability over long horizons. Wealth is mean reverting and adapts over
long-horizons to match the smoothness in consumption and labor income.13 These findings
were highlighted in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001); we now extend these results to quantify
  11
      Standard errors do not need to be adjusted to account for the use of the generated regressor, α0 xt in
(4) because estimates of the cointegrating parameters converge to their true values at rate T , rather than at
                  √
the usual rate T (Stock (1987)) .
   12
      This first-order lag length was chosen in accordance with the Akaike and Schwarz criteria.
   13
      We also find that the four -quarter lagged value of the cointegrating error strongly predicts asset growth.
This shows that the forecasting power of the cointegrating residual for future asset growth cannot be at-
tributable to interpolation procedures used to convert annual survey data to a quarterly housing service flow
estimate, part of the services component of ct .


                                                       9
the permanent and transitory components in wealth and consumption.


3.2    Permanent and Transitory Shocks
Cointegration may be used to decompose xt into innovations that are distinguished by their
degree of persistence. Because xt has three elements and a single cointegrating vector, there
are two permanent shocks, or common trends, and one transitory shock (Stock and Watson
(1988)). Following King et al. (1991), Gonzalo and Granger (1995) and Gonzalo and Ng
(2001), identification is achieved in two steps. First, cointegration restricts the matrix of
long-run multipliers of shocks in the system, which identifies the permanent components. The
transitory component is identified as the residual. Second, in order to study the dynamic
impact of the transitory innovation, it is assumed to be orthogonal to the two permanent
innovations. This second assumption is not necessary to obtain our main results, and is made
only to interpret impulse response functions. Our main conclusions can be obtained from a
variance-covariance decomposition, which requires no such orthogonalization assumption.
   A summary of this methodology is as follows. Under the maintained hypothesis that
the growth rates of the variables in xt−1 are covariance stationary, a multivariate Wold
representation exists taking the form

                                        ∆xt = δ + C(L)et ,

where et is an n × 1 vector of innovations, and where C(L) is a distributed lag opera-
tor. We seek to identify n = 3 transformed, or structural-form, innovations distinguished
by whether they have permanent or transitory effects. Denote these transformed innova-
tions η t ≡ (η 1t , η 2t , η 3t )0 , where two are permanent and one is transitory. Without loss of
generality, shocks are ordered so that the first two have permanent effects, the third tran-
sitory effects. Following Gonzalo and Granger (1995), define a shock, η P t , as permanent if
limh→∞ ∂Et (xt+h )/∂η P t 6= 0, and a shock, η T t , as transitory if limh→∞ ∂Et (xt+h )/∂η T t = 0.
   The permanent and transitory innovations may be identified using the estimated pa-
rameters γ
         b and α
               b from the error-correction representation. Write the reduced-form Wold
representation of this system as above, ∆xt = δ + C(L)et . By the Granger Representation
Theorem, the parameters α and γ, both of rank r, satisfy α0 C(1) = 0 and C(1)γ = 0 (Engle
and Granger (1987)). Let                        "          #
                                                    γ 0⊥
                                          G=                   ,                                 (5)
                                                    α0
where γ 0⊥ γ = 0. Define a new distributed lag operator D(L) equal to C(L)G−1 . Gonzalo
and Ng (2001) show that the transformed (permanent and transitory) residuals are given by

                                             η t = Get ,

                                                 10
and their relation to xt is given by the Wold representation

                                    ∆xt = δ + C(L)G−1 Get                                          (6)
                                          = δ + D(L)η t ,

where δ is a constant vector. Each element of ∆xt has been decomposed into a function of
two permanent shocks and a single transitory shock.
       This decomposition can be understood intuitively by noting that it gives the jth variable
a large weight in the permanent innovations and a small weight in the transitory innovations
when γ j is small, implying that the variable participates little in the error-correction required
to eventually restore the variables to their common trend. Conversely, it gives the jth
variable a small weight in the permanent innovations and a large weight in the transitory
innovations when γ j is large, implying that the variable plays an important role in the error-
correction required to restore the variables to their common trend. In the application studied
here, the elements of the adjustment vector γ corresponding to ct and yt are statistically
indistinguishable from zero (Table 1), implying that these variables have a large weight in
the permanent innovations and a small weight in the transitory innovations. By contrast,
the element of the adjustment vector γ corresponding to at is large in absolute value and
strongly statistically significant (Table 1), implying that at will have a large weight in the
transitory innovations and a small weight in the permanent innovations.
       With this decomposition, the level of xt can be written as the sum of k I(1) common
factors (permanent component), and n − k I (0) transitory components, where k is equal to
the number of common trends, in our case two.14


4        Empirical Results
4.1       Permanent and Transitory Components of Consumption, Wealth,
          and Income
Using the permanent-transitory decomposition discussed above, it is straightforward to in-
vestigate how each of the variables in our system are related to permanent and transitory
shocks. Table 2 displays the fraction of the total variance in the forecast error of ∆ct , ∆at ,
  14
    The k common factors in the Granger-Gonzalo/Gonzalo-Ng decomposition described above are deter-
mined by γ 0⊥ xt , where γ 0⊥ γ = 0. This permanent component may contain serial correlation around the
random walk component given by the multivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition. The random walk com-
ponent of the I(1) common factors from the Gonzalo-Granger/Gonzalo-Ng procedure is the trend concept
provided by the multivariate Beveridge–Nelson (Beveridge and Nelson (1981)) decomposition investigated
in Stock and Watson (1988).


                                                  11
and ∆yt that is attributable to the two permanent shocks combined (we do not attempt to
identify the impact of the two permanent shocks separately), and to the single transitory
shock. The transitory shock is constructed to be orthogonal to the two permanent shocks;
we use this orthogonal shock in the impulse responses presented below. Later we present
variance-covariance decompositions which do not assume that the transitory shock is or-
thogonal to the two permanent shocks. To quantify the sampling uncertainty of the variance
decompositions, we compute cumulative distribution functions for each variance decomposi-
tion using a bootstrapping procedure. These results are presented in Appendix C and Table
C.I.
   Gonzalo and Ng (2001) recommend restricting the values of the parameters in γ to zero
where they are statistically insignificant at the five percent level. Their simulation evidence
suggests that doing so as a matter of practice generates much more stable estimates of the
permanent-transitory decomposition. This is also done elsewhere in other applications of
this methodology (Cochrane (1994) and Gonzalo and Granger (1995)). In the computations
that follow, we set γ c and γ y to zero in order to match the evidence from Table 1 that these
variables are small and statistically indistinguishable from zero, but we also present results
using the actual point estimates of γ.
   Table 2 displays the fraction of h-step ahead forecast error in consumption, labor income
and wealth growth that is attributable to the two permanent shocks combined, and to the
single transitory shock. For h → ∞, we compute the portion of the total variance of each
variable attributable to each disturbance. The top panel of Table 2 shows the results when
γ c and γ y are set to zero; the bottom panel shows the results when all elements of γ are set
to their point estimates.
   First consider the results in the top panel. For consumption growth, the two permanent
shocks in this system explain over 95 percent of the variance in the forecast error at all
horizons. The bootstrapped 95% confidence interval is (0.92, 0.99). Thus, consumption is
a function of only the permanent components in at and yt : less than five percent of the
variation in consumption growth is attributable to the transitory shock. Similarly, almost
all of the variance in income growth is attributable to the two permanent shocks. Together
they account for over 96 percent of the variation in the long-run forecast error of ∆yt , with
the bootstrapped 95% confidence interval equal to (0.93, 0.99).
   The findings are quite different for asset wealth. Notice that the orthogonalization of
transitory and permanent shocks assumed above orders the transitory shock last, thereby
giving it the smallest possible role in the transitory component of at . Despite this ordering,
we find that transitory shocks dominate changes in wealth: the estimates reported in the top
panel imply that 88 percent of the variation in the growth of asset wealth is attributable to


                                              12
this shock; only 12 percent is attributable to permanent shocks. It follows that the single
transitory shock in this system is essentially a wealth shock. This finding implies that the
vast majority of variability in consumption, driven by permanent shocks, is disassociated
with the vast majority of variability in wealth, driven by transitory shocks. This does not
mean that wealth has no impact on consumption, but rather that only permanent changes
in wealth are related to consumer spending.
   Turning to the bottom panel of Table 2, it is evident that when all elements of γ are set to
their point estimates, the transitory component of wealth is smaller, but still comprises the
majority of its fluctuations: in this case, about 60 percent of the variation in wealth growth
is estimated to be transitory in this case. For consumption and labor income, permanent
shocks are still the dominant source of variation, although the confidence intervals are wider.
   So far we have restricted the single transitory shock to be orthogonal to the two per-
manent shocks. By doing so, we cannot rule out the possibility that consumption (or labor
income) contains a transitory component that is correlated with the permanent components.
To address this possibility, Table 3 provides the results of a variance-covariance decomposi-
tion, which requires no orthogonalization. The table displays the fraction of the h-step ahead
forecast error that is attributable to the variance of the permanent shocks, the transitory
shocks, and to two times the covariance between the permanent shocks and the transitory
shock. The permanent components of consumption and labor income are virtually uncorre-
lated with the transitory component; therefore it is not the case that consumption contains
a large transitory component that is correlated with the permanent shocks. The transi-
tory component in wealth is correlated with the permanent shocks, but this does not alter
the conclusion that the majority of variation in at is attributable to transitory shocks and
therefore unrelated to the majority of variation in quarterly consumption growth.
   An implication of these last findings is that they provide no support for the hypothesis
that consumption takes many periods to adapt to permanent innovations in wealth or la-
bor income. Suppose consumption did adapt sluggishly to trend movements in wealth and
income. Then it would have to contain a transitory component, correlated with the perma-
nent shocks in wealth or income. Permanent movements in wealth or income would not be
immediately accompanied by a full adjustment in consumption to its trend level, generat-
ing a transitory component in consumption and a temporary deviation in the cointegrating
residual from its mean.
   This point can be made another way. If consumption adjusts slowly to shocks, such
temporary deviations in the cointegrating residual from its mean should be eliminated by a
subsequent movement in consumption, as it sluggishly adapts to the permanent innovation
in wealth or income. Deviations from the common trend in c, a, and y should then tell


                                              13
us something about the future path of consumption growth; i.e., the cointegrating residual
should have long-horizon forecasting power for consumption growth. Table 4 reports the
results of regressions of long-horizon consumption growth, ∆ct+h (defined as ct+h − ct ), long-
horizon labor income growth, ∆yt+h , and long-horizon asset wealth growth, ∆at+h , on the
                                 b 0 xt , controlling for ∆ct , ∆yt , and ∆at , over horizons, h,
estimated cointegrating residual α
ranging from one to 16 quarters.
   The first panel of Table 4 displays the long-horizon forecastability of consumption growth.
The coefficients on time t consumption growth are small but statistically significant predic-
tors of consumption growth up to 4 quarters out, reflecting serial correlation in aggregate
expenditure growth. The R2 statistics imply that the growth of consumption is not highly
predictable over horizons in excess of one year, however. More to the point, the cointe-
grating residual is always statistically indistinguishable from zero in these regressions, and
explains a negligible fraction of the variation in future consumption growth at all horizons.
The results for labor income growth are similar. These regressions provide no evidence that
consumption adapts sluggishly to permanent innovations in wealth or income. The findings
underscore the point that the modest short-horizon predictability in consumption growth
evident in the data (and primarily attributable to serial correlation) does not imply that
consumption slowly adjusts to permanent innovations in wealth or income, and is therefore
forecastable over long-horizons by the cointegrating residual.
                               b 0 xt has any forecasting power at any horizon is wealth
   The only variable for which α
growth, consistent with the finding reported above that it has a significant transitory com-
ponent. The residual has marginal predictive power even at a horizon of 16 quarters and
beyond, with the adjusted R2 statistic peaking at about 31 percent at a 12 quarter horizon.
These adjusted R2 statistics are unaffected by removing the other regressors ∆ct , ∆yt , and
∆at from the forecasting regression, thus all of the long-horizon forecasting power for the
                                          b 0 xt . Note also that wealth growth is substantially
growth in asset wealth is attributable to α
more forecastable than consumption or labor income growth as the horizon over which these
variables are measured increases. Wealth is mean reverting and adapts over long horizons
to match the smoothness in consumption and labor income.
   The permanent-transitory decomposition employed here allows us to identify the random
walk component of each variable, given by the multivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition
for this system. This allows us to assess how highly correlated is each variable with its random
walk component. Not surprisingly, consumption and labor income are highly correlated with
their random walk components, while wealth is not. Even with the serial correlation in
measured spending growth, consumption still displays a correlation of 91 percent with its



                                               14
random walk component (Table 5).15 Similarly, labor income growth displays a 87 percent
correlation with its random walk component. By contrast, asset wealth is far from a random
walk, displaying a correlation of just 18 percent with its random walk component.
       To characterize the dynamic impact of the transitory wealth shock, Figure 1 shows the
cumulative responses of ∆ct , ∆at , and ∆yt , to a one-standard deviation innovation in the
transitory shock. Standard errors for these responses are presented in Appendix C. The
                                                b 0 xt = ct −b
responses of the estimated cointegrating error, α            αa at −b
                                                                    αy yt , are also plotted. Figure
1 depicts graphically what the variance decompositions depict numerically: an increase in
the transitory shock leads to a sharp increase in asset wealth, but has virtually no impact on
consumption and labor earnings at any future horizon. The consumption and labor income
responses are statistically insignificant (Appendix C), and economically negligible. The effect
of a transitory wealth shock on at is strongly significant over periods from a quarter to several
years, but is eventually eliminated, as it must be, since the shock is transitory. The long-run
response of αb 0 xt to this shock is zero, since deviations from the common trend in ct , at , and
yt must eventually be eliminated. Note that these transitory movements in wealth cause
the cointegrating residual to deviate from its mean, forecasting a subsequent adjustment in
wealth, which restores the cointegrating relation.
       Figure 1 also shows that the transitory shock to wealth is very persistent; a typical shock
continues to affect asset values for a little over four years. Thus, transitory variation in
wealth is not characterized by mere day-to-day or even quarter-to-quarter volatility. Instead,
temporary shocks can lead wealth to deviate for a number of years from its long-run trend.
Despite their persistent effect on asset values, such shocks bear virtually no relation to
consumption at any future horizon.
       It is reasonable to ask whether this transitory variation is driven by the stock market
component of wealth. At least two pieces of evidence indicate that it is. First, if we split
wealth into its stock and nonstock components, a four-variable variance decomposition shows
clearly that, in contrast to stock market wealth, nonstock wealth is dominated by permanent
shocks (results available on request). Second, the cointegrating residual for ct , at , and yt is
a strong univariate predictor of stock market wealth growth, but has virtually no predictive
power for nonstock wealth growth (Table 6). Since nonstock forms of wealth do not adjust to
close a transitory gap in the cointegrating relation, they cannot have an important transitory
component.
  15
    This figure does not contradict the result in Table 2, that 99 percent of the variation in consumption
growth is attributable to permanent shocks. The reason is that the permanent shocks in Table 2 are defined
as those that have permanent effects, and therefore allow for serial correlation around the random walk
innovation.



                                                   15
      We close this section by considering what these findings imply for conventional estimates
of the wealth effect on consumption. Estimates of this effect, often referred to as the marginal
propensity to consume out of wealth, are typically formed from estimates of the cointegrat-
ing coefficients for consumption, wealth and income. This makes some sense because such
cointegrating coefficients arise from a regression of consumption on wealth, controlling for
the influence of labor income. Moreover, because these estimates are based on cointegrating
coefficients, they are superconsistent, and therefore robust to the presence of regressor endo-
geneity. Modigliani (1971) used this approach to calculate that a dollar increase in wealth
leads to an increase in consumer spending of about five cents. Using our own estimates of
the cointegrating coefficients for log variables (i.e., α
                                                        b a = 0.30), we find that–once translated
as a relation between levels of variables–the marginal impact of a dollar increase in wealth
on consumption is about 4.6 cents, in line with customary estimates.16 Similar figures are
reported in Ludvigson and Steindel (1999). Such estimates are valid descriptions of the trend
relation among consumption, wealth and income. The magnitude of these estimates is not
trivial quantitatively and may explain why it is commonly presumed that sharp swings in
asset values will generate important changes in consumer spending.
      But are these estimates appropriate as a summary measure of the consumption-wealth
link? It is commonly said that every dollar increase in wealth leads to a four to five cent
increase in consumption. Because these estimates are based on parameters of a common
trend, however, they are informative only about the correlation between consumption and
permanent movements in wealth, not every movement in wealth. They reveal nothing about
the relation between consumption and transitory changes in wealth. If most movements
in wealth are transitory, and if transitory movements have a very different impact on con-
sumption than do permanent movements, such an estimate will poorly describe the true
correlation between wealth and consumption.
      A better summary statistic would account for the finding that much of the variation in
wealth is transitory and uncorrelated with consumer spending. If 88 percent of the variance
in wealth is transitory, as Table 2 reports, only 12 percent of the total variation in wealth
will be associated with a 4 to 5 cent on the dollar change in consumption; the remaining
88 percent of the variation in wealth will be associated with no change in consumption.
Although one could combine these estimates into a single summary statistic of the average
response of consumption to a dollar change in wealth, it may not be desirable to do so.
After all, such an exercise must necessarily obfuscate the finding that consumption responds
differently to permanent changes in wealth than it does to transitory changes in wealth.
Instead, we emphasize that conventional estimates of the wealth effect are likely to be quite
 16
      This number is obtained by multiplying α
                                             b a = 0.30 by the most recent value of Ct /At .


                                                      16
misleading, because they are found to apply only to a small fraction of the variation in
wealth.


4.2       Time Series Analysis of the Trend in Asset Values
The empirical procedure employed here can be used to decompose any of the variables in
our system into a “trendÔ and “cyclicalÔ component. A natural definition of trend in each
variable is the long-run forecast of the variable, furnished by the trend component from the
multivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition for the cointegrated system (ct , at , yt )0 .
   The three panels of Figure 2 plot the resulting trend components of consumption, asset
wealth and labor earnings, along with the actual series for each variable. The plot spans the
period beginning in the second quarter of 1952 to the first quarter of 2003. Consumption and
labor earnings are visually indistinguishable from their trends. This is not surprising since
we already know that they are highly correlated (Table 5). For asset wealth, by contrast,
there are many times in the post-war period when asset wealth has diverged substantially
from its estimated trend.
   A clearer picture of the extent to which this is true is given in Figure 3, which shows
the difference between the trend and actual value of asset wealth (the transitory component
of wealth), in percent of the trend component. The series displayed in the figure has been
normalized so that when it is above zero, wealth is estimated to be above its long-term trend;
when it is below zero, wealth is estimated to be below its long-term trend.
   Figure 3 shows that asset values were above their long-term trend during the mid 1950s
and late 1960s, and below their long-term trend in many quarters from the mid 1970s through
1997. Consistent with popular impression, the estimate picks out the “bull marketsÔ of the
late 1960s and 1990s, and the “bear marketsÔ of the 1970s. Note the sharp decline in wealth
in 1973, a year in which stock market wealth relative to GDP fell by a factor of two.
   The figure also shows clearly that transitory swings in wealth are both quantitatively
large and persistent. In the 1990s, the transitory component reached as high as 16 percent
of the permanent component of wealth. Translated into dollar amounts, this implies that
wealth exceeded its long-run trend by as much $16,781 per capita in 1996 dollars.
   In general, periods of above-trend asset wealth are typically followed by episodes of
negative excess returns on the aggregate stock market, while below-trend asset values are
typically followed by episodes of positive excess stock returns. For example, the spikes
upward in asset wealth relative to trend in 1956 and 1973, were followed, respectively, by a
sequence of negative excess returns in the 1960s, and by the bear markets of the 1970s. The
decline in asset wealth relative to trend in 1994 was followed by the bull market of the late
1990s. This estimate suggests that, by the end of 1997, the stock market boom had driven

                                               17
wealth to above trend levels, anticipating the broad decline in the stock market wealth since
2000.
    Of particular interest in Figure 3 is the level of transitory wealth in 1995, a period that
marked the beginning of the extraordinary surge in equity values that occurred in the latter
half of the 1990s. As late as 1997–well into the bull market of the 1990s and well after
the onset of worries shared by many analysts that the market was “irrationally exuberantÔ–
wealth was still below its long-term trend. In contrast to other indicators such as the
dividend-yield and price-earnings ratio, this estimate suggests that wealth was not due for a
correction until much later, when the stock market had reached the lofty levels it obtained
by 1998 and 1999. The figure underscores the importance of using information contained in
consumption and labor income, in addition to conventional indicators such as dividends and
earnings, for determining the long-run value of asset wealth.


5       Stability
In this section, we address an important objection to our empirical approach: the possibility
of instability in the cointegrating relation. The meaningful question is not whether the
econometric model exhibits any instability at all (few models aimed at fitting data for the
entire postwar period would share such a property), but whether the instability present is
sufficiently large to alter our main econometric conclusions. We address this issue from a
number of different angles.
    One possible angle is simply to employ formal tests of parameter instability for coin-
tegrated systems. These tests are not without their limitations. The issue of identifying
structural breaks in common trends with finite samples is a subtle and tricky one. Long
data spans are often required to obtain consistent estimates of cointegrating coefficients,
yet instability tests require those parameters to be estimated by splitting an already finite
sample into even smaller subsamples. This requirement has led to a well-known criticism
of the entire structural break approach, namely that the data driven specification searches
inherent in the methodology can bias inferences dramatically toward finding breaks where
none exist (see Leamer (1978); Lo and MacKinlay (1990)).
    With these caveats in mind, we present the results of three tests of parameter stability in
cointegrated regression models. The procedures are from Hansen (1992). For all three tests,
the null hypothesis is that the cointegrating vector is constant over the sample, although the
tests differ in their treatment of the alternative hypothesis. The first test, called the SupF
test, models the cointegrating vector as obeying a single structural break with unknown break
date. The second two tests, called the M eanF and the Lc tests, model the cointegrating


                                              18
vector as a martingale process. For the trivariate cointegrated system we investigate, the
following values for the three statistics, with p-values in parentheses, were obtained:

                                 SupF = 9.67            (> .20)
                               MeanF = 5.85             (.064)
                                    Lc = .477           (.112)

   The results present a somewhat mixed picture concerning the presence of instability. No
test presents overwhelming evidence of instability, and the SupF test in particular does not
suggest any instability–this test statistic is not significant at the 20% level. On the other
hand, the M eanF test statistic is significant at the 10% level, though not at the 5% level;
the Lc test statistic is at the 20% level but not the 10% level. These last two test results
may hint at some instability in the cointegrating parameters, but for all tests the data are
not sufficiently informative to reject the null of stability at the 5% level. A possibility is
that some instability is present, but is sufficiently small that a stable cointegrating relation
is a reasonable approximation of the data. This possibility is consistent with the finding in
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) that the cointegrating residual is sufficiently stable so as to
display statistically significant out-of-sample forecasting power for asset returns.
   A little digging indicates that the best case for instability in this cointegrated system
can be made when data since 1995 are included in the sample. For example, if the sample
is ended at 1995:Q4, all of the test statistics reported above have p-values in excess of 20%.
Thus, formal tests suggest no instability whatsoever in the 44 years of data up to 1995.
Another way to see the influence of recent data is to estimate the cointegrating vector over
subsamples. Table 6 shows that only in subsamples that include data from the late 1990s
do the cointegrating coefficients look drastically different from the other subsamples. For
example, estimates for the period 1951:Q4-1995:Q4 look almost the same as estimates from
1951:Q4-1977:Q2, but are quite different from 1977:Q3-2003:Q1, which includes post-1995
data and exhibits a much smaller coefficient on wealth and larger coefficient on income. Of
course, a caveat with these estimates is that they are not really proper, since it is never
appropriate to throw away information when estimating the parameters of a common trend.
Nevertheless they give a rough idea of where in the sample instability might lie.
   What’s going on? The late 1990s were an extraordinary episode in which the price-
dividend ratio on aggregate stock market indexes increased more than three-fold between
1995 and 1999. During this period, wealth remained far above its previously estimated long-
run trend with consumption and labor income, and persistently so. Figure 4 demonstrates
graphically by plotting the cointegrating residual when the cointegrating vector is estimated
on data through 1995:Q4. The residual takes on large and sustained negative values during

                                              19
the late 1990s, as wealth moved well above its long-run trend with consumption and labor
income.
    The irony of this episode is that, while it weakens some formal statistical evidence in favor
of a stable cointegrating vector, it serves to reinforce the main conclusions of this paper: as
Figure 4 shows, the large and sustained negative values in the cointegrating residual are
entirely eliminated by 2003, and the residual restored to its post-war mean. The restoration
of the cointegrating residual to its mean clearly coincides with a large error-correction in
wealth, a direct result of the broad stock market declines since 2000. By using only data
up to 1995 to estimate the cointegrating vector, we can be sure that this restoration is not
a result of estimating a new mean and an entirely new cointegrating vector on the unusual
data post-1995. (Nevertheless, the figure based on full-sample estimates looks quite similar.)
    Including data from the last half of the 1990s creates instability, not because the period
was fundamentally different from historical experience, but because, on the contrary, the
episode was a more extreme version of the historical record, generating a transitory movement
in wealth that was larger and more persistent than previously observed in our sample. Yet
the essence of the episode bears out the historical experience to a tee: wealth surged well
above its long-run trend with consumption and labor income only to be ultimately restored
to that trend because of a subsequent decline in asset values. The important question going
forward is whether this episode represents a break toward a fundamentally different long-
run relation between consumption, wealth and income, or whether it was simply an outlier,
merely the largest of many such episodes in a familiar pattern of events. It is too early to
know for sure, but Figure 4 suggests that the latter possibility may be an important part of
the story.
    We close this section by noting a number of additional robustness checks that were
performed. The permanent/transitory decomposition is robust to changes in lag length in
the VECM, to the measure of consumption used (total personal consumption expenditures
rather than nondurables and services), to the timing convention for wealth, and to the
procedure used to estimate the VECM (two stage DLS/OLS versus the Johansen (1991)
one-step maximum likelihood estimator). These results are available upon request.


6     Conclusion
The empirical linkage between wealth and consumption is a classic research problem at the
intersection of finance and macroeconomics. We argue here that this linkage cannot be
understood without distinguishing trend from cycle in asset values. Transitory variation in
asset wealth is both quantitatively large and highly persistent. Indeed, our estimates imply


                                               20
that transitory shocks constitute the vast majority of fluctuations in quarterly net worth and
have a half-life of about 2 years. Yet despite their quantitative importance, transitory shocks
in wealth are found to be unrelated to aggregate consumer spending, contemporaneously
and at any future date. Aggregate consumption is well described as a function of the trend
components in wealth and income and is dominated by permanent shocks. In summary,
permanent changes in wealth do affect consumer spending, but most changes in wealth
are transitory and are uncorrelated with consumption. A contribution of this paper is to
document the sheer quantity of variation in asset values that is ultimately unsustained, as
well as the extent to which macroeconomic aggregates such as consumption and labor income
appear unaffected by this variation.
   These findings have at least one important implication for monetary policy. Recent
research has suggested that central banks pursuing inflation targets should ignore movements
in asset values that do not influence aggregate demand (Bernanke and Gertler (1999)). The
results in this paper underscore the relevance of this recommendation, since they suggest
that most changes in asset values are transitory and unrelated to consumer spending, the
largest component of aggregate demand.




                                              21
                         Appendix A: Data Description
   CONSUMPTION
   Consumption is measured as either total personal consumption expenditure or expen-
diture on nondurables and services, excluding shoes and clothing. The quarterly data are
seasonally adjusted at annual rates, in billions of chain- weighted 1996 dollars. The com-
ponents are chain-weighted together, and this series is scaled up so that the sample mean
matches the sample mean of total personal consumption expenditures. Our source is the
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   AFTER-TAX LABOR INCOME
   Labor income is defined as wages and salaries + transfer payments + other labor in-
come - personal contributions for social insurance - taxes. Taxes are defined as [wages and
salaries/(wages and salaries + proprietors’ income with IVA and Ccadj + rental income +
personal dividends + personal interest income)] times personal tax and nontax payments,
where IVA is inventory valuation and Ccadj is capital consumption adjustments. The quar-
terly data are in current dollars. Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   POPULATION
   A measure of population is created by dividing real total disposable income by real per
capita disposable income. Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   WEALTH
   Total wealth is household net worth in billions of current dollars, measured at the end
of the period. Stock market wealth includes direct household holdings, mutual fund hold-
ings, holdings of private and public pension plans, personal trusts, and insurance com-
panies. Nonstock wealth includes tangible/real estate wealth, nonstock financial assets
(all deposits, open market paper, U.S. Treasuries and Agency securities, municipal secu-
rities, corporate and foreign bonds and mortgages), and also includes ownership of privately
traded companies in noncorporate equity, and other. Subtracted off are liabilities, includ-
ing mortgage loans and loans made under home equity lines of credit and secured by ju-
nior liens, installment consumer debt and other. Our source is the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System. A complete description of these data may be found at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z1/Current/.
   PRICE DEFLATOR
   The nominal after-tax labor income and wealth data are deflated by the personal con-
sumption expenditure chain-type deflator (1996=100), seasonally adjusted. In principle, one
would like a measure of the price deflator for total flow consumption here. Since this variable
is unobservable, we use the total expenditure deflator as a proxy. Our source is the Bureau
of Economic Analysis.
                        Appendix B: Tests for Cointegration
   This appendix presents the results of cointegration tests. Tests for the presence of a unit
root in c, a, and y (not reported) are consistent with the hypothesis of a unit root in those
series and are available upon request.
   Table B.I reports test statistics corresponding to two cointegration tests. Reported in the
far right column are residual based cointegration test statistics (Phillips and Ouliaris (1990)).
The table shows both the Dickey-Fuller t-statistic and the relevant five and 10 percent critical
values. The test is carried out without a deterministic trend in the static regression, allowing
for trends in the raw data. We applied the data dependent procedure suggested in Campbell
and Perron (1991) for choosing the appropriate lag length in an augmented Dickey-Fuller
t-test. This procedure suggested that the appropriate lag length was one for the (c, a, y)0
system. The tests reject the null of no cointegration at the five percent level.
   Table B.I also reports the outcome of testing procedures suggested by Johansen (1988)
and Johansen (1991) that allow the researcher to estimate the number of cointegrating
relationships. This procedure presumes a p-dimensional vector autoregressive model with k
lags, where p corresponds to the number of stochastic variables among which the investigator
wishes to test for cointegration. For our application, p = 3. The Johansen procedure
provides two tests for cointegration: under the null hypothesis, H0 , that there are exactly
r cointegrating relations, the ‘Trace’ statistic supplies a likelihood ratio test of H0 against
the alternative, HA , that there are p cointegrating relations, where p is the total number
of variables in the model. A second approach uses the ‘L-max’ statistic to test the null
hypothesis of r cointegrating relations against the alternative of r + 1 cointegrating relations.
   Because these particular tests results are more sensitive to the sampling interval, we
present result for both the full sample, 1951:Q4-2003:Q1, as well as the sample 1951:Q4-
1995:Q4, which exclude the unusual late 1990s data. In the latter sample, both the L-max
and Trace test results establish evidence of cointegration among log consumption, log labor
income, and the log of household wealth. The L-max test implies that we may reject the
null of no cointegration against the alternative of one cointegrating vector. In addition, the
Trace test shows that we cannot reject the null hypothesis of one cointegrating relationship
against the alternative of two or three. In the full sample, the results are more sensitive to
the lag length in the underlying levels vectorautoregression. When the lag length is set to
unity, both tests establish evidence of a single cointegrating relation, but not when the lag
length is set to two.
   When the economic model implies cointegration, it has been argued that it is more ap-
propriate to test the null hypothesis of cointegration than the null of no cointegration (Park
(1990); Park (1992); Ogaki and Park (1997)). Tests of the no cointegration null are known
to have low power against some alternatives and can fail to reject the null with high prob-
ability even though the variables are actually cointegrated (Ogaki and Park (1997)). As
a consequence, a number of researchers have relied on tests of the null of cointegration to
establish evidence of cointegration, even in applications where Dickey-Fuller and Johansen
tests are unable to reject the null of no cointegration (for example, Ogaki and Park (1997);
Han and Ogaki (1997); Ogaki and Reinhart (1998)). A test based on the canonical coin-
tegrating regression, developed in the work of Park (1990) and Park (1992), is available to
test the null of cointegration. Park’s H (0, 1) test has an asymptotic chi-square distribution
with one degree of freedom, and is a test of the null hypothesis of deterministic cointegration
(i.e., that the cointegrating vector which eliminates the stochastic trends also eliminates the
deterministic trends). The results of this test for c, a, and y are reported in Table B.2. The
H (0, 1) test fails to reject the null of cointegration at a very high significance level.
Appendix C: Standard Errors for Impulse Response Functions and
                  Variance Decompositions
   This appendix presents 95% confidence intervals for the impulse response functions and
variance decompositions The confidence intervals are generated from a bootstrap as described
in Gonzalo and Ng (2001). The procedure is as follows. First, the cointegrating vector is
estimated, and conditional on this estimate, the remaining parameters of the VECM are
estimated. The fitted residuals from this VECM, ebt , are obtained and a new sample of
data is constructed using the initial VECM parameter estimates by random sampling of
ebt with replacement. Given this new sample of data, all the parameters are reestimated,
holding fixed the number of cointegrating vectors, and the impulse responses and variance
decompositions stored. This is repeated 5,000 times. The empirical 95% confidence intervals
are evaluated from these 5,000 samples of the bootstrapped impulse response functions are
presented in Table C.1. The empirical 95% confidence intervals are evaluated from these
5,000 samples of the bootstrapped variance decompositions are presented in Table 2.
References
Abel, Andrew B. and Ben S. Bernanke, Macroeconomics, 4 ed., New York, NY: Addison
    Wesley Longman, Inc, 2001.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility,Ô
    Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, 4th Quarter, 1999, pp. 17–53.

Beveridge, Stephen and Charles R. Nelson, “A New Approach to Decomposition of
    Economic Time Series Into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular
    Attention to Measurement of the ’Business Cycle’,Ô Journal of Monetary Economics,
    1981, 7, 151–174.

Blinder, Alan S. and Angus Deaton, “The Time Series Consumption Function Revis-
    ited,Ô Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1985, 2, 465–511.

Campbell, John Y., “Does Saving Anticipate Declining Future Labor Income? An Alter-
    nate Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis,Ô Econometrica, 1987, 55, 1249–73.

     and Angus Deaton, “Why Is Consumption So Smooth?,Ô Review of Economic Stud-
    ies, 1989, 56 (3), 357–73.

     and Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Reinterpret-
    ing the Time Series Evidence,Ô in Oliver Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989, pp. 185–216.

     and John H. Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
    Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,Ô Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107, 205–251.

     and Pierre Perron, “Pitfalls and Opportunities: What Macroeconomists Should
    Know About Unit Roots,Ô in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual: 1991, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Cochrane, John H., “Permanent and Transitory Components of GDP and Stock Prices,Ô
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109, 241–265.

    , Asset Pricing, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.

Constantinides, George M. and Darrell Duffie, “Asset Pricing With Heterogeneous
    Consumers,Ô Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104, 219–40.

Engle, Robert F. and Clive W. J. Granger, “Co-integration and Error Correction
    Representation, Estimation and Testing,Ô Econometrica, 1987, 55, 251–276.
Fernandez-Corugedo, Emilio and Simon Price, “The UK Consumption ECM Redux,Ô
    2002. Unpublished paper, Bank of England.

Flavin, Marjorie, “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About
    Future Income,Ô Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89 (5), 974–1009.

Francis, Neville and Valerie A. Ramey, “Is the Technology Driven Real Business Cycle
    Dead?,Ô 2001. Unpublished Paper, University of California San Diego.

Galı́, Jordi, “Finite Horizons, Life-Cycle Savings, and Time-Series Evidence on Consump-
    tion,Ô Journal of Monetary Economics, 1990, 26, 433–452.

    , “Technology, Employment and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
    Aggregate Fluctuations,Ô American Economic Review, March 1999, 89, 249–271.

Gonzalo, Jesus and Clive Granger, “Estimation of Common Long-Memory Components
    in Cointegrated Systems,Ô Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1995, 13, 27–
    35.

     and Serena Ng, “A Systematic Framework for Analyzing the Dynamic Effects of
    Permanent and Transitory Shocks,Ô Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2001,
    25 (10), 1527–1546.

Gordon, Robert J., Macroeconomics, 6 ed., New York: HarperCollins, 1993.

Han, Hsiang-Ling and Masao Ogaki, “Consumption, Income and Cointegration,Ô In-
    ternational Review of Economics adn Finance, 1997, 6 (2), 107–117.

Hansen, Bruce E., “Tests for Parameter Instability in Regressions with I(1) Processes,Ô
    Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1992, 10 (3), 321–335.

Johansen, Soren, “Statistical Analysis of Cointegrating Vectors,Ô Journal of Economic
    Dynamics and Control, 1988, 12, 231–254.

    , “Estimation and Hypothesis Testing of Cointegration Vectors in Gaussian Vector
    Autoregressive Models,Ô Econometrica, 1991, 56, 1551–1580.

King, Robert, Charles Plosser, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson, “Stochastic
    Trends and Economic Fluctuations,Ô American Economic Review, 1991, 81, 819–840.

Leamer, Edward, Specification Searches, New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons, 1978.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson, “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Ex-
    pected Stock Returns,Ô Journal of Finance, June 2001, 56 (3), 815–849.

Lo, Andrew and A. Craig MacKinlay, “Data Snooping Biases in Test of Financial
    Models,Ô Review of Financial Studies, 1990, 3, 175–208.

Ludvigson, Sydney C. and Charles Steindel, “How Important is the Stock Market
    Effect on Consumption?,Ô FRBNY Economic Policy Review, July 1999, 5 (2), 29–51.

Modigliani, Franco, “Consumer Spending and Monetary Policy: The Linkages,Ô Federal
    Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series, 1971, 1971 (5).

Ng, Serena and Pierre Perron, “Estimation and Inference in Nearly Unbalanced Nearly
    Cointegrated Systems,Ô Journal of Econometrics, 1997.

Ogaki, Masao and Carmen M. Reinhart, “Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The
    Role of Durable Goods,Ô Journal of Political Economy, 1998, 106 (5), 1078–1096.

     and Joon Y. Park, “A Cointegration Approach to Estimating Preference Parame-
    ters,Ô Journal of Econometrics, January 1997, 82 (1), 107–134.

Park, Joon Y., “Testing for Unit Roots and Cointegration by Variable Addition,Ô Advances
    in Econometrics, 1990, 8, 107–133.

    , “Canonical Cointegrating Regressions,Ô Econometrica, 1992, 60 (1), 119–143.

Phillips, Peter and Sam Ouliaris, “Asymptotic Properties of Residual Based Tests for
    Cointegration,Ô Econometrica, 1990, 58, 165–193.

Poterba, James M., “Stock Market Wealth and Consumption,Ô Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 2000, 14 (2), 99–118.

Stock, James H., “Asymptotic Properties of Least Squares Estimators of Cointegrating
    Vectors,Ô Econometrica, 1987, 55, 113–144.

Stock, James H and Mark Watson, “Testing for Common Trends,Ô Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 1988, 83, 1097–1107.

Stock, James H. and Mark Watson, “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating Vectors in
    Higher Order Integrated Systems,Ô Econometrica, 1993, 61, 783–820.
                           Table 1: Estimates From a Cointegrated VAR
                      Dependent variable                        Equation
                                                    ∆ct            ∆at            ∆yt
                              ∆ct−1                0.203           0.063          0.499
                                                  (2.659)         (0.184)        (3.197)
                              ∆at−1                0.043           0.099          0.090
                                                  (2.696)         (1.375)        (2.783)
                              ∆yt−1                0.067          -0.041         -0.123
                                                  (1.674)        (-0.226)       (-1.500)
                             b 0 xt−1
                             α                     -0.036          0.387          0.008
                                                  (-1.380)        (3.236)        (0.159)
                               R̄2                  0.157          0.042          0.086

    Notes: The table reports the estimated coefficients from cointegrated vector autoregressions of the
column variable on the row variable; t-statistics are in parentheses. Estimated coefficients that are
significant at the 5% level are highlighted in bold face. The term ct − α
                                                                        ba at − α        b 0 xt is the estimated
                                                                                b y yt = α
cointegrating residual. The sample spans the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter of 2003.
                      Table 2: Variance Decomposition (Orthogonalized)
                       ∆ct+h − Et ∆ct+h            ∆yt+h − Et ∆yt+h            ∆at+h − Et ∆at+h
       Horizon h         P            T              P            T              P            T
                                                γc = γy = 0
            1          1.000        0.000          1.000        0.000          0.097        0.903
            2          0.967        0.033          0.968        0.032          0.109        0.891
            3          0.964        0.036          0.968        0.032          0.111        0.889
            4          0.964        0.036          0.968        0.032          0.113        0.887
           ∞           0.961        0.039          0.966        0.034          0.119        0.881
                    (0.92, 0.99) (0.01, 0.08)   (0.93, 0.99) (0.01, 0.07)   (0.11, 0.20) (0.80, 0.89)
                                            γc and γy estimated
            1          0.894        0.106          0.999        0.001          0.418        0.582
            2          0.895        0.105          0.995        0.005          0.424        0.576
            3          0.893        0.107          0.995        0.005          0.421        0.579
            4          0.893        0.107          0.995        0.005          0.418        0.582
           ∞           0.892        0.108          0.994        0.006          0.412        0.588
                    (0.63, 0.96) (0.05, 0.37)   (0.81, 0.99) (0.01, 0.19)   (0.25, 0.87) (0.44, 0.76)

Notes: The table reports the fraction of the variance in the h step-ahead forecast error of the variable
listed at the head of each column that is attributable to innovations in the permanent shocks, P, and the
transitory shock, T. Horizons are in quarters, and the underlying VECM is of order one. The last row
reports the bootstrapped, described in Appendix C, 95% confidence intervals for the h = ∞ case. The
sample spans the fourth quarter of 1951 to the third quarter of 2003.
                     Table 3: Variance Decomposition (Unorthogonalized)
                        ∆ct+h − Et ∆ct+h            ∆yt+h − Et ∆yt+h          ∆at+h − Et ∆at+h
       Horizon h        P̃     T̃     P̃ , T̃       P̃        T̃   P̃ , T̃    P̃      T̃     P̃ , T̃
                                                γc = γy = 0
           1          1.000   0.000   0.000       1.000   0.000    0.000     0.932   1.663   -1.595
           2          0.990   0.013   -0.003      1.026   0.045    -0.071    0.932   1.582   -1.514
           3          0.991   0.014   -0.005      1.025   0.046    -0.071    0.888   1.571   -1.459
           4          0.990   0.014   -0.005      1.025   0.046    -0.071    0.851   1.560   -1.411
           ∞          0.990   0.016   -0.005      1.022   0.049    -0.071    0.732   1.531   -1.262
                                           γc and γy estimated
           1          1.149   0.153   -0.303      0.949   0.002    0.049     0.608   0.843   -0.451
           2          1.134   0.153   -0.287      0.951   0.006    0.043     0.608   0.811   -0.419
           3          1.132   0.154   -0.285      0.951   0.006    0.043     0.581   0.830   -0.411
           4          1.131   0.154   -0.285      0.951   0.006    0.043     0.560   0.844   -0.404
           ∞          1.131   0.154   -0.285      0.950   0.007    0.043     0.512   0.880   -0.391

Notes: The table reports the fraction of the variance in the h step-ahead forecast error of the variable
listed at the head of each column that is attributable to innovations in the permanent shocks, P̃ , the
transitory shock, T̃ and two times the covariance between P̃ and T̃ . Horizons are in quarters, and the
underlying VECM is of order 1. The sample spans the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter of 2003.
                               Table 4: Long-Horizon Regressions
                                    Panel A: H
                                            P
                                               h=1 ∆ct+h regressed on
               Horizon H          ∆ct          ∆yt           ∆at       b 0 xt
                                                                       α                R̄2
                 1.00            0.20          0.07         0.04       -0.04           0.17
                                (2.82)       (1.58)        (2.96)     (-1.21)
                  4.00           0.61          0.04         0.13       -0.06           0.14
                                (3.63)       (0.37)        (3.74)     (-0.42)
                  8.00            0.58         0.07         0.09       -0.04           0.04
                                (1.64)       (0.40)        (1.74)     (-0.18)
                 12.00            0.61         0.14         0.00       -0.17           0.04
                                (1.47)       (0.70)        (0.02)     (-0.61)
                 16.00            0.56         0.15         0.02       -0.34           0.04
                                (1.06)       (0.66)        (0.24)     (-0.94)
                                    Panel B: H
                                            P
                                               h=1 ∆yt+h regressed on
               Horizon H          ∆ct          ∆yt           ∆at       b 0 xt
                                                                       α                R̄2
                 1.00            0.50         -0.12         0.09        0.01           0.10
                                (3.81)       (-1.01)       (2.47)     (0.20)
                  4.00           1.36         -0.20         0.15        0.05           0.12
                                (3.95)       (-1.21)       (2.45)     (0.28)
                  8.00            1.37        -0.32         0.02       -0.10           0.04
                                (2.97)       (-1.27)       (0.26)     (-0.35)
                 12.00           1.79         -0.20         -0.03      -0.26           0.06
                                (3.17)       (-0.61)      (-0.24)     (-0.73)
                 16.00           1.46          0.02         -0.07      -0.45           0.04
                                (1.89)       ( 0.05)      (-0.46)     (-0.84)
                                    Panel C: H
                                            P
                                               h=1 ∆at+h regressed on
               Horizon H          ∆ct          ∆yt           ∆at       b 0 xt
                                                                       α                R̄2
                 1.00             0.06        -0.04         0.10       0.39            0.06
                                (0.20)       (-0.23)       (1.20)     (2.61)
                  4.00            0.45         0.11         0.26       1.46            0.17
                                (0.70)       (0.36)        (2.01)     (2.67)
                  8.00           -0.63         0.76         0.42       2.84            0.30
                                (-0.61)      (1.77)        (1.62)     (3.86)
                 12.00            0.03        1.04           0.18      3.81            0.37
                                (0.02)       (2.19)        (0.59)     (3.96)
                 16.00           -0.08         0.96         0.15       3.72            0.29
                                (-0.06)      (2.00)        (0.53)     (2.96)

    Notes for Table 5: The table reports output from long-horizon regressions of consumption, labor
income and asset wealth on lags of these variables and the cointegrating residual α  b 0 xt . The dependent
variables in the h-period regressions are ∆xt+1 + ... + ∆xt+h , where x ∈ {c, y, a}. For each regression,
the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey-West corrected t-statistics (in parentheses) and
adjusted R2 statistics. Significant coefficients at the 5% level are highlighted in bold face. The sample
spans the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter of 2003.
       Table 5: Correlation of Growth Rates with Random Walk Components
                            Variable                     Correlation
                              ∆ct                           0.911
                              ∆yt                           0.871
                              ∆at                           0.182

Notes: The sample period is the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter 2003.
Table 6: Long-Horizon Regressions: Stock Market Wealth and Non-Stock Market Wealth
                                          Forecast Horizon H
                      1          2         4          8     12     16                 24
                                                             PH
                                Panel A: Stock Market Wealth h=1 ∆st+h

                    2.01       3.86       6.93      12.3816.28   17.85  23.57
                   (4.28)     (4.00)     (4.14)     (6.10)
                                                        (7.79)   (6.84) (5.71)
                   [0.08]     [0.14]     [0.23]     [0.42]
                                                         [0.52]  [0.46] [0.43]
                                                              PH
                             Panel B: Non-Stock Market Wealth h=1 ∆nt+h

                    -0.12      -0.21      -0.39     -0.61      -0.83      -1.24     -1.79
                   (-1.93)    (-1.65)    (-1.55)   (-1.27)    (-1.22)    (-1.40)   (-1.56)
                    [0.04]     [0.04]     [0.05]    [0.04]     [0.04]     [0.05]    [0.06]

    Notes: The table reports results from long-horizon regressions of the log first difference of the
    stock market component of asset wealth, ∆st , in Panel A and the log first difference of the
    non-stock market component, ∆nt , in Panel B on the lagged cointegrating residual α     b 0 xt . In
    each column, the first number is the OLS coefficient; the second number, in parentheses, is
    the Newey-West corrected t-statistic; the third number, in square brackets is the adjusted R2
    statistic for the regression. The sample spans the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter
    of 2003.
                           Table 7: Cointegration Vector - Subsamples
                      Sample                             αa                    αy

                      1951Q4-2003Q1                    0.269                  0.621
                      1951Q4-1995Q4                    0.332                  0.571
                      1977Q3-2003Q1                    0.077                  0.978

Notes: This table presents DLS estimates of the cointegration vector αy and αa for various samples. The
variables are consumption ct , labor income yt , and asset wealth at . The sample spans the fourth quarter
of 1951 to the first quarter of 2003.
                                    Table B.1: Cointegration Tests
                      L-max Test                  Trace Test                t-Test        AIC      SIC
                r=      0       1      2    r=      0      1      2    H0 : no coint.
    10% c.v.          18.70 12.10 2.82            26.79 13.34 2.82          -3.52
    5% c.v.           20.78 14.04 3.96            29.51 15.12 3.96          -3.80
    1% c.v.           25.52 17.94 6.94            35.34 19.31 6.94          -4.36

                                               1951Q4-2003Q1 Sample
    1 lag            30.33 5.98 0.95             37.26 6.93 0.95            -4.36        -19.84 -19.69
    2 lags            17.78 4.09 1.05             22.93 5.15 1.05           -3.86        -19.92 -19.63

                                               1951Q4-1995Q4 Sample
    1 lag            31.86 4.80 0.63             37.30 5.44 0.63            -4.77        -20.13 -19.97
    2 lags           21.98 3.79 0.94              26.72 4.74 0.94           -4.44        -20.18 -19.86



    Notes: The first two columns report the L-max and Trace test statistics described in Johansen (1988)
and Johansen (1991). The former tests the null hypothesis that there are r cointegrating relations against
the alternative of r+1; the latter tests the null of r cointegrating relations against the alternative of p,
where p is the number of variables in the cointegrated system. The last column reports the Phillips-
Ouliaris (1990) cointegration test. The critical values for the Phillips-Ouliaris tests allow for trends in
the data. The null hypothesis is no cointegration; significant statistics at the 10% level are highlighted in
bold face. The number of lags in the Johansen tests refers to the VAR specification. AIC is the Akaike
information criterion and SIC is the Schwartz criterion. The sample spans the fourth quarter of 1951 to
the first quarter of 2003.
                                Table B.2: CCR Cointegration Tests
                                   Sample                χ2           p-value
                               1951Q4-2003Q1            0.175          0.675
                               1951Q4-1995Q4            0.869          0.351

Notes: The table reports results from Park’s (1992) canonical cointegration regression (CCR) test. The
null hypothesis is the presence of cointegration. The test statistic is has a χ2 distribution with one degree
of freedom. The variables are consumption ct , labor income yt , and asset wealth at . The sample spans
the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter of 2003.
                                Table C.1: Impulse Response Function
            Horizon                  ct                       yt                      at
               1                    0.000                    0.000                   1.835
                                (0.000,0.000)            (0.000,0.000)           (1.628,1.963)
               4                    0.113                    0.178                   1.437
                                (0.060,0.159)            (0.101,0.249)           (1.085,1.747)
               8                    0.073                    0.113                   0.876
                                (0.03330.117)            (0.054,0.179)           (0.468,1.392)
              12                    0.044                    0.069                   0.535
                                (0.015,0.091)            (0.026,0.134)           (0.203,1.163)
              16                    0.027                    0.042                   0.326
                                (0.007,0.071)            (0.011,0.107)           (0.087,0.970)
              ∞                     0.000                    0.000                   0.000
                                (0.000,0.001)            (0.000,0.002)           (0.000,0.018)

    Notes: The table reports the impulse response function of c, y, and a to the transitory shock. The 95%
confidence intervals are reported in brackets below the point estimates. Standard errors are computed
using the bootstrap procedure described in Gonzalo and Ng (2001) using 10,000 replications. Horizons h
are in quarters, and the underlying VECM is of order 1. The sample spans the fourth quarter of 1951 to
the first quarter of 2003.
          Figure 1: Impulse Response Function to Transitory Shock




Note: Impulse responses to a one-standard deviation transitory shock.
                Figure 2: Estimates of the Trends in c, y and a




Note: The trend is defined as the long-run forecast of each variable given the
multivariate Beveridge-Nelson decomposition for the trivariate system ct , yt and
at . The variables are measured in log real per-capita units.
                  Figure 3: The Transitory Component of Asset Wealth
Percent of Permanent Asset Wealth
   18

   15
                 Above Trend
   12

    9

    6

    3

    0

    -3

    -6

    -9             Below Trend

  -12
    1952      1957     1962     1967   1972   1977   1982   1987   1992   1997   2002
                        Figure 4: Cointegration Residual




Note: The plot shows the cointegrating residual ct − αy yt − αe at from 1951:Q4
to 2003:Q1. The cointegration vector [αy , αa ] is estimated using only data up to
1995:Q4.
