NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENRICHING A THEORY OF WAGE AND
PROMOTION DYNAMICS INSIDE FIRMS
Robert Gibbons
Michael Waldman
Working Paper 9849
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9849
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

We thank Orley Ashenfelter, George Baker, Gary Fields, Paul Oyer, Jan Zabojnik, seminar participants at
Cornell University, Queen’s University, UCLA, and Washington University in St. Louis, and conference
participants at the 2002 SOLE conference and the 2002 SITE and NBER conferences on personnel economics
for helpful comments, and Ari Gerstle and Kameshwari Shankar for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Robert Gibbons and Michael Waldman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

Enriching a Theory of Wage and Promotion Dynamics Inside Firms
Robert Gibbons and Michael Waldman
NBER Working Paper No. 9849
July 2003
JEL No. J3
ABSTRACT
In previous work we showed that a model that integrates job assignment, human-capital acquisition,
and learning can explain several empirical findings concerning wage and promotion dynamics inside
firms. In this paper we extend that model in two ways. First, we incorporate schooling into the
model and derive a number of testable implications that we then compare with the available
empirical evidence. Second, and more important, we show that introducing "task-specific" human
capital allows us to produce cohort effects (i.e., the finding that a cohort that enters a firm at a low
wage will continue to earn below-average wages years later). We argue that task-specific human
capital is a realistic concept and may have many important implications. We also discuss limitations
of our (extended) approach.
Robert Gibbons
Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-590
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rgibbons@mit.edu

Michael Waldman
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
mw46@cornell.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
A standard theme in labor economics, industrial relations, and human resource management has
been that careers in organizations are inconsistent with standard economic theories of labor markets. For
example, Doeringer and Piore (1971) described aspects of internal labor markets (such as ports of entry
and wages attached to jobs) that depart from standard conceptions of competitive labor markets. More
recently, Medoff and Abraham (1980,1981), Lazear (1992), and Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994a,
1994b) provided detailed empirical analyses of careers inside specific firms and argued that many of their
results again do not match standard conceptions of competitive labor markets. In particular, Baker,
Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994b) compared their empirical findings to two theories of wage determination learning and incentives - and found their results to be quite different than the predictions of those theories.
In Gibbons and Waldman (1999a), we developed a theoretical model that integrates job
assignment, human-capital acquisition, and learning. Regarding job assignment, we followed Rosen
(1982) and Waldman (1984a) by assuming that jobs are ranked in terms of the importance of ability, so it
is efficient to assign higher-ability workers to higher levels of the job ladder. Regarding human-capital
acquisition, we followed the spirit of Becker (1962) and Mincer (1974) by assuming that a worker’s
productivity rises during the worker’s career. (We also assumed productivity rises faster for workers of
higher innate ability.) Finally, regarding learning, we followed Harris and Holmstrom (1982) and Farber
and Gibbons (1996) by assuming there is uncertainty about a worker’s ability when she enters the labor
force, but all firms learn about the worker’s ability from public output observations as the worker ages.
Our 1999a model captures many of the empirical results concerning wage and promotion
dynamics found by Medoff and Abraham, by Lazear, by Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom, and by others.1
For example, Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (henceforth, BGH) find that (1) wage changes are serially
correlated, (2) promotions are associated with large wage increases, and (3) workers who receive large
wage increases early in their stay at one level of the job ladder are promoted quickly to the next level.
Our model captures the first and third of these findings because of the skill-acquisition process that we
assume: a worker who receives a large wage increase today is likely a worker with high ability, so the
1

Some of the other studies whose empirical findings are consistent with one or more of our theoretical results
include Rosenbaum (1984), Murphy (1985), Main, O’Reilly, and Wade (1993), McCue (1996), Baker (1997), and
Podolny and Baron (1997). See Gibbons (1997) for a review of this literature through 1997. Also, see Lima and
Pereira (2001) for a recent study testing our theory that uses a longitudinal matched employer-employee panel of 74
large manufacturing firms in Portugal. Their results are in general supportive of our framework.

2

worker’s productivity will likely grow quickly in the future, producing both a large wage increase and an
early promotion. Our model captures the second finding because of the learning process that we assume:
a promoted worker is likely a worker whose most recent output produced positive updating of the beliefs
concerning the worker’s ability, so the worker’s wage will likely increase significantly.2 Our 1999a
model also explains Medoff and Abraham’s findings concerning performance evaluations, provided that
supervisors evaluate individuals relative to others with the same labor-market experience.
In this paper we extend our 1999a model in two directions. First, we address issues that we did
not consider in our earlier work. In particular, we incorporate schooling into the model and derive a
number of testable implications that we then compare with the available empirical evidence. Second, and
more important, we show that an important empirical finding that is inconsistent with our 1999a model
becomes consistent with our approach if we make a realistic new assumption. In particular, we
incorporate task-specific human capital into the model and thereby capture the BGH finding of cohort
effects: a cohort that enters a firm at a low wage will earn below-average wages years later.
The first part of the paper incorporates schooling into our previous model in two ways. First,
schooling increases a worker’s starting level of general-purpose human capital. Second, schooling is
correlated with the speed with which the worker accumulates human capital once she is on the job. We
show that this new model makes a number of predictions concerning how schooling affects wage and
promotion dynamics. To begin, this extended model of course predicts a positive correlation between
schooling and the starting wage, since more schooling means a higher starting level of general human
capital. But the model also makes other predictions, such as that schooling is positively related to
promotion prospects (because a worker with more schooling accumulates human capital more quickly
once she is on the job) and that schooling is positively related to the wage even after holding job level and
experience fixed (because a worker with more schooling has a higher initial level of general human
capital). We compare these predictions with the available evidence and find that, although the evidence is
not clear concerning all the predictions, in general the predictions coincide well with the available data.
The second part of the paper considers cohort effects. BGH find that the average wage at which a
cohort is hired is positively correlated with the cohort’s average wage many years later, even after

2

Our 1999a model also explains two other findings in the BGH study. The first is that real-wage decreases are not
rare but demotions are. The second is that, even though promotions are associated with large wage increases, wage
increases at promotion are small relative to the difference in average wages across levels of the job ladder.

3

controlling for cohort differences in age, gender, race, and education. In our earlier paper we argued that
our framework is inconsistent with this finding, because we believed the finding to be at odds with spotmarket contracting, which is a basic feature of our approach. Here we show that we were incorrect in that
earlier discussion: introducing task-specific human capital into our framework produces cohort effects
even in the presence of spot-market contracting. By task-specific human capital we mean that some of
the human capital an individual acquires on the job is specific to the particular tasks being performed, as
opposed to being specific to the firm. Hence, when a worker is promoted and given a new set of tasks to
perform, some of her acquired human capital goes unutilized on the new job. We show that, if taskspecific human capital is an important part of the skill-acquisition process, then cohort effects can arise.
Our view is that the first of these extensions, concerning schooling, is quite straightforward, but
nonetheless advances the project we advocated in our Handbook chapter, Gibbons and Waldman (1999b)
- namely, that theoretical models of wage determination should begin to address broad patterns of
evidence rather than isolated stylized facts. By incorporating schooling into our model, we are adding
several new findings to the (already fairly large) set of findings that we originally set out to explain.
In contrast to the first extension, we believe the second extension, concerning task-specific
human capital, is more novel and potentially quite rich in its theoretical applications and empirical
implications. Since Becker’s (1962,1964) seminal work, the literature has focused almost exclusively on
general-purpose and firm-specific human capital. We believe that task-specific human capital is
potentially both as commonplace and as important as these better known types. Clearly, when a worker
performs a particular task, it is likely that some of the human capital she acquires is useful for performing
that task but of only limited use in the performance of other tasks; that is, there may be task-specific
learning by doing.3 By introducing task-specific human capital into our model in order to analyze cohort
effects, we hope to set the stage for a variety of future theoretical and empirical exercises concerning
issues such as job design, job assignment, labor mobility, labor demand, and even business strategy.4
3

See Heckman, Lochner, and Cossa (2002) for a recent empirical study that finds evidence consistent with much of
the human-capital accumulation on jobs being due to learning-by-doing.
4 As far as we know, Kwan (1998) was the first to analyze what we are calling task-specific human capital. He
considers this type of human capital in a model similar to Prendergast’s (1993), where wage increases at promotion
are used to provide incentives for investment in human capital. Kwan’s analysis does not consider our main focus
here - namely, the implications of task-specific human capital when cohorts vary in the mix of jobs at which they
enter the firm. See also Chaudhury (2002) for a recent analysis that incorporates task-specific human capital, but
again the focus is not on cohort effects.

4

In sum, this paper reinforces the contention in our 1999a paper that a framework that integrates
job assignment, human-capital acquisition, and learning can explain a large number of empirical findings
concerning wage and promotion dynamics inside firms.5 Our interpretation is not that these three model
elements currently (or could ever) constitute a complete theory of wage and promotion dynamics inside
firms. Clearly other elements - ranging from incentives to social norms - are important parts of such a
theory. Rather, our interpretation is that, for a wide variety of firms, a complete theory of wage and
promotion dynamics is very likely to include our three model elements as integral parts. Notice that we
say a “wide variety” of firms as opposed to “all” firms. This is because we believe our theory does not
apply well to the type of internal labor market initially described by Doeringer and Piore (1971),
involving ports of entry, wages attached to jobs, and little turnover at higher levels of the job ladder. We
return to this issue in Section IV, where we discuss limitations of our approach.

II. THE ROLE OF SCHOOLING IN WAGE AND PROMOTION DYNAMICS
In this section we consider the role of schooling in wage and promotion dynamics inside firms.
We begin by constructing a model that enriches our 1999a model by incorporating schooling. We then
analyze the model and show that it produces several natural predictions concerning the role of schooling
in wage and promotion dynamics inside firms. We end the section by discussing the empirical evidence
on this topic, which is broadly consistent with the model’s predictions. Our main point in this section is
not that this modest enrichment is important in its own right, but rather that enriching the model in this
way adds several new findings to the broad pattern of evidence that our approach can explain.

A. The Model
All firms are identical and the only input is labor. A worker’s career lasts T periods, T≥3.
Worker i enters the labor market with a schooling level, denoted Si, which can take on any integer value
between 1 and N. We assume that there is a positive number of workers at each value of S. One simple
5 Other papers that integrate these three model elements include Bernhardt (1995) and Jovanovic and Nyarko
(1997). In contrast to our approach, Bernhardt’s analysis focuses on asymmetric learning, as in Waldman (1984b),
Greenwald (1986), and Gibbons and Katz (1991), where a worker’s current employer receives better information
concerning the worker’s ability than prospective employers receive. Jovanovic and Nyarko do not consider the
ability of their model to capture a broad set of empirical findings. Bernhardt does, but his model cannot explain a
number of important findings in the literature; see Section V of Gibbons and Waldman (1999a) for a detailed
discussion of Bernhardt’s analysis.

5

interpretation is that a worker’s schooling level is the number of years the worker spent in school prior to
entering the labor market.6
Greater schooling makes a worker more productive, but so does greater experience. This
distinction between schooling and experience is standard in the literature, but we consider the
microfoundations of the effects of schooling and experience in more than the usual level of detail, as
follows. Let ηit denote the worker’s “on-the-job human capital,” where
ηit=θif(xit).

(1)

In this specification of on-the-job human capital, θi is the worker’s ability to learn on the job and xit is the
worker’s labor-market experience prior to period t (i.e., for a worker in her first period in the labor
market, prior experience xit equals zero). In this specification, θif ′(xit) is the speed with which on-the-job
human capital grows in period t, where f(0)>0, f ′>0, and f ′′<0.7 Thus, a worker with more ability to
learn on the job (i.e., higher θ) accumulates on-the-job human capital more quickly. We assume that a
worker with schooling level S has ability to learn on the job equal to φH+B(S) with probability p and
ability to learn on the job equal to φL+B(S) with probability (1-p), where φH>φL and B′>0. That is,
schooling is positively correlated with a worker’s ability to learn on the job (either because schooling is
useful for learning on the job or because there is a positive relationship between schooling and innate
ability to learn on the job).
A firm consists of two different jobs, denoted 1 and 2. In our 1999a paper, we allowed for three
job levels, but little of the evidence discussed below relies on three job levels, so here we assume only
two levels to simplify the analysis. If worker i is assigned to job j in period t then the worker produces
(2)

yijt=dj+G(Si)+cj(ηit+εijt),

where dj and cj are constants known to all labor-market participants, G′>0 and G′′<0, and εijt is a noise
term drawn from a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance σ2.8 Let η′ denote the amount of on-the6

With this interpretation, it would probably be more accurate to assume that worker i’s career lasts Ti periods,
where Ti=A-Si. But since nothing of significance would be changed by assuming this, for simplicity of exposition
we assume that the career lasts T periods for all workers.

7

We assume f(0)>0 rather than f(0)=0. One interpretation is that this model is a simplified version of a continuoustime model where production in the first period represents production in the early part of the worker’s career.
Since, on average, during this early part of the career the worker has a positive amount of labor-market experience,
it is natural to assume f(0)>0 rather than f(0)=0.
8

We could have assumed that the extra productivity due to a worker’s starting level of general-purpose human
capital depends on the job the worker is assigned to. That is, rather than this productivity being equal to G(Si), we

6

job human capital at which a worker is equally productive at jobs 1 and 2. That is, η′ solves
d1+c1η=d2+c2η. We assume c2>c1>0 and d2<d1<0, so the efficient assignment for a worker with η>η′ is
job 2, while the efficient assignment for a worker with η<η′ is job 1.
We assume that each worker’s schooling level is known to all labor-market participants when the
worker enters the labor market. In contrast, each worker’s value for θi is not known by either the firms or
the worker, although the probability p and ability levels φL+B(S) and φH+B(S) are common knowledge.
Learning about θi takes place at the end of each period, when the realization of the worker’s output for
that period is publicly observed. The presence of the noise term εijt in (2) implies that learning occurs
gradually, as follows.
Let zit=[(yijt-dj-G(Si))/cj]-B(Si)f(xit)=ηit-B(Si)f(xit)+εijt. That is, zit is the signal about the worker’s
on-the-job human capital after subtracting off the human capital due to the schooling term B(Si) that the
market extracts from observing the worker’s output in period t. We refer to zit as the worker’s normalized
output from period t (i.e., normalized to abstract from job assignment and schooling) and to (zit-x,...,zit-1)
as the worker’s normalized output history at date t. Because the signal zit is independent of job
assignment and schooling, there is no difference in the rate of learning across jobs and schooling levels.
Let θite denote worker i’s expected ability to learn on the job at date t: θite=E(θiSi,zit-x,...,zit-1). From θite
we can compute the expected on-the-job human capital of worker i in period t:
ηite=θitef(xit).

(3)

For example, if worker i enters the labor market in period t with schooling Si, then ηite=[pφH+(1-p)φL+
B(Si)]f(0). (Recall that xit measures prior labor-market experience, so xit=0 in the worker’s first period in
the labor market.)
Workers and firms are risk neutral and have a discount rate of zero. There is no cost to workers
from changing firms, or to firms from hiring or firing workers. Under these assumptions, there are no
benefits to long-term contracts, so we assume that wages are determined by spot-market contracting.
Finally, to ease the comparison of the model with the empirical evidence, we restrict attention to wages
that are paid in advance of production, as opposed to one-period piece-rate contracts.
There is free entry into production. At the beginning of each period, all firms simultaneously
offer each worker a wage for that period. The worker then works for the firm that offers the highest
could have assumed it equals Gj(Si) for a worker assigned to job j. Given the additional assumptions G2(Si)≥G1(Si)
for all Si and G2′(Si)≥G1′(Si) for all Si, all the qualitative results that follow would still hold.

7

wage. If there are multiple firms tied at the highest wage, the worker chooses randomly among these
firms (unless one of these tied firms was the worker’s employer in the previous period, in which case the
worker remains with that firm). This tie-breaking rule is equivalent to assuming a moving cost that is
infinitesimally small; as a result, there is no turnover in equilibrium.
To reduce the number of cases that need to be considered, we restrict the analysis to
parameterizations that satisfy the following conditions. First, [pφH+(1-p)φL+B(N)]f(0)<η′, so that it is
efficient for each worker to be assigned to job 1 in the first period of the worker’s career. Second,
[φH+B(S)]f(T-1)>η′>[φL+B(S)]f(T-1) for all S, so that for each schooling level it is efficient for workers
with the highest ability to learn on the job to be on job 2 by the end of their careers, but for workers with
the lowest ability it is efficient to remain on job 1.
As a final point, there are a number of ways this model could be made more realistic. For
example, we could start with workers having some knowledge of their own innate abilities and
incorporate a cost of schooling, and then have the schooling distribution be derived endogenously, as in
Spence (1973). Or, we could assume a worker’s schooling level is positively related to the extra
productivity due to a worker’s starting level of general-purpose human capital G(Si), but not in a
deterministic way. We believe our main results are robust to both changes. The reason we consider the
particular specification above is that it allows us to present our main results in a tractable analysis.

B) Analysis
We begin with a general result concerning how workers are assigned to jobs and how they are
paid. We then turn our attention to how schooling affects wage and promotion dynamics. The general
result is that, as in Gibbons and Waldman (1999a), in each period each worker is assigned to the job that
maximizes her expected output in that period and paid a wage equal to that expected output.9 Let wit
denote the equilibrium wage paid to worker i in period t.

Proposition 1: In equilibrium, job assignments and wages are given by i) and ii).
i) If ηite<η′, then worker i is assigned to job 1 in period t and paid wit=d1+G(Si)+c1ηite.

9

Throughout the analysis we assume that if a firm is indifferent between assigning a worker to either of the two
jobs then the firm assigns the worker to the high-level job. This assumption is not crucial for the analysis but
simplifies the statements of some results.

8

ii) If ηite≥η′, then worker i is assigned to job 2 in period t and paid wit=d2+G(Si)+c2ηite.

Proposition 1 tells us that the assignment of workers to jobs follows a simple rule: a worker is
assigned to the high-level job if and only if her expected on-the-job human capital exceeds the critical
value η′. Only the expected on-the-job human capital matters, rather than other moments of the
distribution, because output in each job is a linear function of on-the-job human capital and the rate of
learning is independent of job assignment.
This model is a simple extension of our 1999a model, so it of course reproduces most of the BGH
findings captured by our original model. Three such findings follow. First, this model captures the
finding of serially correlated wage increases. The reason is that a large wage increase today likely means
the worker has high ability to learn on the job, which is positively correlated with a large wage increase
tomorrow. Second, this model captures the finding that a large wage increase early in a worker’s stay at
one level of the job ladder is positively correlated with quick promotion to the next level. The logic here
is that, similar to the argument above, a large wage increase early in a worker’s stay at job 1 likely means
the worker has high ability to learn on the job, which implies that on-the-job human capital will likely
grow quickly and induce promotion. Third, this model also captures the finding of large wage increases
at promotion. As in our 1999a model, this result follows from a selection effect: a promoted worker will
likely be a worker for whom learning resulted in a large increase in expected on-the-job human capital.10
This model also explains a BGH finding that our previous model did not capture. BGH found
that adjacent levels of the job ladder had overlapping wage distributions: the highest paid workers at level
L made more than the lowest paid workers at level L+1. In our earlier model there were no schooling
levels and all workers were ex ante identical, so a worker’s wage and job assignment depended solely on
ηite, so the highest paid worker at level L was paid strictly less than the lowest paid worker at level L+1.
In this section’s model, however, a worker’s wage depends on both ηite and the worker’s schooling level.
Consequently, in contrast to our earlier analysis, this model exhibits overlapping wage distributions: the
highest-paid workers assigned to job 1 are paid more than the lowest-paid workers assigned to job 2.
Furthermore, our theory not only explains overlapping wage distributions but does so in a testable way: if

10

All of these results follow easily from results in our earlier paper given that in each case we are referring to
workers of a given schooling level. We believe that each of the results also holds without controlling for workers’
schooling levels, but we have not formally shown this.

9

we consider pairs of workers on adjacent levels, where the worker assigned to the lower level is paid
more than the worker assigned to the higher one, the worker on the lower level should typically have
more schooling.11
We now turn our attention to predictions concerning the relationship between schooling and wage
and promotion dynamics. Corollary 1 states our (unsurprising) first prediction: schooling is positively
related to the starting wage.

Corollary 1: The wage a worker receives in her first period in the labor market is a strictly increasing
function of the worker’s schooling level.

In this model, a worker’s starting wage is an increasing function of her schooling level for two reasons.
The first is that more schooling means that a worker enters the labor force with more general-purpose
human capital and so is paid more. The second is that, because B′>0, a worker with more schooling has a
higher expected starting level of on-the-job human capital, E(θif(0)) (see footnote 7).
The second prediction is that schooling is positively related to job level. Corollary 2 develops
this prediction. Let π(X,S) denote the proportion of workers of experience X and schooling level S who
are assigned to the high-level job.

Corollary 2: Given any (X,S) pair, where 1≤X≤T-1 and S≤N-1, π(X,S+1)≥π(X,S). Also, the inequality is
strict if X is sufficiently close to T-1.

The logic for this result follows from the way that schooling is correlated with the speed of human-capital
acquisition. Holding experience constant, workers with more schooling will likely have higher ability to
learn on the job. This means that if we consider any experience, X, and any critical value, η+, workers
11

In Gibbons and Waldman (1999a) we discussed a different extension of our original analysis that captures
overlapping wage distributions (see footnote 13 of that paper). In particular, we argued that overlapping wage
distributions can be explained by each firm having multiple job ladders, where promotions only occur within
ladders and not across. Our argument was that, if the wage distributions for one ladder are shifted relative to
another, then an analysis of the aggregate job ladder would yield overlapping wage distributions. We believe the
schooling argument above is a superior argument. The reason is that, although we are not familiar with any
evidence on the subject, we suspect that when a firm has multiple job ladders there are overlapping wage
distributions for each job ladder that makes up the aggregate job ladder, and the schooling argument presented here
is consistent with such a finding.

10

with schooling level S+1 will have a higher proportion whose expected on-the-job human capital exceeds
η+ than will workers with schooling level S. Since any worker whose on-the-job human capital exceeds
η′ will be assigned to the high-level job, we now have that at any experience level the proportion assigned
to the high-level job will be increasing in the schooling level.
Notice that although the corollary is directly a statement about job assignments, it easily
translates into a statement about promotions. That is, since all workers in our model start their careers in
the low-level job, the corollary tells us that the promotion rate is higher for workers with higher schooling
levels, i.e., π(T-1,S)/(T-1) is increasing in S. Additionally, although we do not show it formally, a
refinement of this prediction is that in empirical analyses of promotion rates the relationship between
schooling and promotions will be weaker when other measures of worker ability to learn on the job are
included as explanatory variables. The logic here is that in our model schooling affects the probability of
promotion through its correlation with the worker’s ability to learn on the job. Hence, if one included a
noisy measure of this ability in a regression analysis of promotion rates, the prediction is that the
measured impact of schooling on promotions should fall.
The third prediction is that wage increases are positively related to schooling. Corollary 3
develops this prediction. Let W(X,S) denote the average wage paid to workers of experience X who have
schooling level S.

Corollary 3: For any parameterization, if demotions are sufficiently rare, then given any X, 0≤X≤T-2,
W(X+1,S)-W(X,S) is a strictly increasing function of S.

The logic for this result is straightforward if we restrict attention to values of X such that all workers are
assigned to the low-level job at experience levels X and X+1, because the argument is then similar to why
workers with more schooling are typically promoted more quickly. As stated above, at any given
experience level, workers with more schooling will on average have a higher ability to learn on the job.
This means that, as the workers gain experience, those with more schooling will on average experience
higher growth in on-the-job human capital. In turn, since a worker assigned to the low-level job in
adjacent periods will experience a wage change equal to c1 multiplied by the change in the worker’s onthe-job human capital, we have that those with more schooling will on average experience higher wage
growth.

11

The result still holds but the argument becomes more complicated when it is possible that a
worker will be on different jobs at experience levels X and X+1 as long as demotions are rare (which is
typically the case).12 For example, suppose that all workers are assigned to the low-level job when
experience equals X but some workers are assigned to the high-level job when experience equals X+1.
Now there are two reasons why schooling is positively related to wage increases. The first is that those
with more schooling typically experience higher growth in on-the-job human capital. The second
concerns the fact that, in contrast to what was true before, a worker’s wage change does not always equal
c1 multiplied by the change in on-the-job human capital. Rather, for those promoted, the wage change
equals a convex combination of c1 and c2 multiplied by the change in on-the-job human capital, where
c2>c1. This results in a second reason that schooling leads to larger wage increases, because from
Corollary 2 we know that higher schooling means that more workers are promoted.
Our last prediction is that schooling is positively related to wages even after controlling for
experience and job assignment. Let Wj(X,S) be the average wage paid to workers of experience level X
and schooling level S who are assigned to job j. Also, to generate this prediction we now assume that the
extra productivity due directly to schooling is given by G(S)=λg(S), where λ>0, g′>0, and g′′<0.

Corollary 4: Holding all other parameters fixed, if λ is sufficiently large, then Wj(X,S+1)-Wj(X,S)>0 for
all (X,S,j) triplets, where 0≤X≤T-1, S≤N-1, and j=H,L.

This result follows because of the effect that a worker’s starting level of general-purpose human capital
has on productivity. Since this effect does not vary across jobs, it does not affect job assignment, but it
does affect productivity and thus wages. In turn, since higher schooling means higher productivity due to
the higher starting level of general-purpose human capital, the presence of this factor serves to make the
wage a positive function of schooling even after controlling for experience and job assignment.13 Note
12

The role of demotions being rare is as follows. When a worker is demoted, instead of the worker’s wage
decrease being c2 multiplied by the decrease in the the worker’s expected on-the-job human capital, the wage
decrease is a convex combination of c1 and c2 multiplied by the decrease in the worker’s expected on-the-job human
capital, i.e., the wage decrease is smaller. The result is that, if there is a much higher frequency of demotions at a
lower schooling level, then it is possible that the lower schooling level will have a higher return to experience.
13

Although the argument is a bit more complicated, the result also holds if, as we briefly discussed in footnote 8,
the extra productivity due to a worker’s starting level of general-purpose human capital were allowed to vary with
job assignment. The reason is that, since this extra productivity would still increase with schooling, a sufficiently

12

that there is a complicating factor because a worker’s schooling level affects the underlying distribution
of true ability to learn on the job, so extra schooling will affect (and possibly reduce) the expected ability
to learn on the job of workers with a given experience and job assignment. The restriction that λ is large
means that the first factor dominates, and therefore that the wage increases with schooling even after
controlling for experience and job assignment.

C) Empirical Evidence
We now consider the extent to which the available empirical evidence concerning schooling and
wage growth supports our theoretical predictions. Unfortunately, most of the vast literature concerning
schooling and wage growth does not speak to any of our predictions. That is, because the goal of
previous studies was not to test the theory developed above, much of the existing evidence cannot be used
either to refute or to support our predictions. Nevertheless, there are a few studies that have reported
results that do address our predictions and, although the evidence is a bit mixed, we feel that overall the
results support our theoretical predictions.
We begin with BGH. In our previous paper we discussed a variety of findings from the BGH
study, but there were two findings concerning schooling that we did not address. First, BGH find that the
average schooling of workers promoted into a job level increases with the level the worker is promoted
into. Although this is not exactly what Corollary 2 states, it would be easy to extend the model to
additional job levels to capture exactly this prediction. Second, BGH run a wage regression similar to the
standard Mincerian human-capital earnings function discussed below but also include the worker’s job
level. Consistent with our model (Corollary 4), they find that higher values for schooling are associated
with higher wages, even after controlling for experience and job level.
There are a number of other studies that find evidence consistent with schooling being positively
related to promotions, and with schooling being positively related to the wage even after controlling for
experience and job level. For example, similar to BGH, Medoff and Abraham (1980,1981) run Mincerian
regressions that include job level and find that schooling is positively related to earnings even after one
controls for experience and job level. They also study the factors that affect promotion and find that
schooling is positively related to promotion probabilities. Similarly, McCue (1996) finds (using evidence
high value of λ is enough to ensure that the wage increases with schooling, even after holding experience and job
assignment fixed.

13

from the PSID) that promotion probabilities are positively related to schooling level, although this finding
is statistically significant only for white men; for other demographic groups, the coefficients typically are
positive but are not statistically significant.
In a very recent study using German data, Lluis (2001) also looks at the effect of schooling on
promotion rates. She first shows that schooling is significantly positively related to promotions. She then
incorporates a lagged value for each worker’s wage growth into her empirical analysis and shows that this
weakens the correlation between schooling and promotions. Notice that, consistent with our discussion
following Corollary 2, this is exactly what our model predicts should happen. The lagged value of a
worker’s wage growth is a noisy measure of the worker’s ability to learn on the job, and our model thus
predicts that the correlation between schooling and promotions should be weaker when lagged wage
growth is included as an explanatory variable.
We now turn to the vast empirical literature concerning schooling and earnings that employs the
earnings function first explored in Mincer (1974); see Willis (1986) for an early survey of this literature
and Card (1999) for a more recent survey. As is well known, Mincer estimates a log wage equation:
(4)

log y=β1+β2S+β3X+β4X2+e,

where y is earnings, S is the number of years of schooling, X is labor-market experience, and e is an error
term. Mincer’s finding that β2>0 is consistent with our first prediction: initial compensation (i.e., the
wage received when entering the labor market) is increasing in the schooling level. This finding is also
consistent with our second prediction: the absolute (rather than percentage) return to an extra year of
experience is increasing in schooling. The reason is that, given the log specification that Mincer studied,
β2>0 means that the percentage return to schooling is constant with experience, implying that the absolute
return to schooling is increasing with experience.
But just because (4) is the specification that Mincer and others have studied, it is not necessarily
the correct specification. For example, in his original study Mincer added to (4) an experience-schooling
interaction term and found a significant negative coefficient on this term. This finding introduces the
possibility that the absolute return to an extra year of experience is not positively related to the schooling
level but rather is either independent or negatively related.
A recent study concerning schooling and wage rates that does not take the standard Mincerian
approach is Farber and Gibbons (1996). (Altonji and Pierret (2001) is related but takes an approach more

14

similar to Mincer’s.) In testing a pure-learning model of wage dynamics, Farber and Gibbons estimate
the wage-level (as opposed to log-wage) specification given in equation (5):
y=β1+β2S+β3X+β4X2+β5S×X+β6U+β7U×X+e,

(5)

where U is a variable correlated with ability but unobserved by employers (such as a test score). The
pure-learning theory that Farber and Gibbons consider predicts β5=0 and β7>0: the absolute return to an
extra year of schooling is independent of experience, whereas the absolute return to a higher value for U
is increasing with experience.
Farber and Gibbons estimate regression (5) with and without the U and U×X terms. When they
include controls for changes in the return to education over time, they find results consistent with their
prediction that β5=0, both when they include the U and U×X terms and when they do not. When the U
and U×X terms are included, their finding that β5=0 is consistent with our model.14 But when the U and
U×X terms are not included, our model predicts β5>0, so these Farber-Gibbons results are problematic for
our theory. But Farber and Gibbons also find that when the controls for changes in the return to
education over time are not included, then β5>0 when the U and U×X terms are not included, as our
theory predicts. It is possible that data limitations in the Farber-Gibbons sample created a strong
relationship between a worker’s schooling level and the date at which the worker entered their sample, so
that the true effect of schooling on the return to experience is better estimated without controls for
changes in the return to education over time.15 Clearly, additional empirical investigation of this issue
would be helpful.16
14

The logic here is as follows. Our model assumes a correlation between schooling (Si) and ability to learn on the
job (θi), captured by the term B(Si). In our model, this correlation with θi is the only way that schooling might have
a measured effect on the return to experience. Thus, if variables correlated with ability to learn on the job are
included in the regression specification and there is no remaining correlation between schooling and ability once
those variables are included, then the prediction of our model is what Farber and Gibbons found: β5=0 and β7>0.

15

Their sample consisted of workers in the NLSY between the ages of 14 and 21 on January 1, 1979 and data for
these workers between 1979 and 1991, where a worker typically entered the sample when he finished his schooling.
Given this sample, there is likely a strong relationship between a worker’s schooling level and the year when he
enters the sample, i.e., those with high values for schooling will typically enter later. This causes two potential
problems for finding the true impact that schooling has on the return to experience. First, there are likely to be few
data points for many of the workers whose schooling levels are high. Second, because many of the workers with
high schooling levels enter the sample later, some of the impact that education has on the return to experience might
be picked up by the controls Farber and Gibbons included for changes in the return to education over time.

16

See Habermalz (2003) for a recent study using the Current Population Survey that allows for non-linearity
concerning how the return to education varies with experience, and finds results that suggest education positively
affects the return to experience over a substantial part of workers’ careers.

15

In summary, although there is not much direct evidence concerning our theoretical predictions,
on three of the predictions - schooling being positively related to promotions, the correlation between
schooling and promotions being weaker when a noisy measure of a worker’s ability to learn on the job is
included, and schooling being related to the wage even after controlling for experience and job level - the
available evidence is supportive. For the remaining prediction - schooling being positively related to the
return to experience - there is a single study that is not supportive, but we do not feel the evidence there is
definitive. (We take as given that the evidence is consistent with our prediction that schooling positively
affects the starting wage.) Hence, all told, we feel the available evidence supports our theoretical model,
but clearly more evidence is needed before reaching any final conclusions.

III. AN EXPLANATION OF COHORT EFFECTS
In this section we provide an explanation for why wage and promotion dynamics inside firms
might exhibit cohort effects. We begin by discussing the recent empirical literature on cohort effects and
providing a basic intuition that explains how task-specific human capital can produce cohort effects, even
in the spot-market framework that we analyze. We then present a variant of the model in Section II and
show that it exhibits cohort effects. Finally, we analyze some other possible implications of task-specific
human capital in this model.
Our idea of task-specific human capital is closely related to occupation-and industry-specific
human capital. In each case, human capital is specific to the nature of the work, not specific to the firm.
Hence, when capital is accumulated, multiple firms value the capital, so most (or even all) of the value of
the capital will be reflected in the worker’s wage. The main difference between our idea of task-specific
human capital and occupation- and industry-specific human capital is how the idea is applied. Our main
focus is on how the presence of task-specific human capital affects the promotion process, whereas
analyses of occupation- and industry-specific human capital typically ignore promotions.17

A) Empirical Evidence and Basic Argument
There are two well known recent studies of cohort effects: Baker, Gibbs, and Homstrom (1994b)

17

For a formal analysis of occupation-specific human capital see Weiss (1971), while Neal (1995) and Parent
(2000) are recent empirical studies of industry-specific human capital. Consistent with our discussion, however,
none of these papers considers the implications for the promotion process.

16

and Beaudry and DiNardo (1991). BGH study the personnel records of managers in a single firm over a
twenty-year period. Regarding cohort effects, they find that a cohort’s average wage upon entering the
firm is an important determinant of the cohort’s average wage years after entry. Of course, this would not
be surprising if a cohort’s average wage upon entry reflected differences in the composition (and thus
average productivity) of a cohort. But BGH find no evidence that composition differences in race, sex,
age, or education can explain a cohort’s average wage years after entry.
Beaudry and DiNardo find cohort effects in panel data covering a large cross-section of
occupations and industries. Their initial finding is that the unemployment rate in the year a worker enters
the firm affects wages years after entry. But Beaudry and DiNardo conduct further analyses that allow
both the current unemployment rate and the lowest unemployment rate since a worker’s entry year to
affect current wages. They find that each of these three regressors (entry unemployment, current
unemployment, and lowest unemployment) is significant on its own, but that the lowest unemployment
rate since entry is the only significant regressor when all three are included. These Beaudry-DiNardo
findings suggest alternative interpretations of the BGH cohort effect. For example, the apparent influence
of a cohort’s entry wage on its current wage might disappear if one controlled for the highest wage paid to
any entering cohort since the first cohort entered.18
In Gibbons and Waldman (1999a), we argued that the spot-contracting framework we considered
in that paper (and this one) is inconsistent with the cohort effects found by BGH, and with the range of
findings by Beaudry and DiNardo. Our argument was based on Beaudry and DiNardo’s interpretation of
their own results in terms of long-term insurance contracts, akin to those analyzed by Harris and
Holmstrom (1982). Since our 1999a model assumes wages are determined each period by competition
between a worker’s current employer and prospective employers (and all parties are risk neutral), longterm insurance contracts are neither necessary nor feasible, so we concluded that cohort effects were
inconsistent with our model. In this section we show that we were incorrect in our previous conclusion: a
competitive framework is potentially consistent with cohort effects, even after controlling for composition
18 MacLeod and Malcomson (1993) put forth a model that can explain the cohort effects found by Beadry and
DiNardo. In their analysis, fixed-wage contracts are employed to induce efficient general investments by the firm
(i.e., investments that are not specific to a particular worker). These contracts are such that the wage moves only
when one of the outside options changes, so that the relationship will be terminated if the wage remains unchanged
(even if it is efficient for the relationship to continue). Although such contracts can explain the Beaudry and
DiNardo finding that the best labor-market conditions since the start of a worker’s job have a significant positive
effect on the worker’s current wage, we are skeptical concerning the ability of such contracts to match other
important findings in the empirical literature concerning careers.

17

differences, because a cohort’s prior experiences at a firm can have a significant effect on actual or
perceived productivity. In the next subsection, we develop an argument along this line and show how it
can explain the BGH finding that a cohort’s entry wage is correlated with the cohort’s wage years later.
There are two key aspects to this new model: i) the state of the economy can be either good or
bad, and ii) human-capital acquisition is task-specific, so some of a worker’s acquired human capital goes
unutilized when a worker is promoted and is assigned to a new set of tasks. When the economy is in the
bad state, a higher proportion of young workers enter the firm at the low-level job. Since human capital is
task-specific, some of a worker’s acquired human capital goes unutilized when she is promoted, so a
cohort hired in the bad state has a low average wage years later. (This result holds even if all the workers
get to the high-level job eventually, because they have less time there and so are less productive). To
capture the BGH finding that low wages at entry predict low wages later, we require that the cohort’s
entry wage be low in the bad state. Given the two states are sufficiently different, this occurs in our
model because the bad state has both more entry workers on the low-level job and a lower entry wage on
the high-level job.19
One interesting aspect of this argument is that, although we explain the BGH finding that a
cohort’s entry wage is correlated with the cohort’s wage years later, this is not because the entry wage
itself matters. Instead, what matters is the proportion of workers who start at the low-level job, which
affects the number and productivity of workers in the high-level job years later. Our explanation for the
BGH cohort effects is consistent with further evidence reported by BGH: although they find no evidence
that composition differences in race, sex, age, and education across cohorts explain their cohort-effects
finding, they do find that a higher proportion of new workers entered the firm at lower job levels during
1976-1985, which is when the entry wage was low. This is exactly what our explanation predicts: there is
a low wage upon entry when more workers enter the firm in the lower job levels, and it is the low skill
acquisition (or the lack of transferability of skills acquired in the low job) that affects wages years later.20

19 Although we focus on the BGH finding that a cohort’s entry wage is correlated with the cohort’s average wage
years later, we believe our basic argument can also capture the Beaudry and DiNardo findings. As indicated, they
find that when entry unemployment, current unemployment, and lowest unemployment since entry are all included
as explanatory variables in a wage regression, it is only the lowest unemployment rate since entry that matters. Our
approach will capture this finding (or at least that the lowest unemployment rate since entry matters more) if the
lowest unemployment rate since entry is more highly correlated with prior assignments to high-level jobs and thus
more highly correlated with the amount and quality of the cohort’s human capital in the current period.

18

In addition to the BGH study, there are a number of recent empirical studies that find results
consistent with our argument. First, Kahn (2002) uses the NLSY to study the effect that the national
unemployment rate in the year a worker graduates from college has on the worker’s earnings over her
career. Consistent with our theoretical model, Kahn finds that graduating in a bad year has large negative
effects on wages, both in the year of graduation and much later in the career. Second, Devereux (2002a)
uses the PSID to investigate the effects that taking a good job (i.e., a high-paying job) has on wages years
later. (An important difference between this study and Beaudry and DiNardo’s is that Devereux does not
exclude workers who subsequently switch employers.) Also consistent with our theoretical approach,
Devereux finds that there is a significant positive effect on wages received four years later, both for
workers who remain with the same employer and for those who switch. Third, a related study that
supports our general approach is Devereux (2002b), which shows that the average education level of new
hires within occupations is higher when the economy is contracting rather than expanding. This is
consistent with our model in that, for both the low-level and high-level jobs, the average education level
for new hires is higher when the state of the economy is bad rather than good.21
As a final point, although our analysis focuses on how task-specific human capital can explain
cohort effects, the basic point is more general: cohort effects can arise whenever a cohort’s past
experiences affect subsequent actual and/or perceived productivity. For example, suppose there is no
task-specific human capital, but the rate at which workers acquire human capital depends on how “busy”
the firm is (e.g., workers learn more from “interesting” projects, but such projects are scarce in slack
times). Then a cohort that enters the firm when it is not busy may receive a low wage upon entry and also
do poorly years later because little was learned during the entry period. Similarly, suppose there is no
20

Note that what we call state of the economy could just as well be the state of the industry (or even state of the
firm, if we were to introduce some firm-specific human capital into the model). These two reinterpretations are
quite plausible for the financial services firm that BGH study.
21

Another related study is Welch (1979), which considers the effects of cohort size on earnings. Welch finds that
being a member of a large cohort has a significant negative effect on the worker’s wage when she enters the labor
force and a smaller, but still negative effect, later in the worker’s career. He interprets this as limited substitutability
in production across cohorts, where this limited substitutability gets less important as the cohort ages. An
alternative interpretation is that task-specific human capital is important. In this interpretation, when a large cohort
enters the labor market, because there are a limited number of high-level positions available to entry-level workers,
the cohort earns on average lower wages and works on average in lower-level jobs. In turn, if human capital is task
specific, then there will be a subsequent negative effect on wages as the cohort ages. The reason is that, if a large
cohort enters the labor force on average in lower-level jobs, then the presence of task-specific human capital lowers
subsequent wages because the human capital the cohort acquires while young is less valuable after promotions take
place.

19

task-specific human capital and how busy a firm is does not matter, but asymmetric learning causes a
worker’s job-assignment history to serve as a signal of ability (as initially explored in Waldman
(1984b,1990) and Ricart i Costa (1987)). That is, suppose more workers enter the labor market at lowlevel jobs when the state of the economy is bad, and promotions are rare as long as the economy stays
bad. Then, if prospective employers interpret a worker’s job-assignment history as a signal of the
worker’s ability, but fail to account for the state of the world when a worker was young, then a worker’s
cohort can affect the worker’s compensation years later.

B) Model
There are three main differences between the model explored here and the one analyzed in
Section II. The first difference concerns the idea that human capital is now task-specific. But to keep the
model simple, we restrict this effect to job 2. That is, we assume that job 1 is analogous to both jobs in
Section II (and all the jobs in our 1999a paper): past labor-market experience improves a worker’s current
productivity on job 1, and the extent of this productivity improvement is independent of how much of the
past experience was on which jobs. Formally, we assume that if worker i has experience xit in period t,
then this worker’s output in job 1 in that period is
(6)

yi1t=d1+c1[θif(xit)+εi1t],

similar to equation (2) in Section II. For job 2, however, we make a different assumption. Now skill
acquisition is task-specific: past experience improves a worker’s current productivity on job 2, but
experience on job 2 creates a larger productivity improvement than does experience on job 1. Formally,
we assume that if worker i has experience xit in period t then this worker’s output in job 2 in that period is
(7)

yi2t=d2+c2[θif(xi2t+αxi1t)+εi2t],

where xijt is the past experience that worker i has accumulated in job j prior to period t, so xi1t+xi2t=xit, and
α∈(0,1) is a parameter that reflects the extent to which experience on job 1 creates a productivity
improvement on job 2. That is, because acquired human capital is task-specific in job 2, when a worker is
promoted from job 1 to job 2, a previous period that the worker spent in job 1 counts as only α of a period
in the skill-acquisition function.22 Although equations (6) and (7) no longer include the productivity term
22

As indicated, to keep the model simple, we have allowed task-specific human capital only in job 2. We could
also allow task-specific human capital in job 1. If we then further restricted the analysis to parameterizations for
which there are few (if any) demotions (which is what most of the data shows), then this alternative specification
would produce basically the same results as we derive.

20

G(Si) since it is not needed for any of the results below, we continue to assume heterogeneity in
schooling, because of the role it plays in initial job assignments.
The second difference between this section’s model and Section II’s is that now there are two
states of the world, where the state of the world affects relative productivities and hence job assignments.
The simplest way to capture this possibility is to have the state of the world affect the productivity of the
high-level job.23 In particular, we assume that there are two intercepts for the high-level job. If the
economy is in the good state then d2=d2G; if it is in the bad state then d2=d2B, where d2G>d2B. We further
assume that the probability that the economy is in the good state in any period is q, independent across
periods, and that the realization of the state is determined and publicly observed at the beginning of each
period (before wages and job assignments are determined). When the economy is in the good state,
holding all else equal, more workers will be assigned to the high-level job, because d2G>d2B.
The third difference between this section’s model and Section II’s is that, because we want to
explore how the history of job assignments for young workers affects job assignments and wages when
workers become old, we no longer restrict the analysis to parameterizations for which all entry workers
are assigned to the low-level job. To the contrary, we now restrict the analysis to parameterizations
where some entry workers are assigned to the high-level job. In particular, we assume that a worker with
the highest schooling level (SN) is assigned to the high-level job in the worker’s first period in the labor
market if the state of the world is good, and that a worker with the lowest schooling level (S1) is assigned
to the low-level job in the worker’s first period in the labor market if the state of the world is bad.24
Although the model in this section seems closely related to the model in Section II and the main
model of our 1999a paper, the model in this section is in fact much more conceptually challenging. In
Section II and our earlier work, a worker’s output in any period was independent of the worker’s jobassignment history. As a result, in each period, the assignment of workers to jobs was simple: a worker is
always assigned to the job that maximizes that period’s expected output. But that assignment rule is not
optimal here. Instead, the current job assignment is now partly an investment in the worker’s expected
future productivity, so the worker’s optimal assignment may not maximize current productivity. Because
23

We could assume that the state of the world affects productivity in both jobs. All of our qualitative results would
still go through as long as the effect that the state of the world has on the high-level job is larger than its effect on
the low-level job.
24

We also restrict the analysis to parameterizations such that at least one schooling group is assigned to the highlevel job in the good state of the world and to the low-level job in the bad state.

21

of this, to keep the intuition behind cohort effects clear, we begin by assuming that careers last two
periods (i.e., T=2). Note that for this part of the analysis we use the terms “young” and “old” to refer to
workers in their first and second periods in the labor market, respectively.25 We then consider what
happens if careers last for more than two periods.

C) Analysis
As indicated, we start by considering the case T=2. We begin our analysis of this case by
considering how workers are assigned to jobs. Consider first what happens when workers are old. Since
there are no subsequent productivities to be concerned with, when a worker is old, she will be assigned to
the job that maximizes her expected output that period. But the solution to this second-period assignment
problem depends on the worker’s job assignment when young. In particular, because some human capital
goes unutilized when a worker is promoted, more old workers will be assigned to the high-level job this
period if more young workers were assigned to the high-level job last period.
Now consider assignments when workers are young. In contrast to what happens when workers
are old, the optimal job assignments when workers are young do not simply maximize expected
productivity in the current period. Rather, the assignments now take into account the effect that this
period’s assignment has on next period’s optimized productivity. In particular, because assigning a
young worker to the high-level job increases the worker’s output in the following period if she is again
assigned to the high-level job, assignments will be biased towards the high-level job, relative to
assignments that optimize today’s productivity. The other important aspect of assignments (both when
workers are young and when they are old) is that more workers are assigned to the high-level job in the
good state of the world than in the bad state. This follows because the high-level job is even more
productive relative to the low-level job in the good state of the world.
We formalize the above discussion in Proposition 2. Let θYK(S) denote the critical value of θite
such that young worker i with schooling level S in period t is assigned to the high-level job if θite≥θYK(S)
and is assigned to the low-level job if θite<θYK(S), where K=G,B is the state of the world in period t.
Similarly, let θOK,J(S) denote the critical value of θite such that old worker i with schooling level S in
In this case we assume that α is sufficiently close to one and/or f(1) is sufficiently small that some promotions
occur when a worker becomes old. If α were sufficiently small and f(1) were sufficiently large, there would be no
promotions in equilibrium because the underutilization of acquired human capital associated with a promotion
would make all promotions unprofitable.
25

22

period t is assigned to the high-level job when θite≥θOK,J(S) and is assigned to the low-level job when
θite<θOK,J(S), where K=G,B is again the state of the world in period t and J=1,2 denotes the worker’s job
assignment in period t-1. Finally, let θYK* denote the critical value of θite if the assignment of a young
worker in state K were to maximize current productivity, and let θOK,J* denote the critical value of θite if
the assignment of an old worker in state K were to maximize current productivity, given that the worker
was assigned to job-level J in the previous period.

Proposition 2: If T=2, then job assignments satisfy i) through iv).
i) θYK(S)<θYK* for all S and K=G,B.
ii) θOK,J(S)=θOK,J* for all S and all (K,J) pairs, K=G,B and J=1,2.
iii) θYG(S)<θYB(S) for all S and θOG,J(S)<θOB,J(S) for all S and J=1,2.
iv) θOK,H*<θOK,L* for K=G,B.

We now turn our attention to cohort effects. Let WYK denote the average wage paid to young
workers in state of the world K, and WOK,K′ the average wage paid to old workers when the current state
of the world is K and the state of the world in the previous period was K′.

Proposition 3: Suppose T=2. Then holding all the other parameters fixed, there exists a value d2G′ such
that, if d2G>d2G′, then there is a unique equilibrium that satisfies i) and ii).
i) WYG>WYB.
ii) WOK,G>WOK,B for K=G,B.

Proposition 3 tells us that, if d2G is sufficiently large, then the model exhibits a cohort effect like
that found by BGH: a cohort that enters a firm with a high entry wage will earn more when the cohort
becomes old. To see this consider first what happens when a cohort becomes old. Holding constant this
period’s state of the world, the old cohort’s average pay will be higher when the previous period’s state
was good rather than bad. This result occurs because more young workers are assigned to the high-level
job in the good state, and being assigned to the high-level job when young increases productivity in the
high-level job when old.

23

Now consider what happens when a cohort enters the labor market. As stated earlier, relative to
entry in the bad state, more workers will be assigned to the high-level job in the good state. In turn, there
are two factors affecting whether the average wage for young workers is higher in the good state or the
bad state. First, because the high-level job is more productive in the good state, the average wage is
higher in the good state since those who would be assigned to the high-level job in both states are paid
more in the good state.
Second, again because the high-level job is more productive in the good state, some workers are
assigned to the high-level job only in the good state and these workers may earn on average either more
or less in the good state than in the bad state. They can earn more because the high-level job is more
productive in the good state. But there is also the possibility they earn less because a young worker is
willing to work in the high-level job for less given that human capital accumulated on that job is on
average more valuable when the worker becomes old. In other words, because of the future return
associated with working in the high-level job when young, a young worker’s wage can in fact fall when
the state of the world is good rather than bad and the worker’s job assignment switches from low to high.
The assumption d2G sufficiently large ensures that the first of these factors is the dominant one, and thus
that the model exhibits cohort effects in the sense that a good state of the world translates into high wages
both when the cohort is young and when it is old.
As discussed earlier, one interesting aspect of our explanation for the BGH finding is that,
although a cohort’s average wage when young is correlated with its average wage when old, the wage
when young is only a proxy for the cohort’s job assignments when young (and consequently for the
amount and quality of human capital that the cohort acquires when it is young). This is important for two
reasons. First, from a competitive standpoint, it would be surprising for the average wage a cohort earns
when young to affect the average wage the cohort earns when it ages, but it is not surprising for the
amount and quality of the human capital that a cohort accumulates when it is young to affect the cohort’s
average wage when it ages. Second, as discussed earlier, this aspect of our explanation for the BGH
cohort-effects finding is consistent with another aspect of their empirical analysis: in their data, when the
entry wage was low, more workers entered the firm at lower job levels.
We now consider what happens when T>2. In this analysis we consider both cohort effects and

24

other aspects of wage and promotion dynamics when there is job-specific human capital.26

Proposition 4: If T>2, then i) through iii) are satisfied.
i) Holding all other parameters fixed, there exists a value d2G′ such that, if d2G>d2G′, then there is a
positive correlation between a cohort’s average wage when young and its expected
compensation over the last T-1 periods the cohort is in the labor market.
ii) Hold all other parameters fixed other than α and let α′ be the highest value for α such that
d1+c1θf(T-1)≥d2G+c2θf(α′(T-1)) for all φL+B(0)≤θ≤φH+B(N) (such a value will necessarily exist
if f(0) is sufficiently small). If α<α′, then there exists a smallest value t′, t′≤T-1, such that any
worker who spends her first t′ periods in job 1 is not promoted in any of her last T-t′ periods in
the labor market.
iii) There are parameterizations in which some promotions are associated with wage decreases.

Proposition 4 tells us that there are three results that characterize the case T>2.27 The first
captured in i) is that, not surprisingly, when d2G is sufficiently large the model continues to exhibit cohort
effects: the average wage paid to a cohort in its first period in the labor market is correlated with average
wages paid to the cohort later. As above, this occurs because acquired human capital is task-specific, so
the state of the world in the worker’s first period in the labor market influences not only job assignments
and wages in that first period, but consequently also job assignments and wages later in these careers.
The second result captured in ii) is that, if the specificity of human capital is sufficiently large,
i.e., α is sufficiently small, then a worker who spends substantial time in job 1 at the beginning of her
career can get stuck in that job with no possibility of a subsequent promotion. That is, it can be the case
that a worker who spends her first t′(<T) periods in the low-level job has a zero probability of being
promoted to the high-level job in any of the last T-t′ periods. There are two factors leading to this result.
First, as the number of periods in job 1 grows, the loss in lifetime productivity upon promotion becomes
26

As for our analysis of T=2, we continue to restrict the analysis to parameterizations such that there are some
promotions in equilibrium (see footnote 25).
27 When workers are in the labor market for more than two periods, this model is similar to the analysis in Gibbons
and Waldman (1999a). Thus, as was true for the model of Section II, this model should be consistent with a variety
of findings in BGH and elsewhere, such as that wage increases are serially correlated, real-wage decreases are not
rare but demotions are, and workers who receive large wage increases early in their stay at one level of the job
ladder are promoted quickly to the next. Here we focus on results other than those found in our 1999a analysis.

25

large (because some job-1 human capital will be underutilized after promotion). Second, again as the
number of periods in job 1 grows, the gain in lifetime productivity upon promotion from human-capital
acquisition on job 2 becomes small, because fewer periods remain in the worker’s career.
This second result is consistent with BGH evidence concerning promotion rates for workers in
level 2 as a function of the number of years the worker has been in level 2 or below. Extending the logic
from the above discussion to the case of three job levels yields that a worker who spent many years in
level 2 or below would have little or no probability of further promotion. The logic is that the large
number of years in level 2 or below means that much human capital would go unutilized with a
promotion, and fewer years would exist after a promotion to build human capital. BGH find just such a
result: the promotion rate is less than two percent for workers who were at level 2 or below for at least
fifteen years (compared to an overall promotion rate for workers at level 2 of nineteen percent).28
The last result captured in iii) is that, in contrast to what was true in Gibbons and Waldman
(1999a), there are parameterizations in which some (possibly many) promotions will be associated with
wage decreases. This also follows from the presence of task-specific human capital. Because being in the
high-level job increases productivity in the high-level job in subsequent periods, in period t a worker will
sometimes prefer a lower wage on the high-level job to a higher wage on the low-level job. Extending
this argument to incorporate the worker’s wage on the low-level job in period t-1 yields that, if taskspecific human capital is significant (i.e., α is small), some promotions may be associated with wage
decreases.29
Notice that this argument is similar to a classic argument concerning wage profiles and interfirm
mobility over the career (e.g., Topel and Ward (1992)). In this argument, there are no promotions and no
turnover, but firms vary in terms of the rate at which a worker in the firm accumulates human capital over
the worker’s career. As a result, young workers are willing to work at high-capital-accumulation firms
28 Our general approach also provides a second potential explanation for this finding: workers who work many
years in each of the two lowest job levels may have sufficiently low ability to learn on the job that it is rarely
optimal to promote such workers to level 3.
29 In our model, a worker’s wage each period equals that period’s expected productivity, so the idea that promotions
are sometimes associated with wage decreases means the model also predicts that promotions will sometimes be
associated with productivity decreases. Task-specific human capital, therefore, is an additional explanation to the
ones identified by Lazear (2002) for why productivity might sometimes fall after a promotion occurs. Further, the
fact that promotions can be associated with wage decreases means that, in addition to the explanation developed in
Section II concerning schooling, task-specific human capital serves as an explanation for why adjacent job levels
can have overlapping wage distributions.

26

for less because of the effect on subsequent productivity and subsequent wages. The result is that firms
with fast accumulation of human capital have lower starting wages but higher wage growth over the
career. Our logic here is the same except that fast accumulation of human capital is associated with
promotions, so some promotions are likely to be associated with wage decreases.
Given the above, the obvious question is, to what extent are some promotions associated with
wage decreases even though on average promotions are associated with wage increases? BGH do not
report the percentages of their promotions associated with wage increases and decreases. However, as
discussed earlier, McCue (1996) also studies promotions and wage changes and she does report
information concerning the percentages of promotions associated with wage increases and decreases.
Consistent with BGH and many other studies, McCue finds that promotions on average are associated
with large wage increases. But she also finds that roughly twenty-five percent of promoted workers in
her sample received real-wage decreases.30 This finding is inconsistent with our 1999a paper and the
model of Section II, but is consistent with a world where task-specific human capital is important.

IV. LIMITATIONS OF OUR APPROACH
We feel that in our 1999a paper and here we have made a strong case that our approach is able to
capture a variety of facts concerning wage and promotion dynamics in a large class of settings. But there
are some settings in which we believe our approach does not apply. In this section we discuss limitations
of our approach.
There are two key interrelated aspects of our approach that are important for generating
predictions, but that also limit its applicability. First, there is only spot-market contracting; there are no
insurance contracts. Second, there is no firm-specific human capital (and the value of task-specific
human capital does not vary across employers). In combination, these two assumptions imply that wages
in every period are determined by the wage offers of prospective employers. In a setting in which each
level of a firm’s job ladder exhibits a significant proportion of workers both entering and exiting the firm
(as is true for the BGH firm), we believe that these aspects of our approach make sense and help the
model better match the data. The fact that each level of the job ladder exhibits significant entry and exit

30

McCue reports the real-wage increase for promoted workers at the twenty-fifth percentile broken down by race
and gender. She finds that for white men this value is negative but small while for the other categories - white
women, black men, and black women - the value is positive but small.

27

suggests that firm-specific human capital is limited. Further, since there is a significant probability of a
worker leaving at every job level, the wage offers of prospective employers are likely to be important in
determining what a worker’s initial employer is willing to pay.31
But there are other settings in which our approach is probably not a good one, exactly because of
the two assumptions mentioned above. For example, consider a firm with an internal labor market like
that described by Doeringer and Piore (1971). Among other aspects, this firm is characterized by ports of
entry (meaning little or no entry at higher levels of the job ladder) and little exit at higher levels of the job
ladder. The fact that there is little turnover at higher levels of the job ladder suggests that the labormarket practices of this firm may not be driven by the wage offers of prospective employers. Rather, it
may be that significant firm-specific capital insulates the firm’s workers from the outside market, so some
alternative theory of wage and promotion dynamics is needed to understand careers in this firm.
Our approach shares one feature with the pure-form internal labor market (ILM) described by
Doeringer and Piore: an important role for job levels in wage determination. But in the pure-form ILM,
wages are attached to jobs. (That is, there is little or no wage variation within a job, except perhaps
formulaic variation with seniority.) In our approach, in contrast, a worker’s wage is determined by her
productivity. Because our model incorporates learning and heterogeneity in human-capital acquisition,
wage variation within a job cannot be explained solely by variation in seniority. Thus, within-job wage
variation may be another way (in addition to entry and exits at higher levels of the job ladder) to identify
settings in which our approach applies rather than the pure-form ILM described by Doeringer and Piore.

V. CONCLUSION.
A large number of theories have been put forth to explain wage and promotion dynamics inside
firms. We believe that an important goal in such model-building should be to explain broad patterns of
evidence rather than isolated stylized facts. In our 1999a paper, we showed that a model that combines
job assignment, human-capital acquisition, and learning captures a number of findings concerning wage
and promotion dynamics found in BGH and elsewhere, and that our theory matches the evidence better
31

We feel that turnover in the data makes it more likely that our model is applicable, even though our model itself
exhibits no turnover. In our model, in each period a worker is close to indifferent between moving and staying (one
interpretation of our model is that there is an infinitesimal moving cost that results in no turnover, but means the
worker prefers staying only by an infinitesimal amount). It would be easy to make small changes in the model that
result in some turnover but cause few other changes.

28

than available alternatives do. In this paper we extend that earlier analysis in two ways. First, we
incorporate schooling into the framework and develop several predictions, most of which match well with
available evidence concerning the role of schooling in wage and promotion dynamics. Second, we show
that the introduction of task-specific human capital allows the model to capture BGH’s finding of cohort
effects, which in our earlier paper we incorrectly argued was inconsistent with our theoretical approach.
The other main message of this paper is the potential significance of task-specific human capital.
Beginning with the seminal work of Becker, most of the literature concerning human capital has focused
on the concepts of general-purpose and firm-specific human capital. We believe, however, that taskspecific human capital is potentially as prevalent and important as are general-purpose and firm-specific
human capital. Clearly, much of human-capital acquisition involves becoming more proficient at the task
or tasks being performed. Thus, rather than human capital going unutilized when a worker switches firms
(as is the case when human capital is firm-specific), human capital goes unutilized when a worker
switches jobs and is assigned to a new set of tasks, whether the switch entails staying within the same
firm or moving across firms. In this sense, our notion of task-specific human capital is akin to
occupation- or even industry-specific human capital. In this paper we have begun to explore some of the
implications of task-specific human capital. We showed that this concept can explain cohort effects, but
we conjecture that there are a variety of other applications such as job design, job assignment, labor
mobility, labor demand, and even business strategy.
There are a number of directions in which the analysis in this paper could be extended, including
the following three. First, as just indicated, one could extend our analysis of task-specific human capital
to a variety of topics. Second, one could incorporate into our framework other modeling elements that
have received significant theoretical attention such as incentives and asymmetric learning, to see whether
the addition of such elements makes the model a better match with the evidence.32 Third, one could
integrate our focus on careers inside firms with the extensive theoretical literature that attempts to explain
evidence concerning wage dynamics and mobility between firms (see, e.g., Burdett (1978), Mortensen
(1978), and Jovanovic (1979)). Since promotions and turnover are alternative exit routes from a
32

One prominent approach to incentives in firms involves tournaments. Papers concerning the tournament issue
include Lazear and Rosen (1981) and Rosen (1986), while asymmetric learning is studied in Waldman
(1984b,1990), Greenwald (1986), and Gibbons and Katz (1991) among others. See Zabojnik and Bernhardt (2001)
for an interesting recent paper that combines the tournament and asymmetric-learning approaches.

29

worker’s current job, there should be a single theoretical framework that captures the empirical evidence
on both topics.33

APPENDIX
In the Appendix we present proofs of the Propositions and Corollaries.
Proof of Proposition 1: This proof is similar to the proof of Proposition 2 in Gibbons and Waldman
(1999a). Because learning is symmetric and there is no firm-specific human capital, competition among
firms each period yields both efficient job assignment and wages equal to expected output. Given this,
we compute worker i’s expected on-the-job human capital in period t, ηite, in (3) and then the worker’s
expected output in job j as Eyijt=dj+G(Si)+cjηite. Note that the linearity of the production function in (2) is
key here: without linearity, expected output would not equal the output of a worker known to have onthe-job human capital equal to ηite. We now have that, given efficient job assignment and wages equal to
expected output, if ηite<η′ then worker i is assigned to job 1 in period t and paid wit=d1+G(Si)+c1ηite,
while if ηite≥η′ then worker i is assigned to job 2 in period t and paid wit=d2+G(Si)+c2ηite (see footnote 9).
Note here the fact (2) reads dj+G(Si)+cj(ηit+εijt) means that the signal about ability that can be extracted
from output does not vary in its signal-to-noise ratio as a function of j. Thus, there is no way to use job
assignment to change the speed of learning about ability, so job assignment is determined by current
productive efficiency (i.e., maximizing expected output this period), which in turn is solely a function of
the worker’s current expected on-the-job human capital. Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 1: Given Proposition 1 and that the analysis is restricted to parameterizations such that
it is efficient for each worker to be assigned to job 1 in the first period of the worker’s career (i.e., [pφH+
(1-p)φL+B(N)]f(0)<η′), the wage of worker i in her first period in the labor market can be written as d1+
G(Si)+c1[pφH+(1-p)φL+B(Si)]f(0). Given G′>0 and B′>0, we immediately have that the worker’s wage is
a strictly increasing function of the worker’s schooling level. Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 2: Because the signal zit is independent of job assignment and schooling level, the
amount in any period that has been learned about φi is independent of a worker’s schooling level and past
job assignments. In turn, since a worker is assigned to the high-level job whenever [φite+B(S)]f(xit)≥η′
and B′>0, we immediately have that for any (X,S) pair, where 1≤X≤T-1 and S≤N-1, π(X,S+1)≥π(X,S).

33

See Ghosh (2002) for a start in this direction. Also, Munasinghe (2001) explores a model that captures a number
of findings concerning wages and turnover, although she does not explore the extent to which her model captures
findings concerning careers inside firms.

30

In turn, since by assumption [φL+B(S)]f(T-1)<η′<[φH+B(S)]f(T-1) for all S, we have that this inequality
must be strict if X is sufficiently close to T-1.
Proof of Corollary 3: Consider first values for X and X+1 such that all workers of those experience levels
are assigned to job 1. Let φ*=pφH+(1-p)φL. Given expectations each period must be correct on average
and output in job 1 is linear in on-the-job human capital, we have that W(X,S) is given by (A1).
(A1)

W(X,S)=d1+c1[φ*+B(S)]f(X)

In turn, the return to experience for a fixed schooling level is given by (A2).
(A2)

W(X+1,S)-W(X,S)=c1[φ*+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]

Given B′>0 and f ′>0, (A2) immediately yields that W(X+1,S)-W(X,S) is strictly increasing in S. Note
that the increase in the return to an extra year of experience as schooling is increased from S to S+1 is
given by (A3).
(A3)

[B(S+1)-B(S)]c1[f(X+1)-f(X)]
Now consider values X and X+1 such that some workers may be assigned to job 2 but there are

no demotions. Consider a worker with experience level X and schooling level S who is assigned to job 1
and for whom there is an expectation concerning φ given by φ′. Given expectations each period must be
correct on average and output in job 1 is linear in on-the-job human capital, if the worker is assigned to
job 1 with probability one next period, then her expected wage increase is given by c1[φ′+B(S)][f(X+1)f(X)]. Similarly, consider a worker with experience level X and schooling level S assigned to job 2 for
whom there is an expectation concerning φ given by φ′′. This worker’s expected wage increase is given
by c2[φ′′+ B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]. Now consider a worker with experience level X and schooling level S
initially assigned to job 1 for whom there is an expectation concerning φ given by φ′′′, where there is a
strictly positive probability the worker will be assigned to job 2 in the following period. Because
expectations are correct on average every period, the expected wage increase is given by rc1[φ′′′+
B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-r)c2[φ′′′+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)] where 0<r<1. These expressions yield that
integrating the wage increases over all workers of experience X and schooling S yields (A4), where
0≤R<1.
(A4)

W(X+1,S)-W(X,S)=Rc1[φ*+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-R)c2[φ*+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]
Now consider workers of the same experience level but schooling level S+1. Because a worker

whose initial expectation for φ is given by φ′ may now be assigned to job 2 in either period, this worker’s
expected wage increase must be greater than or equal to c1[φ′+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]. Similarly, a worker
whose initial expectation for φ is given by φ′′ must now be assigned to job 2 in each period, so this
worker’s expected wage increase is c2[φ′′+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]. Now consider a worker whose initial
expectation for φ is φ′′′. Because for any realization for the stochastic term in which the worker is
assigned to job 2 given X+1 and S the worker is also assigned to job 2 given X+1 and S+1, this worker’s
expected wage increase must be greater than or equal to rc1[φ′′′+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-r)c2[φ′′′+

31

B(S+1)][f(X+ 1)-f(X)]. Given these expressions, integrating the wage increases over all workers of
experience level X and schooling level S+1 yields (A5).
(A5)

W(X+1,S+1)-W(X,S+1)≥Rc1[φ*+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-R)c2[φ*+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]
We now have that the increase in the return to an extra period of experience due to the schooling

level increasing from S to S+1 is greater than or equal to the expression given in (A6).
(A6)

[B(S+1)-B(S)][Rc1+(1-R)c2][f(X+1)-f(X)]

Together, (A3) and (A6) yield that, given no demotions, W(X+1,S)-W(X,S) is strictly increasing in S.
We now consider what happens when demotions are possible. Consider values for X and X+1
such that workers of those experience levels can be assigned to either job and there are some demotions as
experience increases from X to X+1. Consider a worker with experience level X and schooling level S
who is assigned to job 1 and for whom there is an expectation concerning φ given by φ′. As before, if the
worker is assigned to job 1 with probability one next period, then her expected wage increase is given by
c1[φ′+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]. Consider a worker with experience level X and schooling level S assigned to
job 2 for whom there is an expectation concerning φ given by φ′′, where there is a positive probability the
worker will be assigned to job 1 in the following period. This worker’s expected wage increase is strictly
less than c2[φ′′+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+mc2∆f(X+1), where m is the probability of demotion and ∆ is the
absolute value of the average reduction in the expectation concerning φ when the worker is demoted.
Consider a worker with experience level X and schooling level S assigned to job 1 for whom there is an
expectation concerning φ given by φ′′′, where there is a strictly positive probability the worker will be
assigned to job 2 in the following period. As before, the expected wage increase for this worker is given
by rc1[φ′′′+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-r)c2[φ′′′+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)], where 0<r<1. These expressions yield
that integrating the wage increases over all workers of experience X and schooling S yields (A7), where
M is the overall probability of demotion for these workers and 0≤R<1.
(A7) W(X+1,S)-W(X,S)<Rc1[φ*+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-R)c2[φ*+B(S)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+Mc2[φH-φL]f(X+1)
Now consider workers of the same experience level but schooling level S+1. Because a worker
whose initial expectation for φ is given by φ′ may now be assigned to job 2 in either period, this worker’s
expected wage increase must be greater than or equal to c1[φ′+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]. Because a worker
whose initial expectation for φ is φ′′ may be assigned to job 1 in the following period, this worker’s
expected wage increase must be greater than or equal to c2[φ′′+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]. Because a worker
whose initial expectation for φ is φ′′′ has a higher probability of being assigned to job 2 in the following
period when the schooling level is S+1 rather than S, this worker’s expected wage increase must be
greater than or equal to rc1[φ′′′+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-r)c2[φ′′′+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]. These
expressions yield that integrating the wage increases over all workers of experience X and schooling S+1
yields (A8).
(A8)

W(X+1,S)-W(X,S)>Rc1[φ*+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]+(1-R)c2[φ*+B(S+1)][f(X+1)-f(X)]

32

Comparing (A7) and (A8) yields that for any parameterization, if demotions are sufficiently rare, i.e., M
is sufficiently small, then W(X+1,S)-W(X,S) is strictly increasing in S. Q.E.D.
Proof of Corollary 4: Let Wjλ(X,S) be the average wage paid to workers of experience level X and
schooling level S who are assigned to job j given a value for λ. Because the productivity due to a
worker’s starting level of general-purpose human capital, λg(S), does not depend on the worker’s job
assignment, varying λ will not affect job assignments. Hence, Wjλ(X,S) can be written as Wj0(X,S)+
λg(S). This, in turn, yields that for all 0≤X≤T-1, S≤N-1, and j=H,L, Wjλ(X,S+1)-Wjλ(X,S)=Wj0(X,S+1)Wj0(X,S)+λ[g(S +1)-g(S)]. Given g′>0, this expression is strictly positive given λ sufficiently large.
Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2: Consider first an old worker with schooling level S. Since this is the last period of
the worker’s career, competition across firms means the worker will be assigned to the job that maximizes
productivity that period and paid a wage equal to that productivity. We also know that, since c2>c1, if in
state of the world K an old worker who worked in job J last period with expected ability to learn on the
job equal to θ is efficiently assigned to job 2, then in state of the world K an old worker who worked in
job J last period with expected ability to learn on the job equal to θ′, θ′>θ, must also efficiently be
assigned to job 2. This means that for each S and each (K,J) pair, K=G,B and J=1,2, there exists a value
θOK,J(S) such that if period t is characterized by state of the world K then old worker i previously assigned
to job J is assigned to job 2 if θite≥θOK,J(S) and is assigned to job 1 if θite<θOK,J(S). Further, since
assignments maximize that period’s expected output, we also have θOK,J(S)=θOK,J* for all S and (K,J)
pairs, K=G,B and J=1,2. This proves ii).
Consider again θOK,J*. This is the value for θite such that in state of the world K an old worker
who was in job J in the previous period has the same expected output in each of the two jobs. In other
words, θOK,2* satisfies (A9) while θOK,1* satifies (A10).
(A9)

d1+c1[θOK,2*f(1)]=d2K+c2[θOK,2*f(1)]

(A10)

d1+c1[θOK,1*f(1)]=d2K+c2[θOK,1*f(α)]

(A9) yields θOK,2*=(d1-d2K)/[c2f(1)-c1f(1)] while (A10) yields θOK,1*=(d1-d2K)/[c2f(α)-c1f(1)]. A
comparison of these expressions yields θOK,2*<θOK,1* for K=G,B. Note, if θOK,2*<θOK,1*≤φL+B(1) for
K=G,B or φH+ B(N)≤θOK,2*<θOK,1* for K=G,B, then this inequality does not translate into a difference
concerning assignments in equilibrium. This proves iv).
We now consider the assignment of young workers to jobs. θYK* is the value for θite such that a
young worker is equally productive in the two jobs. That is, θYK* satisfies (A11).
(A11)

d1+c1[θYK*f(0)]=d2K+c2[θYK*f(0)]

Let E(WOJS) be the expected productivity of an old worker of schooling level S who was assigned to job
J when she was young (where this expectation is taken prior to the realization of the state of the world
when the worker is old). Because being assigned to job 1 when young only counts α of a period in the

33

human-capital-accumulation function if the worker is assigned to job 2 when old, we know E(WO2S)>
E(WO1S). Given this, θYK(S) satisfies (A12).
d1+c1[θYK(S)f(0)]+E(WO1S)=d2K+c2[θYK(S)f(0)]+E(WO2S)

(A12)

(A11) yields θYK*=(d1-d2K)/(c2-c1)f(0) while (A12) yields θYK(S)=[d1-d2K+E(WO1S)-E(WO2S)]/(c2c1)f(0). A comparison of these expressions yields θYK(S)<θYK* for all S and K=G,B. This proves i).
Further, the expression for θYK(S) also yields θYG(S)<θYB(S) for all S, while the earlier expressions for
θOK,2* and θOK,1* yield θOG,J(S)<θOB,J(S) for all S and J=1,2. This proves iii). Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3: Competition and no firm-specific human capital means that a worker’s wage each
period equals her expected output in the job to which she is assigned. Let Zn denote the number of
workers of schooling level n in each cohort, and let Z denote the total number of workers in each cohort.
Given a worker is always paid her expected output in the job to which she is assigned, we have that WYB
must satisfy (A13).
(A13)

WYB<

N

∑

Znmax{d1+c1E(θiSn)f(0), d2B+c2E(θiSn)f(0)}/Z

n=1

Now consider the good state of the world. θYG* satisfies d1+c1θYG*f(0)=d2G+c2θYG*f(0). Given
c2>c1, sufficiently high values for d2G yield θYG*<φL+B(S) for all S. But since Proposition 2 tells us that
θYG(S)<θYG* for all S, we now have that θYG(S)<φL+B(S) for all S for sufficiently high values for d2G.
For such a value for d2G we can write WYG as in (A14).
WYG=

(A14)

N

∑

Zn(d2G+c2E(θiSn)f(0)/Z

n=1

Comparing (A13) and (A14), in turn, yields that WYG>WYB for sufficiently high values for d2G.
We now turn out attention to the average wage of old workers in state of the world K. Consider
first a worker of schooling level S′ such that E(θiS′)≥θYB(S′). Given from Proposition 2 we know
θYG(S)<θYB(S) for all S, when she is young this worker is assigned to the high-level job in both states of
the world. In turn, since job assignments and wages when a worker is old depends on the current state of
the world, the previous job assignment, and the current expectation concerning the worker’s ability to
learn on the job (and not directly on the previous period’s state of the world), the worker’s expected wage
when she is old is independent of whether the state of the world when the worker was young was good or
bad. Further, a similar argument yields that the expected wage when a worker is old for a worker of
schooling level S′′ such that E(θiS′′)<θYG(S) is independent of whether the state of the world when the
worker was young was good or bad.
Now consider a worker of schooling level S′′′ such that θYG(S′′′)≤E(θiS′′′)<θYB(S′′′). When this
worker is young she will be assigned to the high-level job in the good state of the world and the low-level
job in the bad state. In turn, if the state of the world when she was young was good rather than bad, then
her expected wage when she is old is higher. The logic here is as follows. First, given α<1, if she is

34

assigned to the high-level job in both states of the world she earns more when the previous period’s state
of the world was good. Second, given that there is no task-specific human capital on job 1 (see equation
(14)), if she is assigned to the low-level job in both states of the world her pay when old is independent of
the previous period’s state of the world. Third, since θOK,2(S′′′)<θOK,1(S′′′), she is sometimes assigned to
the high-level job when the previous period was good but assigned to the low-level job when the previous
period was bad. Further, whenever this is the case, since θOK,2(S′′′) satisfies d1+c1θOK,2(S′′′)f(1)=d2K+
c2θOK,2(S′′′)f(1) and c2>c1, she is paid more when the previous period’s state of the world was good. In
summary, her expected wage when old is higher when the previous period’s state of the world was good
since she always earns at least as much when the previous period was good rather than bad and she
sometimes earns more.
We now have that a worker’s expected wage when she is old is independent of the state of the
world in the previous period when E(θiSi)≥θYB(Si) and E(θiSi)<θYG(Si), while when θYG(Si)≤E(θiSi)<
θYB(Si) the worker’s expected wage when she is old is higher when the state of the world in the previous
period was good. Given that there is at least one schooling group such that E(θiSi) falls in the latter
interval (see footnote 24), we now have WOK,G>WOK,B for K=G,B. This proves ii). Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 4: Using the same logic as in the proofs of Propositions 2 and 3 it must be the case
that θYG(S)<θYB(S) for all S and that there exists a value d2G′ such that, if d2G>d2G′, then the average wage
for young workers is higher when the state of the world is good rather than bad. Now consider the
assignment of workers to jobs and wages over the last T-1 periods a cohort is in the labor market.
Consider first a worker of schooling level S′ such that E(θiS′)≥θYB(S′). Given θYG(S)<θYB(S) for all S,
in her first period in the labor market this worker is assigned to the high-level job in both states of the
world. In turn, since the state of the world when a worker is young does not directly enter into the
production function for either job in later periods, we have that the worker’s expected compensation in
the next T-1 periods must be independent of the state of the world when she was young. Further, a
similar argument yields that, for a worker of schooling level S′′ such that E(θiS′′)<θYG(S′′), the worker’s
expected compensation over her last T-1 periods in the labor market is independent of the state of the
world when she was young.
Now consider a worker of schooling level S′′′ such that θYG(S′′′)≤E(θiS′′′)<θYB(S′′′). When this
worker is young she will be assigned to the high-level job in the good state of the world and the low-level
job in the bad state. In turn, if the state of the world when she was young was good rather than bad, then
the worker’s expected compensation over her last T-1 periods in the labor market must be higher because
of the following. Suppose the state of the world when the worker was young was good. In this case, for
every sequence of realizations of the stochastic term, the worker has the option in each period of choosing
the same job assignment that she chooses when the state of the world when she was young was bad rather
than good. Since, in turn, some of these job assignments are to the high-level job (see footnote 26) and

35

because α<1, this set of choices must result in a higher value for the worker’s expected compensation
over her last T-1 periods in the labor market then she achieves when the state of the world was bad when
she was young. But since her actual choices must do at least as well as this, we now have that the
worker’s expected compensation over her last T-1 periods in the labor market must be higher when the
state of the world when she was young was good rather than bad.
We now have that a worker’s expected compensation over her last T-1 periods in the labor market
is independent of the state of the world when the worker was young when E(θiSi)≥θYB(Si) and
E(θiSi)<θYG(Si), while when θYG(Si)<E(θiSi)<θYB(Si) this expected compensation is higher when the
state of the world when the worker was young was good rather than bad. Given that there is at least one
schooling group such that E(θiSi) falls in the latter interval (see footnote 24), we now have that a
cohort’s average compensation over the last T-1 periods it is in the labor market is higher when the state
of the world was good rather than bad in its first period in the labor market. This proves i).
Suppose α<α′ and consider a worker who has spent her first T-1 periods in the labor market in
job 1. Let θ′ be her expected ability to learn on the job. Since α<α′, we know d1+c1θ′f(T1)>d2G+c2θ′f(α(T-1)). Thus, she will be assigned to the low-level job in her last period in the labor
market. In turn, this immediately yields that there must exist a smallest value t′, t′≤T-1, such that a
worker who spends her first t′ periods in job 1 is not promoted in any of her last T-t′ periods in the labor
market. This proves ii).
We demonstrate the third point by presenting an example in which some promotions are
associated with wage decreases. Suppose T=3, d1=20, c1=δ, d2=10, c2=1, α=1/2, f(0)=δ, f(1/2)=9, f(3/2)=16,
where δ is infinitesimally small. Also, we consider a schooling group for which φL+B(S)=δ, and
φH+B(S)=1 which, given d1=20, d2=10, and f(0)=δ, yields that a worker in this schooling group is
assigned to the low-level job in her first period in the labor market. Let Wt denote the worker’s wage in
her tth period in the labor market. We have W1≈20 since c1=δ and d1=20. Now suppose that learning after
the first period is such that the expectation in the second period concerning the worker’s ability to learn
on the job is arbitrarily close to φH+B(S). If the worker remains in job 1 for the remaining two periods
then she earns W2+W3≈20+20=40 over these last two periods since c1=δ and d1=20. If instead she is
promoted, then W2+W3≈19+26=45 since her expected ability to learn on the job is arbitrarily close to
φH+B(S). Hence, she will be promoted at the beginning of the second period but her wage falls from
approximately 20 to approximately 19 when the promotion takes place. This proves iii). Q.E.D.

36

REFERENCES
Altonji, J. and C. Pierret (2001), “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 116, pp. 313-350.
Baker, G., M. Gibbs, and B. Holmstrom (1994a), “The Internal Economics of the Firm: Evidence from
Personnel Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, pp. 881-919.
Baker, G., M. Gibbs, and B. Holmstrom (1994b), “The Wage Policy of a Firm,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109, pp. 921-955.
Baker, M. (1997), “Growth-Rate Heterogeneity and the Covariance Structure of Life-Cycle Earnings,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 15, pp. 338-375.
Beaudry, P. and J. DiNardo (1991), “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages over
the Business Cycle: Evidence from Microdata,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, pp. 665-688.
Becker, G. (1962), “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of Political
Economy, 70, pp. 9-49.
Becker, G. (1964), Human Capital (NBER, New York).
Bernhardt, D. (1995), “Strategic Promotion and Compensation,” Review of Economic Studies, 62, pp.
315-339.
Burdett, K. (1978), “A Theory of Employee Search and Quit Rates,” American Economic Review, 68, pp.
212-220.
Card, D. (1999), “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.,
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3 (North-Holland, Amsterdam), pp. 1801-1863.
Chaudhury, P. (2002), “Multi-tasking and the Returns to Experience,” mimeo, New York University.
Devereux, P. (2002a), “State Dependence in Wages: Stigma, Human Capital, or Search,” mimeo, UCLA.
Devereux, P. (2002b), “Occupational Upgrading and the Business Cycle,” Labour, 16, pp. 423-452.
Doeringer, P. and M. Piore (1971), Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis (Heath Lexington
Books, Lexington, MA).
Farber, H. and R. Gibbons (1996), “Learning and Wage Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
111, pp. 1007-1047.
Ghosh, S. (2002), “Job Mobility and Careers in Firms,” mimeo, ITAM Business School.
Gibbons, R. (1997), “Incentives and Careers in Organizations,” in D. Kreps and K. Wallis, eds., Advances
in Economic Theory and Econometrics (Cambridge University Press, New York), pp. 1-37.
Gibbons, R. and L. Katz (1991), “Layoffs and Lemons,” Journal of Labor Economics, 9, pp. 351-380.

37
Gibbons, R. and M. Waldman (1999a), “A Theory of Wage and Promotion Dynamics Inside Firms,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp. 1321-1358.
Gibbons, R. and M. Waldman (1999b), “Careers in Organizations: Theory and Evidence,” in O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3 (North-Holland,
Amsterdam), pp. 2373-2437.
Greenwald, B. (1986), “Adverse Selection in the Labour Market,” Review of Economic Studies, 53, pp.
325-347.
Habermalz, S. (2002), “Job Matching and the Returns to Education Signals,” IZA Discussion Paper No.
726, The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) in Bonn.
Harris, M. and B. Holmstrom (1982), “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies, 49,
pp. 315-333.
Heckman, J., L. Lochner, and R. Cossa (2002), “Learning-By-Doing Vs. On-the-job Training: Using
Variation Induced by the EITC to Distinguish Between Models of Skill Formation,” NBER
Working Paper No. 9083.
Jovanovic, B. (1979), “Job Mobility and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political Economy, 87, pp.
972-990.
Jovanovic, B. and Y. Nyarko (1997), “Stepping Stone Mobility,” Carnegie-Rochester Series for Public
Policy, 46, pp. 289-337.
Kahn, L. (2002), “The Labor Market Consequences of Graduating College in a Bad Economy,” mimeo,
University of Chicago.
Kwon, I. (1998), “Incentives, Wages, and Promotions: Theory and Evidence,” mimeo, Harvard
University.
Lazear, E. (1992), “The Job as a Concept,” in W. Bruns, ed., Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 8 (JAI
Press, Greenwich, CT), pp. 141-165.
Lazear, E. (2002), “The Peter Principle: Promotions and Declining Productivity,” mimeo, Stanford
University (Forthcoming Journal of Political Economy).
Lazear, E. and S. Rosen (1981), “Rank-Order Tournaments and Optimum Labor Contracts,” Journal of
Political Economy, 89, pp. 841-864.
Lima, F. and P. Pereira (2001), “Career Progression within Large Firms,” mimeo, Faculdade de Economia
da Universidade Nova de Lisboa.
Lluis, S. (2001), “The Role of Comparative Advantage and Learning in Wage Dynamics and Intrafirm
Mobility: Evidence from Germany,” mimeo, University of Montreal.
MacLeod, B. and J. Malcomson (1993), “Investments, Holdup, and the Form of Market Contracts,”
American Economic Review, 83, pp. 811-837.

38
Main, B., C. O’Reilly III, and J. Wade (1993), “Top Executive Pay: Tournaments or Teamwork?”
Journal of Labor Economics, 11, pp. 606-628.
McCue, K. (1996), “Promotions and Wage Growth,” Journal of Labor Economics, 14, pp. 175-209.
Medoff, J. and K. Abraham (1980), “Experience, Performance, and Earnings,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 95, pp. 703-736.
Medoff, J. and K. Abraham (1981), “Are Those Paid More Really More Productive,” Journal of Human
Resources, 16, pp. 186-216.
Mincer, J. (1974), Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (NBER, New York).
Mortensen, D. (1978), “Specific Capital and Labor Turnover,” Bell Journal of Economics, 9, pp. 572-586.
Munasinghe, L. (2001), “A Theory of Wage and Turnover Dynamics,” mimeo, Columbia University.
Murphy, K. (1985), “Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration: An Empirical Analysis,”
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 7, pp. 11-42.
Neal, D. (1995), “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 13, pp. 653-677.
Parent, D. (2000), “Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 18, pp. 306-323.
Podolny, J. and J. Baron (1997), “Resources and Relationships: Social Networks and Mobility in the
Workplace,” American Sociological Review, 62, pp. 673-693.
Prendergast, C. (1993), “The Role of Promotion in Inducing Human Capital Acquisition,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108, pp. 523-534.
Ricart i Costa, J. (1988), “Managerial Task Assignments and Promotion,” Econometrica, 56, pp. 449-466.
Rosen, S. (1982), “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13,
pp. 311-323.
Rosen, S. (1986), “Prizes and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments,” American Economic Review, 76,
pp. 701-715.
Rosenbaum, J. (1984), Career Mobility in a Corporate Hierarchy (Academic Press, New York).
Topel, R. and R. Ward (1992), “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 107, pp. 439-480.
Waldman, M. (1984a), “Worker Allocation, Hierarchies, and the Wage Distribution,” Review of
Economic Studies, 51, pp. 95-109.

39
Waldman, M. (1984b), “Job Assignments, Signalling, and Efficiency,” Rand Journal of Economics, 15,
pp. 255-267.
Waldman, M. (1990), “Up-Or-Out Contracts: A Signaling Perspective,” Journal of Labor Economics, 8,
pp. 230-250.
Weiss, Y. (1991), “Learning by Doing and Occupation Specialization,” Journal of Economic Theory, 3,
pp. 189-198.
Welch, F. (1979), “Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Baby’s Financial Bust,” Journal
of Political Economy, 87, pp. S65-S97.
Willis, R. (1986), “Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital Earnings
Functions,” in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1 (NorthHolland, Amsterdam), pp. 525-602.
Zabojnik, J. and D. Bernhardt (2001), “Corporate Tournaments, Human Capital Acquisition, and the
Firm Size-Wage Relation,” Review of Economic Studies, 68, pp. 693-716.

