NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO BENEFITS FROM LABOR MARKET REGULATIONS?:
CHILE 1960-1998
Claudio E. Montenegro
Carmen Pagés
Working Paper 9850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9850
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

Forthcoming in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, edited by Heckman
and Pagés. We thank the University of Chile for giving us permission to use their data. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the opinions of the World Bank, the IADB or their
boards of directors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Claudio E. Montenegro and Carmen Pagés. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

Who Benefits from Labor Market Regulations?: Chile 1960-1998
Claudio E. Montenegro and Carmen Pagés
NBER Working Paper No. 9850
July 2003
JEL No. E24, J23, J65
ABSTRACT
Economists have examined the impact of labor market regulations on the level of employment.
However, there are many reasons to suspect that the impact of regulations differs across types of
workers. In this paper we take advantage of the unusual large variance in labor policy in Chile to
exa mine how different labor market regulations affect the distribution of employment and the
employment rates across age, gender and skill levels. To this effect, we use a sample of repeated
cross-section household surveys spanning the period 1960-1998 and measures of the evolution of
job security provisions and minimum wages across time. Our results suggest large distribution
effects. We find that employment security provisions and minimum wages reduce the share of
youth and unskilled employment as well as their employment rates. We also find large effects on
the distribution of employment between women and men.

Claudio E. Montenegro
The World Bank

Carmen Pagés
Inter-American Development Bank

1. Introduction
The economic literature has devoted considerable attention to studying the impact of labor market
regulations on labor market outcomes. However, the issue of whether some sub-groups of workers bear
the brunt or enjoy the benefits of such regulations has been much less studied. 2 One notable exception has
been the burgeoning literature studying the effect of statutory minimum wages on youth employment.
Although this subject remains controversial, many studies have found negative effects of minimum wages
on teenagers and young workers.3 Less attention has been paid to the issue of whether minimum wages
particularly affect women or men or unskilled versus skilled workers. Similarly, very little attention has
been paid to the effect that job security provisions may have on particular sub-groups of the labor force.
In this paper, we take advantage of the unusual variance in labor market policies in Chile to
examine how minimum wages and job security provisions affect different types of workers. To this effect,
we use a sample of repeated household surveys spanning the period 1960-1998 and several measures of
labor market regulations across time. We make use of cross-section and time-series methods to estimate
the effect that these policies have on the distribution of employment and on the particular sub-groups
employment rates. To assess whether our estimates are reflecting the effect of regulations instead of the
effect of some unobservable correlates, we also estimate the effect of labor policy on sectors not covered
by regulations. We find large and statistically significant effects on the covered sectors and no effects, or
effects going in the opposite direction, in the uncovered sectors.
Our results indicate that labor market regulations are far from neutral. We find that job security
provisions and minimum wages reduce the employment rates of the youth and the unskilled at the benefit
of older and skilled workers. We also find opposite effects of these policies on women’s and men’s
employment shares and rates. Job security provisions tend to benefit men at the expense of women, while
the reverse seems to be true for an increase in the minimum wage.
We then explore some explanations for these regularities and, while we cannot fully discriminate
among all of them, we are at least able to reject some hypotheses. There is little evidence that these
differential effects are driven by differences in labor supply elasticities or wage adjustments across subgroups. Instead, our findings suggest that labor market regulations produce unequal shifts in labor
demand across groups of workers.

2

One reference in this literature is the paper by Bertola, Blau and Kahn (2002) on the effect of unions’ involvement
in wage setting on the relative employment of youth, women and older individuals.
3
Among the most recent studies, Williams and Mills (2001), Partridge and Partridge (1998) and Bazen and Skourias
(1997) find a negative relation between minimum wages and youth employment, while Katz and Krueger (1992),
Card and Krueger (1994, 2000) and Card, Katz and Krueger (1993) find no evidence of such an effect.

1

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the arguments that predict nonneutral effects of regulations. Section 3 describes the evolution of job security and minimum wage
regulations in Chile. Section 4 describes the data used in our empirical section. Section 5 describes the
methodology implemented to estimate the effects of regulations on the distribution of employment.
Section 6 describes our results for both the distribution of employment and the overall effect on
employment rates. Finally, Section 7 concludes.

2. Why Regulations May Affect Some Workers Differently
There are a number of reasons to suspect that labor market regulations alter the distribution of
employment across sub-groups. In the next two subsections we review the theoretical arguments that
predict differential effects of job security provisions and minimum wages across workers of different age,
skill level and gender.
2.1 Job Security
Job security provisions are introduced to discourage firms from adjusting their labor forces in the face of
adverse economic conditions. However, job security provisions also alter hiring decisions. In good times,
firms hire fewer workers because they take into account that these workers may have to be laid off in the
future, and that is costly. The overall impact of job security provisions on employment rates is
undetermined because it depends on whether the negative effect on layoffs is offset by the reduction in
hiring rates.4
Job security provisions will have differential effects across sub-groups of workers if changes in
legislation bring changes in hiring and layoff rates that have a larger impact on some sub-populations than
on others. Lazear (1990) conjectured that an increase in job security might act as a barrier preventing the
entry of young workers into the labor market. This is because job security reduces job creation, and entry
rates are especially high among youth. This argument, however, does not consider that the effect of lower
job creation rates can be offset by lower job destruction rates—which also tend to be large among youth.
Pagés and Montenegro (1999) suggest an argument whereby job security provisions may actually
increase young workers’ layoff rates. Their argument is related to the regularity that, across countries,
job security is positively related with a worker’s tenure. Mandatory severance payments that increase with
tenure change the cost of dismissing workers with short tenures relative to workers with more seniority at
the firm. In this context, it is expected that job security concentrates layoffs among youth because, other
things being equal, young workers tend to have lower average tenures than older workers. If severance

2

pay increases substantially with tenure and this effect is important, job security simultaneously reduces
entry and increases layoffs among youth, resulting in a lower employment share and lower employment
rates for this group of workers. Instead, the share of older workers in employment tends to increase due to
their relatively lower layoff rates
A similar reasoning can be used to predict the effect of job security provisions across gender. To
the extent that women experience higher rotation and therefore have lower average tenure than males at
every age, high job security will tend to concentrate layoffs among women. This effect will tend to reduce
their employment share relative to men. However, higher turnover rates also imply that stringent job
security may be less of an issue when hiring female workers because employers expect them to quit prior
to attaining high job security. 5 In this case, employers might be more willing to hire women relative to
men, but also more likely to lay them off should bad times arise. The overall effect on female versus
male employment rates is undetermined and remains an empirical issue.
It is tempting to extend the former argument to unskilled and skilled workers. If unskilled
workers have higher rotation and lower tenures than skilled workers, the same reasoning applies.
However, while it can be defended that higher female turnover rates may be motivated by life-cycle
decisions exogenous to the employer, such exogeneity is more difficult to claim when explaining the
higher rotation of unskilled workers.
The insider-outsider literature provides further arguments for why job security may have a
differential effect on the employment rates of different sub-populations.6 According to this literature,
more stringent job security reduces the elasticity of wages to changes in the unemployment rate. When
employed workers know their jobs are insured against demand fluctuations, they may be less willing to
accept the wage adjustments necessary to reduce unemployment rates. This situation may help to create
two kinds of workers: insiders, who hold their jobs and have high wages, and outsiders, who either are
unemployed or hold temporary, part-time or fixed terms jobs without job security. 7 If women, the young
and the unskilled are more likely to be outsiders, then job security (through this wage effect) will bias
employment against these groups.

4

See Bertola (1990), Bentolila and Bertola (1990), Bertola (1991), Bentolila and Saint-Paul (1994), Hopenhayn and
Rogerson (1993) and Risager and Sorensen (1997) among others for a theoretical discussion of the effects of job
security on employment rates.
5
See Pagés and Montenegro (1999) for a more formal development of this argument in the context of a partial
equilibrium model.
6
See for instance, Lindbeck and Snower (1988).
7
The insider outsider argument requires a strong union fixing wages for new entrants. Otherwise, firms could
always pay very low wages at the beginning of the employment relationship to compensate for higher wages in the
future. See Bertola (1990) for an analytical study of this issue.

3

Finally, differences in labor supply elasticity may contribute to differential effects across subpopulations even if job security brin gs a uniform change in labor demand across groups. Let us assume
that an increase in job security reduces labor demand. If women, the young, and the unskilled have higher
labor supply elasticity than the average worker, higher job security would bring a higher decline in
employment for these workers than for other groups with a lower elasticity of labor supply. 8
Summarizing, the arguments put forth in this section suggest that youth, and possibly women and
the unskilled, bear the brunt of job security regulations.
2.2 Minimum Wages
The effect of minimum wages on employment remains a controversial topic. In the competitive model,
workers are paid their marginal product, and any artificial increase in the price of labor above the
marginal product therefore prices the worker out of the labor market. Conversely, models based on some
form of imperfect competition predict wages lower than the marginal product, and thus, an increase in
minimum wages can increase wages without reducing employment rates.9
On average, youth, women, and the unskilled tend to have lower wages than older, male or skilled
workers. Therefore, since minimum wages are more likely to be binding among these workers, the
competitive model predicts larger unemployment effects for the first group. In the imperfect competition
model, however, the effects are less clear-cut. In principle, the magnitude and sign of the minimum wage
effect will depend on how far wages are from their respective marginal products in each sub-population.
If that gap is larger in some groups than in others, an increase in minimum wages may have “competitive”
effects on some groups and “non-competitive” effects on others. Given this ambiguity, the sign and
magnitude of the effects become an empirical question.

3. Labor Market Regulations in Chile
Chile has experienced a very wide range in labor market policies, providing a privileged case scenario for
analyzing the impact of regulations on labor market outcomes. We distinguish between job security
provisions and statutory minimum wages.10

8

See Hamermesh (1993).
There are many situations that give raise to imperfect competition in the labor market, such like monopolistic
power by part of employees, incomplete information or imperfectly mobile workers.
10
See Edwards and Cox-Edwards (2000) for an excellent summary of labor market reforms in Chile during the
1960-2000 period.
9

4

3.1 Job Security Provisions
Among the most interesting aspects of the Chilean experience is that, in the 39 years covered by our
sample, Chile has gone from a situation of dismissal at will to a rigid labor market by OECD standards.11
Since their inception in 1966, job security provisions have favored full-time indefinite employment over
part-time, fixed-term of temporary contractual relationships. To this end, in case of a firm-initiated
separation, labor codes regulate (1) compulsory advance notice periods, (2) the causes for which a
dismissal is considered justified or unjustified and (3) severance pay related to the tenure of a worker and
the cause of dismissal. While the minimum period of advance noticed has always been kept constant and
equal to one month, the formula for computing severance pay and the causes for just or unjust dismissal
have widely varied over the years. This is the variance that we exploit in our empirical work.
Table 1 summarizes the changes in legislation that took place in the 1960-1998 period. From
1960 to mid 1966, firms had to provide a one-month advance notice (or pay the equivalent of one month
of salary) but otherwise “employment at will” was the norm. In 1966, the congress approved a new law
under which firms had to pay compensation equal to one month’s wage per year of work to all workers
dismissed without just cause. The economic needs of the firm were considered a just cause in the law and
therefore a worker dismissed for this reason would not qualify for severance pay. In practice, however,
workers would appeal to courts and judges tended to consider these dismissals unjustified. 12 In that event,
the employer could choose between paying the mandatory compensation–plus wages foregone during
trial—or reinstate the worker in his/her old post. This reform substantially increased the difficulty and the
cost of labor force adjustments.
After 1973, a violent change in political regime brought about a de facto liberalization. Although
job security provisions were not modified in the law, in practice, it was more likely that judges ruled
against workers, effectively reducing dismissal costs. In 1989 and 1981, successive modifications reduced
the cost of dismissal under the law. In 1981, the maximum amount to be awarded to a worker dismissed
without a just cause was reduced to the equivalent of five months’ pay. This reform substantially reduced
the cost of dismissal, particularly for workers with long tenures, although it only applied to newly hired
workers.
After 1984, the tide shifted and job security provisions became progressively stricter. In
December of that year, the law was modified to exclude economic needs of the firm as a justified cause of
dismissal. However, the maximum amount payable to a worker was kept at five months of pay. In 1990,
after the return of democracy, a new labor reform still in force further increased the cost of dismissal. This
law considers dismissals motivated by the economic needs of the firm justified but employers are still
11
12

Heckman and Pagés (2000).
Romaguera et al. (1995).

5

liable to pay compensation equal to one month’s pay per year of work with a maximum amount of 11
months of pay. It is the responsibility of the firm to prove just cause. If such causality cannot be
demonstrated, there is a 20 percent surcharge in the amount of compensation.
We summarize this variance in law and court practice by means of a job security measure derived
in Pagés and Montenegro (1999). 13 This measure is computed as follows:
T

JS t = ∑ β δ
i

i =1

i −1

(1 − δ )( bt+ i + a t SPt +i

jc

+ (1 − a t ) SPt+ i )
uc

where δ is the probability of remaining in a job, β is the discount factor, T is the maximum tenure that a
worker can attain in a firm, b t+i is the advance notice to a worker that has been i years with a firm, a t is
the probability that the economic difficulties of the firm are considered a justified cause of dismissal,
SPt+1jc is the mandated severance pay in such event to a worker that has been i years at the firm, and
finally, SPt+1 uc denotes the payment to be awarded to a worker with tenure i in case of unjustified
dismissal. 14
This measure computes the expected cost, at the time a worker is hired, of dismissing this worker
in the future. This cost is measured in terms of monthly wages. The advantage of this measure in respect
to other measures that compute the cost conditional on having achieved a certain tenure is that our job
security measure captures the whole profile of severance pay at each level of tenure. The assumption is
that firms evaluate future dismissal costs based on current law. Higher values of this variable indicate
periods of relative ly high job security whereas lower values characterize periods in which dismissals were
less costly.
Based on the legal information summarized in Table 1 and assumptions regarding β, δ, a, and T,
we obtain a measure of JS. We take β to be a constant value such that the average real interest is equal to
8.4%, which corresponds to the average real interest rate in Chile during the 1960-1998 period. The
discount rate is computed based on the assumption that without job security, turnover rates in Chile would
be comparable to the ones observed in the US. 15 Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) report an average annual
turnover rate of 12%. The probability that a dismissal originated by the economic needs of the firm will
be considered just depends on whether the law says so and whether labor judges rule so if workers take
firms to courts. For the period 1966-1984, although despite that economic needs of the firm were
considered just cause in the law, we assume a to be larger than zero and depending on labor courts stand.
13

See the mentioned paper and Heckman and Pagés (2000) for a complete description of the methodology used,
how it is applied across time and countries and the relative advantages and costs of using this measure versus other
measures of job security.

6

Finally, we assume T = 25. See Table 2 for a complete description of the parameters used in the
computation of the JS measure.
The evolution of this variable over time is depicted in Graph 1. After some years of rela tively low
employment protection, JS increases eight-fold after the introduction of compulsory severance pay in the
law. Expected dismissal costs decline markedly in 1973 and then successively in 1978 and 1981.
Subsequently, employment protection increases again but without reaching the levels attained during the
late 1960s.
3.2 Minimum Wages
Columns two and three in Table 3 present the hourly real minimum wage in pesos of 1998. 16 These
indices were constructed using Chile’s Central Bank Bulletins. It is interesting to note that since 1989
there has been a lower minimum wage for workers 18 years old or younger. This wage has been fixed at
a level between 15 and 20 percent of the adult wage. Graph 2 summarizes the evolution of the minimum
wage in relation to the average wage for teen and adult workers. The graph shows that minimum wages
are much higher, relative to each group average rate, for teen than for adult workers. It also shows that the
level of teen minimum wages has been quite volatile relative to the average wage.
Between 1960 and 1998, adult real minimum wages increased by 186% and teen minimum wages
by 104%. However, because average ages rose by more, minimum wages lost ground in relation to the
average wage. Despite this long-term secular trend, Chile experienced a wide range of fluctuations in
minimum wages, both in its rate of growth (in real terms) and in its level in relation to the average wage.
During the 1960s, the real value of minimum wages was held constant, but since real wages increased, the
ratio of the minimum to the average real wage declined. In the early 1970s , minimum wages increased
substantially, surpassing the growth rate of average wages. In consequence, the ratio of the minimum to
the average real wage increased sharply in that period. From 1975 to 1980 minimum wages lost ground
relative to the average wage. After the return to democracy in 1990, real minimum wages increased
steadily, but they continued declining relative to the average wage. The decline was particularly sharp for
the teen group, whose minimum to average real wage rate fell from 1.80 in 1975 to 0.50 in 1998. It is
interesting to note that while there are several studies in the Chilean case that suggests that the minimum
wage is binding, others like Bravo and Vial (1997) suggest that it is not. 17

15

Although turnover rates can be measured, this measure is itself affected by labor law. Given this endogeneity, we
choose instead to use the U.S. turnover rate, since it is well established that dismissal costs in the U.S. are very
small.
16
Per hour minimum wages are constructed as monthly minimum wages divided by 4.2*40 hours.
17
See, for instance, Castañeda (1983), Paredes and Riveros (1989), Montenegro (2002) and Cowan et al. (2003).
An excellent review of the impact of minimum wages in the case of the United States can be found in Kosters

7

4. Data
The household surveys used in this study were obtained from the University of Chile’s Economics
Department. The Economics Department’s Survey monitors the employment-unemployment status in the
metropolitan area of Santiago de Chile four times a year. Unfortunately, only the surveys taken in June of
each year contain information about wages and other employment status variables. Therefore, these are
the surveys used in this study. The format of the survey and the definition of the variables have been kept
constant since 1957, when the survey started, and so the information contained in them is comparable
across years.18 During the period 1960 to 1998, the surveys interviewed between 10,000 and 16,000
people, and around 3,700 and 5,400 active labor force participants each year. During this period, the
Metropolitan Area of Santiago de Chile represented about one third of Chile’s total population, and a
higher proportion of GDP.19 The data set is formed by stacked cross-sectional data sets, which means that
individuals are not followed over time. The only restriction applied to our sample is that the people
included in the estimates must be at least 15 years old and no older than 65.
We merge labor policy and macro variables taken at the annual frequency with our individuallevel annual data. We include the job security index and the minimum wage data described in Section 3.
We also include a measure of wage bargaining to control for changes in union activity that can be
correlated to our variables and to employment. While perhaps the best measure of influence of unions in
wage determination is union coverage, that is, the share of workers whose wages are affected by
collective bargaining, a time series of this nature does not exist in Chile. Since union membership is not
available either for all years covered in our sample , we measure unions’ bargaining power by means of an
index that reflects the degree of centralization of collective bargaining constructed by Edwards and CoxEdwards (2000). This variable takes values from 1 (total decentralization) to 4 (total centralization). The
use of this measure is based on the observation that union coverage tends to be larger in countries where
collective bargaining is centralized. Finally, we include as a measure of economic activity deviations with
respect to potential GDP. To obtain this variable, we use GDP data from the World Bank and apply a
Hodrick-Prescott filter to obtain trend GDP.
Table 3 summarizes some basic statistics of our sample, by year. The first three columns display
the value of the job security index and the real minimum wage for people 18 or younger and for adult
workers. The next two columns summarize the index of bargaining (column four presents the original
index, and column five presents the smoothed index). The evolution of these variables over time is
depicted in Graph 5. Higher values of this measure, like those registered from 1960 to 1970, reflect
(1996). A more recent survey on the international evidence of minimum wages can be found in Dowrick and
Quiggin (2003).
18
In this study we use data from 1960 on, because the previous years (1957-1959) do not have reliable data.
19
According to the 1992 Census, the metropolitan area accounted for 39 percent of the total population.

8

periods of higher union centralization. 20 The next seven columns summarize the average hourly wage
broken down by sex (columns six and seven); skill level (columns eight and nine) and age group
(columns ten, eleven and twelve). Column thirteen summarizes the deviation of the GDP from its
potential or trend value. Finally, columns fourteen, fifteen and sixteen present the percentage of total
people employed, the percentage of people that work for someone else (wage employment), and the
percentage of people self-employed as a proportion of total population between 15 and 65 years old.
These three rates are also depicted in Graph 3, which jointly with Graph 4 (which shows GDP deviations
from its trend), illustrates the violent swings experienced by the Chilean economy during the 1960-1998
period, and in particular between 1970 and 1985. 21 Some additional indicators describing the performance
of the Chilean economy are summarized in Table 4.

5. Methodology
To estimate the differential impact of labor market regula tions across sub-populations we assume that the
employment status of an individual is characterized by
y* ijt = Xit *β1 +X’it *Zt *β2+ γt + εijt

(1)

where
yijt =1 if y *ijt > 0
yijt =0 otherwise
and y* ijt is an unobservable variable that determines whether an individual i, in sub-population j, at time t
will be employed or not, and yijt is the observable employment status of this individual. In addition, Xit is a
vector of variables that summarizes the personal characteristics of the individual i at time t, Zt is a vector
of variables that vary with t, γt is a year fixed effect and εijt is an error term. Among the personal
characteristics we include age, gender, skill level, number of children and number of children interacted
with gender. In some specifications, we also include age interacted with gender, and age interacted with
skill to capture differential effects of age across gender and skill groups. Given the number of
observations available, we divided the data into three age groups (15-24, 25-50, and 51-65) and two skill
levels (9 years of education or less, and more than 9 years). Adding the skill and the age groups to the
gender division, we have 12 different sub-populations, j=1,…12
20

Although not shown in the results, we checked the robustness of our results using the strikes index constructed by
Edwards and Cox-Edwards (2000) instead of the centralization index. The results were invariant to different
specifications.

9

In the vector of aggregate variables Zt we include the index of job security, deviations from GDP
trend and the union centralization variable (all in logarithms). We also include the minimum wage index
(also in logarithms), but we let it change for individuals 18 and younger. By construction, the vector of
coefficients on the interaction of Xit and Zt,, β2 , gives the sign of the differential effect. In addition,
assuming that the Prob(y*ijt > 0) is distributed as a standard normal distribution, the size of the marginal
differential effect is given by φ(.)Xit β2 , where φ(. ) is the normal density function.
Our original intention was to estimate
y* ijt = Xit *β1 +X’it *Zt *β2 + Zt*β3 + εijt (1’)
With such a specification we could recover the total marginal effect of a labor policy on sub-population j
as φ(.)(Xit β2 +β3 ). However, despite finding robust estimates for the differential effects, our estimates for
the level effect (β3 ) proved to be extremely sensitive to the set of variables included in Zt., suggesting that
our time variables did not properly account for the time variation of the series. In view of these results,
we opted for estimating specification (1). This estimation still allows us to compute marginal effects, but
the total effects are now absorbed by the constant term. Therefore, we can measure the impact of labor
market regulations on the distribution but not on the level of employment.
Although specification (1) is a reduced form equation, in some cases, it will be useful to add a
measure of wages. To construct this variable, wijt , we assign to all workers i ∈ j, j=1,..,12, at period t, the
average wage of all employed workers in group j at period t.
We minimize the risk of omitted variable biases and spurious correlations in five ways: First, by
using individual data from a series of stacked household surveys to estimate specification (1), we can
control for changes in the relative size of the population of each group and changes in fertility which, if
omitted, could bias our estimates. Second, by introducing time dummies, we control for macroeconomic
trends and cycles as well as policy changes that affect the overall population. Third, by controlling for
effect of changes in the business cycle (using GDP deviations from its trend) across individuals (that is,
including X’it * Zt , where Zt contains the business cycle variable ) we can partially control for changes in
policy and institutions that are endogenous to changes in relative employment. This is because such
movements are likely to be correlated with changes in the business cycle. Fourth, by estimating the
differential effect of policy while including contemporary labor market policies and institutions, we make
sure that our measured effects are not biased by the correlation between these variables and the
distribution of employment. Lastly, by comparing the estimated effects on the probability of wage
employment (which is covered by labor policy) with the results on self-employment (which is not
21

The Chilean economic performance has been extensively documented by Edwards and Cox-Edwards (1987,
2000), de la Cuadra and Hachette (1991), Wisecarver (1992), Bosworth, Dornbusch and Laban (1994), Hudson
(1994), Soto (1995), and Cortazar and Vial (1998).

10

covered), we assess whether we are capturing the effect of policy, or instead, the effect of some
unobservable correlate.
6. Empirical Results
6.1 The Effect of Job Security on the Distribution of Employment
Our results indicate that job security provisions have a differential impact across demographic subgroups. In Table 5, we report the results of estimating our empirical specification (1) assuming normality
in the distribution of errors. The reported numbers correspond to the coefficients of the probit model,
while the marginal effects for selected sub-populations of workers are reported in Table 6. The t-tests,
reported next to the coefficients are robust to the presence of heteroskedasticity of unknown kind using
the White (1980) method. Most coefficients on the individual characteristic variables exhibit the expected
patterns: female and older workers are less likely to be employed than prime-age (26-50) men.
Additionally, the number of children per father increases the probability of being employed, and the
number of children per mother decreases the probability of being employed. Instead, the coefficients on
the variable young and unskilled change signs across specifications.
In column (1) we report the results of interacting the JS measure with dummies for age (young
and older), gender (women) and skill level. A negative (positive) sign indicates that periods of more
stringent JS provisions are associated with a decline (increase) in the probability of employment of a
particular sub-population relative to the omitted category. We find strong age effects. The coefficient on
the young-JS interaction is negative and statistically significant while the coefficient on the older-JS
interaction is positive although not statistically significant. Our results suggest that high job security tends
to bias the distribution of employment against younger workers. We also find significant effects across
the skill divide. The coefficient on the unskilled-JS interaction is negative and statistically significant,
suggesting that JS provisions reduce the probability of employment of unskilled workers relative to
skilled ones. Lastly, the coefficient on the female -JS interaction suggests a negative effect of JS on the
probability of employment of women relative to men.
Column (2) shows the results once we control for the evolution of the minimum wage, union
activity and deviations of GDP with respect to its trend, as well as interaction of these variables with age,
gender and skill dummies. The only difference with respect to column (2) is that the coefficient on the
dummy for older workers is now somewhat larger and statistically significant at the 10% level, suggesting
that job security provisions benefit older workers relative to prime-age ones. In columns (3) and (4) we
report the coefficients resulting from estimating the same specification for wage-employment and selfemployment separately. Our results are encouraging since they suggest that our findings are driven by
policy changes instead of by some unobservable factors correlated with labor policy and employment.

11

The signs and magnitudes of the coefficients for total and wage-employment are very similar, except for
the coefficients on women. Instead, for self-employment the coefficients are either not statistically
different from zero or going in the opposite direction than for wage-employment. This is the case with the
coefficients on the gender and unskilled variable s, which suggest that more stringent JS regulations
increase the probability that women and the unskilled are employment in the self-employment sector
relative to men and the skilled.
Column (5) exhibits the results once we allow for further interactions between age, skill and
gender groups. With this finer level of disaggregation we can examine whether the impact of job security
is the same across young men and young women, or across young skilled and unskilled workers. These
additional variables not only provide a more complete description of the effects of JS on the distribution
of employment, but also help to infer the channels through which JS affects that distribution. The
coefficients for these additional interaction variables are all statistically significant, and a test for their
joint significance strongly rejects the null hypothesis of all the coefficients being zero.
The estimates in Column (5) contain some interesting additional information relative to the
estimates in Column (1)-(4) We find that an increase in JS tends to reduce the employment probabilities
of young men relative to those of young women. However, we also find that this effect is reversed at
older ages. Thus, JS provisions seemingly reduce the probabilities of employment of middle -aged and
older women relative to those of men in that same age group. Our estimates also suggest that an increase
in JS provisions reduces the probability of employment of both skilled and unskilled youth, but the effect
is larger for unskilled youth.
Finally, column (6) reports the results of estimating the same specification than in column (6) but
controlling in addition by the average wage of each sub-population group, in period t. Controlling for the
wage level of each group allows us to assess whether some of the observed effects are driven by
differences in wage adjustment across sub-populations. Yet, the results should be taken with caution
because some wage movements may be endogenous to the probability of employment. Overall we find
that holding wages constant does not affect our main results. The only coefficient that changes size and
significance is the interaction between young unskilled and job security. Holding wages constant reduces
the coefficient and the significance of the effect on unskilled youth (relative to more skilled youth).
Instead, most of the other coefficients become larger (in absolute value) than the ones reported in column
(5). This suggests that more stringent regulations are partly paid by workers in the form of lower wages.
In light of the different theories described in Section 2, how do we explain the results presented
above? Although we cannot totally discriminate among different theories, we are at least able to reject
some hypotheses. The fact that most of our results remain unchanged when wages are included suggests
that the differential effects presented above cannot be explained by differences in the elasticity of labor

12

supply across demographic groups. The only exception is the larger effect on young unskilled workers
that seems to be driven by a higher labor supply elasticity of this group. 22 Our results also suggest that
these differential effects cannot be explained by insider-outsider theories, since in that case the effect
would also be through wages. Instead, our results suggest that the differential effects on employment are
demand driven: Changes in job security provisions bring about changes in hiring and firing rates that
selectively affect different types of workers.
A barrier-of-entry effect can explain the negative impact of job security on the employment rates
of young workers relative to other demographic groups. However, it cannot account for the estimated
differences in impact between young women and young men. One possible way to explain these findings
is to consider differences in turnover rates across groups. As discussed in Section 2, a higher exogenous
turnover rate can bring about two effects. On the one hand, workers with a higher propensity to rotate
have lower average tenures and therefore are more likely to be laid off in bad times. On the other hand,
higher rotation reduces expected severance payments and therefore increases the incentives to hire these
workers Higher rotation among women can explain why JS provisions affect young women less than
young men. It can also explain why middle -aged and older women benefit less from JS than men of the
same age.
Differences among turnover rates could also partially explain the results for skilled and unskilled
workers. Higher rotation among the unskilled would imply lower tenure rates and higher probabilities of
dismissal for middle -aged and older unskilled workers relative to more skilled ones. This is consistent
with the deleterious effect of job security on the employment rates of middle -aged and older unskilled
workers, relative to skilled ones. Of course, the hig her turnover rates among unskilled workers are less
likely to be exogenous to the decisions of employers than female turnover rates. In consequence, a
complete discussion of this effect requires a model that explains why turnover rates are different in the
first place. The model does not seem to able to explain why the effect on employment appears more
negative on the unskilled than the on the skilled youth, but as we have seen, this effect seems to be driven
by the more elastic labor supply of this group.
6.2 Distribution of the Effect of Minimum Wages
Table 5 also reports the results of interacting personal characteristic dummies with the evolution of
minimum wages over time. An increase in the statutory wage has similar qualitative effects on the
distribution of employment across age and skill than stricter job security provisions. To account for
contemporary employment policies and economic conditions we include measures of union activity, job
22

Cowan et al. (2003) find that, in Chile, seemingly high transitions between schooling and the labor market lead to
a very elastic labor supply for the young unskilled.

13

security provisions and GDP deviations, interacted with demographic dummies in all specifications in
columns (2) to (6) but not in column (7). As in other studies for developed countries, the results in column
(7) suggest that an increase in the minimum wage shifts reduces the employment prospects of young
workers relative to older ones. We also find a negative effect on the unskilled. Instead, our results also
indicate that minimum wages hikes may increase the probability of employment for women relative to
men.
Controlling for the sub-group effects of contemporary changes in policy and the business cycle
does not alter the results reported in column (7) (See column (3)). The comparison between the results
obtained from the wage employment and the self-employment specifications (column (3) and (4)) is also
encouraging. As with the coefficients associated to job security provisions, we find that the coefficients
on wage employment are very similar to the ones obtained for total employment, while the coefficients on
self-employment are not statistically significant. All in all, these results suggest that the effects we are
capturing are indeed associated with changes in policy rather than with some unobservable correlate of
employment.
In column (5) we present our results once we allow for differential effects across age-skill and
age-gender categories and control for contemporaneous changes in policy and economic conditions. As in
column (7), we find a negative effect of minimum wages on the employment rates of unskilled workers,
particularly for middle -aged ones. The effect of minimum wages is negative for young unskilled workers
and not statistically significant for young skilled ones. Instead, higher minimum wages tend to shift
employment towards older workers. Lastly, we find that women, and in particular the young, tend to
benefit from minimum wage policies.
The former specification assumes that the effect of raising the minimum wage is unrelated to the
level of the going wage. However, it is plausible that the effect be positively related to the distance
between the statutory and the going wage. To account for this possibility, we include average wages,
computed as described in Section 5.23 The results reported in column (6) indicate that controlling for the
time evolution of the average wage of sub-population j = 1,…,12 does not alter the results reported in
columns (3) to (5).
While most of our findings are consistent with the competitive model, some are diffic ult to
explain with this paradigm. For instance, this model cannot explain why minimum wages tend to shift
employment towards women. Assuming that women have higher marginal products than men and adding
worker heterogeneity to the simple competitive model, this shift can be explained as a “flight to quality”
23

Including such variables is tantamount to including a set of non-coverage adjusted, demographic group-specific
Kaitz ratios. However, we are not imposing the constraint that the coefficient on the minimum wage is the same as
the coefficient on the group-specific average wage.

14

effect. To see that, assume a population of heterogeneous workers that prior to the minimum wage
increase were each paid their marginal value. After an increase in minimum wages, all workers with a
marginal value below the new minimum wage cease to be employed. Assuming a perfectly elastic supply
of all types of workers firms replace lower marginal value workers with higher value ones. This
explanation, however, is at odds with the widespread observation that women’s wages are lower than
men’s. Another possible interpretation is that while men are able to obtain wages that are close to the
competitive ones, women’s wages are below their marginal products. This would be consistent with the
systematic wage gaps found between observationally identical men and women and with the asymmetric
gender effects of minimum wages. If wage-gaps are explained by imperfect competition in female labor
markets, employers are supply constrained when hiring women. Therefore, an increase in minimum
wages can expand both labor supply and employment rates.
6.3 Total Effects
In our previous results, all the estimated coefficients measured the effects of labor regulations on each
particular sub-population relative to the omitted category, but they did not provide information on
whether the employment probabilities of the different sub-groups increased or declined in absolute terms
after changes in policy. In this section, we attempt to gauge the total effects of labor market policies on
the probability of employment by estimating their effect on the aggregate employment rates of primeaged skilled men (the omitted category in the specifications reported in Table 5). To do so, we estimate
the following error correction specification:
∆Nt =c-λ(Νt-1 -Ν∗ ) + Β 1 (yt – yt*)+ +B2 ∆Log(Wt )+ Β 3Λ∆Ν τ-L+εt (1)
where Ν τ∗ = γ0 + γ1 Log(JSt )+ γ2 Log(MWt )+γ3 Log(Union t )

(2)

and where Nt denotes the employment rate–i.e. the employment to population ratio—of prime-aged male
skilled workers in period t, Ν τ∗ denotes long-run equilibrium employment, yt –yt* denotes GDP deviations
from its trend (in logs), Wt denotes average wages for prime-age skilled male workers, JSt denotes the
measure of Job Security, MWt denotes minimum wages, Uniont denotes the index of wage bargaining
and L is the length of the maximum lag. In expression (1), employment changes in function of: previous
period deviations from long-run equilibrium employment; GDP deviations from its trend; changes in
wages and short run dynamics. Expression (2) assumes that, in the long run, employment rates are a
function of labor market policies and the structure of wage bargaining.
Using aggregate time series techniques to estimate the effect of policies on the reference group
allows us to model short and long-run employment dynamics. The first step in the estimation of

15

expression (1) and (2) is to test whether the variables are stationary. The first panel in Table 7 reports the
results of testing for the presence of unit roots using the Augmented Dickey-Fuller test (ADF). The tests
are specified with three lags. In those cases in which the plot of the series indicated the presence of a time
trend we included a constant and a time trend in the specification, in the other cases, we included only a
constant. While we can reject the unit root hypothesis for GDP deviations from its trend and for changes
in hourly wages, we cannot reject non-stationarity for the lagged employment rate, the logarithm of
minimum wages, the logarithm of the job security index and the logarithm of union centralization.
However, ADF tests on the first differences of these four series indicate that the hypothesis that these
series are integrated of order one, I(1), is not rejected.
Given the non-stationarity of the employment rate, expression (1) is well defined only if lagged
employment deviations with respect to the long-run equilibrium rate are stationary. This is equivalent to
saying that the series Ν t* has to cointegrate with Ν t-1. The second panel in Table 7 reports the results of the
Johansen cointegration test between Ν∗ and Νt-1. The likelihood ratio test indicates the presence of three
cointegrating equations indicating that the error correction model is well defined.
Table 8 presents the results of estimating the error correction model (ECM) once expression (2)
has been substituted into (1). We use the results of the AIC test to determine the optimal length of the
lagged endogenous variable and determine that L=1. We estimate the ECM with and without wages to see
whether introducing wages alters our results and find the results to be very similar in both cases.
Essentially, we find that while job security provisions increase the long-run equilibrium rate of primeaged skilled male employment. This is not totally surprising. As mentioned in Section 2, job security
provisions increase the cost of dismissing workers with long tenure relative to the costs of dismissing less
tenured workers, reducing the layoff rate of the first relative to the layoff rate of the latter. Since primeage skilled workers tend to have longer tenures than other, younger, less skilled workers, job security
provisions reduce the layoff rates of prime-age skilled workers relative to the layoff rate of other
demographic groups. The positive sign in the ECM suggests that this effect on the layoff rate more than
compensates for the negative effect of JS on employment creation. Instead, we do not reject the
hypothesis that an increase in the minimum wage does not affect the employment rate of prime-aged,
skilled male workers regardless of whether we control for the evolution of wages.
The estimated effect of job security provisions and minimum wages on the employment rate, can
be used to infer the total effect of these regulations on the employment probabilities of other demographic
groups. In order to do so, the coefficients on job security provisions and minimum wages, reported in
Table 8, should be divided by (minus) the coefficient on the lagged employment variable, to obtain the
coefficients in expression (2). They reflect the magnitude of the long-run effect of regulations on primeage skilled male employment. The third and fourth columns of Table 6 present our estimates for the total

16

effects. They are obtained by adding the marginal effect reported in the first and second columns of Table
6 to the long-run elasticities obtained from specification (1) in Table 8.24
The total effects reported in columns (3) and (4) suggest that job security provisions not only shift
the distribution of employment towards older and skilled workers, but also increase their employment
rates. Instead, more stringent job security provisions reduce the employment rates of young workers.
Moreover, job security provisions reduce employment opportunities for women while increasing those of
men. The magnitudes of these estimated effects are substantial. According to them, the 1990 labor reform,
which increased our measure of job security in about one third, reduced the employment rates of young
unskilled male workers by 1.6 percentage points of the population.
We also find non-neutral effects of minimum wage spikes. Our estimates suggest that a 10%
increase in minimum wages reduces the probability of employment for young unskilled male workers by
0.51 percentage points. Lastly, we find that a 10% increase in the minimum wage raises the employment
rates of women by 0.46 percentage points.

7. Conclusions
The effect of regulations is far from neutral across demographic sub-groups. Paradoxically, job security
and minimum wage regulations appear to be detrimental to those same workers that they are supposed to
help. Our results suggest that both minimum wages and job security regulations reduce the employment
opportunities of the young, the unskilled and particularly unskilled youth while promoting the
employment rates of skilled and older workers. We have also found indications that job security
regulations may force some workers, particularly women and the unskilled, out of wage emplo yment and
into self-employment.
There is an ongoing debate on whether raising minimum wages and job security provisions have
any effects on aggregate employment rates. However, even if researchers concluded that job security
provisions or minimum wages do not have an effect in the aggregate, it is important to carefully consider
these distributional effects when evaluating their desirability. At best, these policies will help some
disadvantaged workers at the expense of other poor, young or low skilled workers. At worse, they
distribute jobs from less advantaged to better-off workers.

24

The long run effect of job security on the employment rates of middle age skilled workers is computed as 0.011
divided by 0.63, which is equal to 0.017.

17

8. References
Banco Central de Chile. 2001. “Indicadores Económicos y Sociales de Chile: 1960-2000.” Banco Central
de Chile, Santiago de Chile.
Bazen, S., and N. Skourias. 1997. “Is There a Negative Effect of Minimum Wages on Youth
Unemployment in France?” European Economic Review 41(3-5): 723-32.
Bentolila , S. and G. Bertola . 1990. “Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How Bad is Eurosclerosis?”
Review of Economic Studies 57: 381-402.
Bentolila, S. and G. Saint-Paul. 1994. “A Model of Labor Demand With Linear Adjustment Costs.”
Labour Economics (1): 303-26.
Bertola, G. 1990. “Job Security, Employment and Wages.” European Economic Review 34: 851-86.
Bertola, G. 1991. “Labor Turnover Costs and Average Labor Demand.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper #3866. Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Bertola, G., F. Blau and L. Kahn. 2002. “Labor Market Institutions and Demographic Employment
Patterns.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #9043. Cambridge ,
Massachusetts.
Bosworth, B., R. Dornbusch and R. Laban, editors. 1994. The Chilean Economy, Policy Lessons and
Challenges. The Brooking Institution, Washington D.C.
Bravo, D., and J. Vial. 1997. “La Fijación del Salario Mínimo en Chile: Elementos para una Discusión.”
Colección de Estudios CIEPLAN 43: 117-151.
Card, D., L.F. Katz and A.B. Krueger. 1993. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the
Fast Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 4509. Cambridge, Mass.
Card, D., L.F. Katz and A.B. Krueger. 1994. “Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Panel Data on
State Minimum Wages Laws: Comment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47 (3): 48797.
Card, D., and A. Krueger. 2000. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast Food
Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply.” American Economic Review 90: 1397-1420.
Castañeda, T. 1983. “Salarios mínimos y empleo en el Gran Santiago: 1978 y 1981.” Cuadernos de
Economía 61.
Cortazar, R., and J. Vial. 1998. Construyendo Opciones: Propuestas Economicas y Sociales para el
Cambio de Siglo. Santiago, Chile: Cieplan and DOMEN Editions.
Cowan, K., A. Micco, A. Mizala, C. Pagés, and P. Romaguera. 2003. “Un Diagnostico del Desempleo en
Chile.” Mimeo Inter-American Development Bank and Departamento Ingenieria Aplicada U.
Chile.
Davis, S., and J. Haltiwanger. 1992. “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment
Reallocation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(3): 819-63.
De la Cuadra, S., and D. Hachette. 1991. “Lessons from the Chilean Stabilization and Recovery.” In: B.
Bosworth, R. Dornbusch and R. Laban, editors. 1994. “The Chilean Economy, Policy Lessons
and Challenges.” The Brooking Institution, Washington D. C.
Dowrick, S., and J. Quiggin. 1993. “A Survey of the Literature on Minimum Wages.” Australian National
University and University of Queensland. Mimeo.

18

Edwards, S., and A. Cox-Edwards. 1987. “Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean Experiment.” The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2nd Edition, 1991.
Edwards, S. and Cox-Edwards, A. 2000. “Economic Reforms and Labour Markets: Policy Issues and
Lessons from Chile.” Economic Policy 15(30): 181-230.
Hamermesh, D. S. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton, United States: Princeton University Press.
Heckman, J., and C. Pagés. 2000. “The Cost of Job Security Regulation: Evidence from Latin American
Labor Markets.” Economía 1(1): 147-151.
Hopenhayn, H., and Rogerson, Richard. 1993. “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General
Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy 101(5): 915-38.
Hudson, R. 1994. “Chile: A Country Study.” Library of Congress, Washington D. C.
Katz, L. and A. Krueger. 1992. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-Food Industry.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 46(1): 6-21.
Kosters, M.H., editor. 1996. “Effects of the Minimum Wages on Employment.” AEI Press for the
American Enterprise Institute, Washington D.C.
Lazear, E. 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(3):
699-726.
Lindbeck A., and D.J. Snower. 1988. The Insider Outsider Theory of Employment and Unemployment.
MIT Press, Cambridge and London.
Montenegro, Claudio E. 1998. “The Structure of Wages in Chile: 1960-1996: An Application of Quantile
Regression.” Estudios de Economía 25(1): 71-98.
Montenegro, Claudio E. 2002. “Unemployment, Job Security, and Minimum Wages in Chile: 19602001.” Washington, DC. World Bank. Mimeo.
Pagés, C., and C.E. Montenegro. 1999. “Job Security and the Age Composition of Employment: Evidence
from Chile.” Inter-American Development Bank, Research Department, Working Paper # 398.
Paredes, Ricardo, and Luis Riveros. 1989. “Sesgo de Selección y el Efecto de los Salarios Mínimos.”
Cuadernos de Economía 79.
Partridge, M., and J. Partridge. 1998 “Are Teen Unemployment Rates Influenced by State Minimum
Wage Laws?” Growth and Change 29(4):359-82.
Risager, O., and J.R. Sorensen. 1997. “On the Effects of Firing Costs When Investment Is Endogenous:
An Extension of a Model by Bertola.” European Economic Review 41(7): 1343-53.
Romaguera, P., C. Echevarria and P. Gonzalez. 1995. “Chile .” In: G. Márquez, editor. Reforming the
Labor Market in a Liberalized Econom”. The Inter-American Development Bank, John
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland.
Soto, R. 1995. “Trade Liberalization in Chile: Lessons for Hemispheric Integration.” In: E.L. EcheverriCarroll, editor. NAFTA and Trade Liberalization in the Americas. Austin: University of Texas,
Graduate School of Business, Bureau of Business Research in cooperation with the ICSS112
Institute.
White, H. 1980. “A Heterokedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test for
Heterokedasticity.” Econometrica 48: 817-838.
Williams, N., and J. Mills. 2001. “The Minimum Wage and Teenage Employment: Evidence from Time
Series.” Applied Economics 33(3): 285-300.

19

Wisecarver, D. 1992. “El Modelo Económico Chileno.” Centro Internacional para el Desarrollo
Económico (CINDE). Instituto de Economía de la Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile.
Santiago de Chile.
.

20

Graph 1
Job Security (in monthly wages)

4.5
4
3.5

Monthly wages

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
60

62

64

66

68

70

72

74

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

94

96

Source: Pagés and Montenegro (1999).

Graph 2
Minimum to Average Real Wages
2.00

Minimum/Average Real Wage

1.80

1.60

1.40

1.20
1.00

0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98

For people under 18 y/o

For people over 18 y/o

Source: Authors’ calculations (see data section).

21

98

Graph 3

60.0%

14.0%

55.0%

13.0%

50.0%

12.0%

45.0%

11.0%

40.0%

10.0%

35.0%

9.0%

30.0%

Self-Employment Rate

Employment and Dependent
Rates

Employment and Dependent Rates

8.0%
60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
Years
Employment Rate

Dependent Rate

Self-Employment Rate

Graph 4
GDP Deviation from Trend

20.00%
15.00%

Percentage

10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
-5.00%
-10.00%
-15.00%
-20.00%
60

62

64

66

68

70

72

74

76

Source: Authors’ calculations (see data section).

22

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

Graph 5
Bargaining Index
4

3

2

1

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

19
76

19
74

19
72

19
70

19
68

19
66

19
64

19
62

19
60

0

Year

Bargaining Index measures the degree of centralization of wage bargaining. It takes values from 1 to 4. Higher values indicate higher centralization
of colective bargaining. Source Edwards and Edwards 2000
Bargaining Index

Smoothed Bargaining Index

23

Table 1. Employment Protection Provisions in Chile: 1960 – 1998
Periods

Prior
Notice
Period

Economic reasons
just
cause
for
dismissal on the
law?
/ in the courts?

Compensation
for dismissal in
case
of
just
cause

Compensation for dismissal in
case of unjust cause

To whom do
changes apply?

1 month

Dismissals at will

Dismissals at will

Dismissals at will

Dismissals
will

Economic reasons
were just cause in
the law. In practice
labor
courts
considered most
dismissals
unjustified.

The law does not
mandate
any
compensation in
this case.

One month’s pay per year of
work at the firm plus foregone
wages during trial. Trials could
last at most 6 months.
There is no maximum in the
amount to be awarded

All workers

1960 –1966

1966-1973
1 month
Firms
could
not
dismiss
workers
without a just cause.

at

1973-1978

1 month

Labor courts were
much more profirms.
Workers’
claims were weaker.

Same as previous
period

Same as previous period

All workers

1978-1980

1 month

Economic
needs
were considered just
cause.

zero

1 month per year of work,
without maximum limit.

Only to workers
hired after June
1978

1981-1984
Law
18,018
(August,14, 1981)

1 month

Economic
needs
were considered just
cause.

zero

1 month’ wage per year of work
with a maximum of 150 days

Only to workers
hired
after
August 1981

1984-1990
Law 18,372
(Dec, 1984)

1 month

Economic
needs
were no longer
considered
just
cause for dismissal.

zero

1 month’ wage per year of work
with a maximum of 150 days

All workers

1990- today
(Nov. 1990)
Firms need to justify
dismissals

1 month

Firms
have
to
justify
dismissals
but economic needs
are considered just
cause for dismissal.

Economic
reasons:
1 month’ wage
per year of work
with a maximum
of 11 months’
pay

1.2-1.5 months per year of work

All
workers
hired after
August 1981

June 15, 78
Decree 2,200

24

Table 2. Parameters used to compute Index
β

δ

b

a

SPf c

SPuc

1960-65

.92

.88

1

1

0

0

1966-73

.92

.88

1

.2

0

(1)

1974-77

.92

.88

1

.5

0

(2)

1978-80

.92

.88

1

.8

0

(2)

1981-84

.92

.88

1

.8

0

(3)

1985-90

.92

.88

1

0

0

(3)

1991-

.92

.88

1

.9

(4)

(5)

Notes: To compute β we use the fact that the average real interest from 1960-1998 was 8.4%. To compute δ we
assume that the average Chilean turnover rate without employment protection would be similar to the US one.
According to Davis and Haltiwanger (1995) average turnover rates average 12% a year in the United States. (1)
Corresponds to one month’s pay per year of work augmented by three months to capture the average payments in
foregone wages during trial. (2) One month’s pay per year of work without upper limit. (3) One month’s pay per
year of work with a five months upper limit. (4) One month’ s pay per year of work with 11 months upper limit. (5)
1.2 month’s pay per year of work with 11 months upper limit. We assume the maximum tenure a worker can attain
at a firm is 25 years.

25

Table 3. Basic Statistics of the Sample
Minimum Wage

Year
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98

Job
Security
Index
Col. (1)
0.5199
0.5199
0.5199
0.5199
0.5199
0.5199
3.9090
3.9090
3.9090
3.9090
3.9090
3.9090
3.9090
3.9090
1.8642
1.8642
1.8642
1.8642
1.0599
1.0599
1.0599
0.8772
0.8772
0.8772
0.8772
2.2915
2.2915
2.2915
2.2915
2.2915
2.2915
3.0598
3.0598
3.0598
3.0598
3.0598
3.0598
3.0598
3.0598

Under
18 y/o
Col. (2)
119
114
126
109
107
114
118
116
111
107
133
183
195
108
204
245
259
269
346
345
354
334
365
276
243
220
215
199
222
293
298
278
293
294
294
302
279
248
243

Over
18 y/o
Col. (3)
119
114
126
109
107
114
118
116
111
107
133
183
195
108
204
245
259
269
346
345
354
334
365
276
243
220
215
199
222
340
346
327
340
341
342
351
324
333
341

Bargaining Index
Original
Col. (4)
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.66667
3.66667
3.66667
3.66667
3
3
3
3
3
2.66667
1.33333
1.33333
1.33333
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667

Smoothed
Col. (5)
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.33333
3.34724
3.39543
3.46403
3.53596
3.57675
3.52856
3.40525
3.26140
3.12419
3.01390
2.88227
2.62090
2.27455
1.90434
1.53353
1.25825
1.13070
1.06209
1.01390
1
1
1.02781
1.12419
1.26140
1.40525
1.54247
1.63885
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667
1.66667

Average Wage
By Sex

By Skill Level

By Age Group

Male
Col. (6)
302
370
373
376
268
n.a.
380
427
466
475
549
689
712
525
435
376
486
692
868
913
890
1057
1235
842
843
699
653
796
766
869
1003
971
904
1072
1141
1230
1329
1392
1356

Low
Col. (8)
157
171
181
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
187
222
224
231
256
302
342
279
275
225
249
320
360
432
424
510
508
345
355
312
301
288
316
376
390
401
455
496
535
566
621
613
759

15-24
Col. (10)
133
164
162
219
133
n.a.
179
217
251
218
248
307
359
280
255
214
280
357
400
496
476
590
618
416
371
323
314
355
376
434
462
470
503
627
624
657
725
775
792

Female
Col. (7)
152
179
203
206
160
n.a.
211
268
278
279
351
437
457
332
310
277
352
512
517
640
611
799
852
622
573
480
471
539
542
679
682
694
726
832
840
919
1047
1100
1136

High
Col. (9)
475
554
615
311
230
n.a.
591
648
699
709
804
957
929
671
561
483
635
953
1090
1150
1120
1338
1499
1056
1028
808
742
932
902
981
1074
1046
998
1158
1194
1310
1412
1505
1427

Source: Authors’ calculations (see data section).

26

25-49
Col. (11)
283
331
361
342
272
n.a.
376
420
450
470
536
660
698
512
436
376
474
696
799
904
881
1099
1206
872
845
683
634
764
751
868
960
951
914
1054
1101
1215
1283
1380
1325

50-65
Col. (12)
306
435
418
395
296
n.a.
434
539
502
560
693
779
729
553
496
420
542
786
1072
1009
932
1016
1295
721
780
725
731
907
799
973
1011
949
900
1093
1163
1199
1465
1335
1500

GDP
deviation
from Trend
Col. (13)
-0.86%
-1.41%
-1.37%
0.20%
-2.15%
-5.23%
1.50%
1.50%
1.79%
2.79%
2.97%
9.67%
7.28%
0.37%
0.12%
-14.58%
-12.67%
-5.01%
0.87%
6.66%
11.83%
15.64%
-1.15%
-6.79%
-4.19%
-6.19%
-5.35%
-4.05%
-2.93%
0.41%
-2.83%
-2.47%
1.47%
0.98%
-1.22%
0.81%
1.59%
2.79%
0.70%

Employment
Rate
Col. (14)
52.5%
52.2%
53.2%
53.0%
52.9%
54.4%
53.0%
54.0%
53.2%
52.4%
52.3%
53.7%
52.7%
51.4%
49.0%
45.0%
45.8%
48.3%
48.0%
47.8%
47.4%
50.9%
41.8%
43.5%
46.1%
46.4%
47.0%
50.1%
50.9%
53.1%
52.0%
53.2%
55.7%
55.9%
55.4%
55.5%
55.8%
56.7%
56.8%

Wage
Employ
ment
Rate
Col. (15)
39.8%
41.1%
41.2%
41.4%
42.3%
43.3%
42.2%
43.2%
41.9%
41.2%
41.4%
42.1%
41.3%
39.6%
37.1%
34.7%
34.5%
38.1%
37.1%
36.8%
36.6%
39.3%
33.0%
34.4%
35.8%
36.6%
37.3%
39.5%
38.6%
41.6%
40.5%
41.2%
43.6%
44.0%
42.5%
42.8%
43.7%
44.1%
43.6%

Self
Employment
Rate
Col. (16)
12.7%
11.1%
11.9%
11.5%
10.6%
11.2%
10.8%
10.8%
11.4%
11.2%
10.9%
11.5%
11.4%
11.8%
11.8%
10.4%
11.2%
10.1%
10.9%
10.9%
10.7%
11.6%
8.8%
9.1%
10.3%
9.8%
9.7%
10.5%
12.2%
11.5%
11.4%
11.9%
12.1%
11.9%
12.9%
12.7%
12.0%
12.6%
13.2%

Table 4. General Economic Indicators: Chile 1960-1998

Inflation,
GDP per capita consumer
growth (annual prices (annual
%)
Series Name %)

National
Unemployment,
total (% of total
labor force)

National
Unemployment, National
Gran
Santiago
female (% of Unemployment, youth Unemployment,
female
labor total (% of total labor total (% of total Gini
force ages 15-24)
labor force)
Coefficient
force)

1960

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

8.0

42.5

1961

1.5

7.7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7.1

45.2

1962

2.7

14.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5.7

45.5

1963

3.6

44.1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5.2

n.a.

1964

0.3

46.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

4.9

n.a.

1965

-1.8

28.8

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5.0

n.a.

1966

7.6

23.1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

6.0

45.2

1967

1.5

18.8

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5.9

45.8

1968

1.6

26.3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

6.4

48.1

1969

1.5

30.4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7.1

48.0

1970

0.2

32.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7.0

47.5

1971

7.1

20.0

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

5.2

47.7

1972

-2.5

74.8

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

3.7

43.1

1973

-6.5

361.5

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

3.1

44.1

1974

0.8

504.7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

10.3

40.7

1975

-12.8

374.7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

16.1

41.1

1976

1.8

211.8

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

18.0

47.2

1977

7.1

91.9

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

13.0

48.4

1978

5.9

40.1

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

12.8

49.8

1979

7.1

33.4

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

12.5

49.4

1980

6.5

35.1

10.4

10.0

20.8

11.7

49.1

1981

3.2

19.7

11.3

9.9

21.5

9.0

47.3

1982

-11.7

9.9

19.6

18.3

30.5

23.2

51.2

1983

-5.3

27.3

14.6

14.7

24.7

22.7

52.7

1984

6.3

19.9

13.9

n.a.

25.2

18.4

54.2

1985

5.4

29.5

12.1

13.4

22.7

16.2

51.5

1986

3.9

20.6

8.8

9.7

17.3

15.4

48.7

1987

4.9

19.9

7.9

9.3

n.a.

13.5

57.6

1988

5.5

14.7

6.3

7.8

14.3

11.2

53.7

1989

8.7

17.0

5.3

6.1

13.2

9.3

50.8

1990

1.9

26.0

5.7

5.7

13.1

9.7

53.9

1991

6.2

21.8

5.3

5.8

12.7

8.3

52.4

1992

10.4

15.4

4.4

5.6

10.9

6.0

47.4

1993

5.2

12.7

4.5

5.1

11.0

6.4

45.4

1994

4.0

11.4

5.9

6.8

13.2

6.3

45.9

1995

8.9

8.2

4.7

5.3

11.5

6.1

46.3

1996

5.7

7.4

5.4

6.7

12.8

7.2

45.4

1997

6.0

6.1

5.3

6.6

13.0

6.7

n.a.

1998

2.5

5.1

7.2

7.6

16.7

6.9

n.a.

Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators Data Base and Gini coefficient from background data,
Montenegro (1998).

27

Table 5. The Effect of Job Security and Minimum Wages
Probit Results
(1)
Dependent variable:

Employed
t-test
β
-1.1703 -6.1
-2.0996 -9.1
-2.4113 -14.2
1.4867 8.6
0.1152 32.0
-0.3179 -70.1

Employed
t-test
β
-0.9651 -4.9
-2.1226 -9.0
-1.9622 -11.3
1.8356 10.3
0.1152 31.5
-0.3160 -68.5

Employed
t-test
β
1.2757 9.1
-1.4101 -8.6
-2.7873 -22.7
2.2867 18.1
0.1562 44.6
-0.3919 -93.1

-0.0935 -10.8
0.0124 1.2
-0.0468 -6.1
-0.0334 -4.2

-12.7
1.8
-3.4
-7.0

-0.0826
0.0292
-0.0021
-0.0733

-9.7
2.7
-0.3
-9.3

-0.0161
0.0173
0.0267
0.0344

-1.2
1.5
2.7
3.4

-0.0913
0.0253
-0.0546
-0.0382
0.0835
-0.0035
-0.0381
0.0033

-5.6
1.2
-4.5
-3.3
4.7
-0.2
-2.2
0.2

-0.1163
0.0123
-0.0873
-0.0596
0.1033
0.0064
-0.0164
0.0146

-6.7
0.6
-6.8
-4.8
5.4
0.3
-0.9
0.6

Dummy young
Dummy old
Dummy women
Dummy unskilled
Dummy young*dummy women
Dummy old*dummy women
Dummy young*dummy unskilled
Dummy old*dummy unskilled

-0.1406
0.0913
0.1455
-0.1811

-8.2
4.4
9.6
-11.6

-0.1557
0.0911
0.1551
-0.1811

-9.3
4.4
10.7
-11.9

-0.0366
-0.0286
-0.0299
0.0304

-1.3
-1.3
-1.5
1.5

-0.0111
0.1301
0.1677
-0.1587
0.0248
-0.0035
0.0393
0.0133

-0.6
6.2
10.8
-10.1
11.0
-1.3
17.4
4.9

-0.0215
0.1301
0.1303
-0.1810
0.0223
-0.0019
0.0346
0.0145

-1.2
6.1
8.2
-11.2
9.8
-0.7
15.2
5.3

Dummy young
Dummy old
Dummy women
Dummy unskilled
Dummy young*dummy women
Dummy old*dummy women
Dummy young*dummy unskilled
Dummy old*dummy unskilled

0.1320
0.0272
-0.0968
0.0756

8.2
1.4
-6.8
5.2

0.1422
0.0241
-0.1222
0.0480

9.2
1.2
-8.9
3.4

0.0800
0.0152
0.0802
0.0358

3.0
0.7
4.2
1.9

-0.3006
-0.0966
-0.2494
-0.0843
0.2957
0.1530
0.3485
0.0265

-13.1
-3.2
-13.5
-4.6
12.3
5.2
14.1
0.9

-0.2785
-0.0854
-0.2177
-0.0599
0.2712
0.1359
0.3306
0.0249

-11.9
-2.8
-11.6
-3.3
10.9
4.5
13.0
0.8

Dummy young
Dummy old
Dummy women
Dummy unskilled
Dummy young*dummy women

-0.0852
-0.3872
-0.4917
0.4345

-0.9
-3.1
-5.5
4.8

0.2102
-0.2161
-0.3108
0.3467

2.2
-1.7
-3.6
3.9

0.0208
-0.0041
0.3153
0.0777

0.1
0.0
2.7
0.7

-0.2928
-0.7902
-0.8047
0.4079

-1.7
-3.4
-6.0
3.2

-0.3618
-0.8027
-0.8958
0.4152

-2.1
-3.4
-6.7
3.2

0.3973
0.3863
-0.2455
0.1912

2.0
1.6
-1.3
0.8

0.5022
0.4749
-0.1571
0.1761

2.5
1.9
-0.8
0.7

of

Dummy young
Dummy old
Dummy women
Dummy unskilled
Dummy young*dummy women
Dummy old*dummy women
Dummy young*dummy unskilled
Dummy old*dummy unskilled

-0.1112
0.0196
-0.0266
-0.0563

Interacted
Logarithm
Security

(7)

Interacted
with
Logarithm
of
Minimum Wage

(6)

Interacted with Union
Centralization

(4)
Self
Employment
t-test
β
-0.4202 -1.4
0.4176 1.7
-0.3632 -1.7
-0.3281 -1.5
0.0273 11.3
-0.0196 -5.4

(5)

Employed
Employed
t-test β
t-test
β
-0.8954 -104.2 0.4921 2.6
-0.6709 -66.8 -1.6509 -7.3
-0.5461 -66.7 -2.0260 -12.2
0.0007 0.1
1.8635 10.9
0.1570 45.0 0.1569 44.6
-0.3931 -93.9 -0.3921 -92.7

(3)
Wage
Employment
t-test
β
0.9189 5.0
-1.6967 -7.5
-1.8595 -11.6
1.8843 11.2
0.0594 25.7
-0.3147 -86.9

Interacted with GDP
Deviation from Path

with
Job

Dummy young
Dummy old
Dummy women
Dummy unskilled
Children per father
Children per mather

(2)

Dummy old*dummy women
Dummy young*dummy unskilled
Dummy old*dummy unskilled
Logarithm of hourly wage
Number of Observations
Pseudo R2

303945
0.196

303945
0.168

303945
0.11

303945
0.08

303945
0.211

-0.2129
0.0715
0.2097
-0.2196

-16.0
4.6
18.0
-18.3

0.1520 16.9
295318
303945
0.210
0.197

Note: Besides the control variables mentioned in the table, all specifications include yearly dummies (not reported). Standard errors are
robust to the presence of heteroskedasticity. The employed dummy variable is defined as 1 if the person is employed and 0 otherwise
(unemployed or inactive). The wage employment dummy variable is defined as 1 if the person is a dependent employee and 0 otherwise
(independent, unemployed or inactive). The self-employed dummy variable is defined as 1 if the person is an employer or if the person
works as an independent worker and 0 otherwise (dependent, unemployed or inactive).

28

Table 6. Marginal and Total Effects of Labor Market Regulations
Marginal Effects

Total Effects

Job Security

Min. Wage

Job Security

Min. Wage

(2)
-0.0516
[0.000]

(3)

(4)

Men, 15-25, unskilled

(1)
-0.066
[0.000]

-0.049

-0.0516

Men, 15-25, skilled

-0.0351
[0.000]

-0.004
[0.52]

-0.0181

-0.004

Men, 26-50, unskilled

-0.008
[0.001]

-0.036
[0.000]

0.009

-0.036

Men, 51-65, unskilled

-0.0035
[0.620]

-0.005
[0.54]

0.0135

-0.005

Men, 51-65, skilled

0.008
[0.22]

0.045
[0.000]

0.025

0.045

-0.0343

-0.012

-0.0173

-0.012

[0.000]

[0.09]

-0.015

0.044

0.002

0.044

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.0278

0.0463

-0.0108

0.0463

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.0151

-0.017

0.0019

-0.017

[0.000]

[0.000]

-0.0394

0.0134

-0.0224

0.0134

[0.000]

[0.08]

-0.008

0.0596

0.009

0.0596

[0.14]

[0.000]

Unskilled

Skilled

Women

Men

Young

Older

P.values of the test that the marginal effects are equal to zero are reported in square brackets.

29

Name of the Series
GDP deviation from its trend
Wage Growth
Logarithm Minimum Wage
Logarithm Job Security
Logarithm Union Centralization
Lagged Employment Rate

Table 7. Unit Root and Cointegration Tests
Symbol
Specification
ADF Test Statistic
y-y*
∆ (logW)
L(Minwage)
L(JS)
L(Union)
Nt-1

∆ Nt-1
First diff. Lagged Emp. Rate
∆
L(Minwage)
Change in Log Minimum Wage
∆ L(Index)
Change in Log JS
∆ L(Union)
Change in Log Union

5% Critical Value

Constant
Constant
Trend
Constant
Trend
Constant

-4.8412
-3.8514
-1.4709
-2.43
-2.7568
-1.6736

-2.9472
-2.9705
-3.5426
-2.9472
-3.5426
-2.9472

Constant
Constant
Constant
Constant

-3.0433
-2.5591
-2.655
-2.3443

-2.9499
-2.9499
-2.9499
-2.9499

Panel 2: Johansen Cointegration Test
Series: Nt-1 L(Minwage) L(JS) L(Union)
Likelihood Ratio
5% critical Value
108.64
53.12
60.35
34.91
24.64
19.96
5.26
9.24
* (**) denotes rejection of the hypothesis at 5% (1%) significance level

30

Hypothesized number of CE
None**
At most 1 **
At most 2 *
At most 3

Table 8. Level Effects on Male Prime-Age Employment

Independent Variables:
Nt-1
Deviations GDPt
∆ log Wt
Log (JS)
Log (Minwage)
Log (Union)
Constant
∆ Nt-1
N obs.
Adj. R squared

(1)

(2)

-0.63
(-3.05)
0.08
(1.21)
-

-0.66
(-3.24)
0.10
(1.48)
0.018
(0.84)
0.015
(2.23)
-0.014
(-1.13)
0.029
(1.45)
0.651
(3.92)
0.239
(1.30)
35
0.23

0.011
(1.80)
-0.01
(-0.93)
0.03
(1.54)
0.61
(3.55)
0.277
(1.48)
37
0.16

Long term Effect of JS
0.017
Long term Effect of Minwage 0

0.023
0

t-statistics shown in parenthesis.

31

