                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN STATE SSI SUPPLEMENTS
                         ON PRE-RETIREMENT LABOR SUPPLY

                                             David Neumark
                                           Elizabeth T. Powers

                                          Working Paper 9851
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9851


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




This research was supported by NIA grant 1-R01-AG17619-01A2. We thank Paula Kazi and Aaron Sparrow
for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Public Policy Institute of California, the Department of Economics at Michigan State University,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research

©2003 by David Neumark and Elizabeth T. Powers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Effects of Changes in State SSI Supplements on Pre-Retirement Labor Supply
David Neumark and Elizabeth T. Powers
NBER Working Paper No. 9851
July 2003
JEL No. I3, J2, J3

                                           ABSTRACT

Because the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program is means-tested, with both income limits
and asset limits, those on the margin of eligibility for the elderly component of the program face
incentives to reduce labor supply (or earnings) prior to becoming eligible. Our past research relying
on cross-state variation in SSI benefits found evidence consistent with the predicted negative labor

supply effects. However, a reliance on cross-state variation necessitated reliance on less-than-ideal

control samples. In contrast, this paper uses CPS data covering a 22-year period, which permit
identification of the effects of SSI from within-state, time-series variation in SSI benefits, using a
better control sample. The evidence points consistently to negative effects of more generous SSI
payments on the labor supply of likely SSI participants aged 62-64. The implied elasticities of labor

supply with respect to benefits, for those with a high probability of SSI participation, are generally
in the range of !0.2 to !0.3, looking at both employment and hours of work.

David Neumark                                         Elizabeth T. Powers
Public Policy Institute of California                 Institute of Government and Public Affairs
500 Washington Street                                 and Department of Economics
Suite 800                                             University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana
San Francisco, CA 94111                               epowers@ad.uiuc.edu
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org
I. Introduction

          The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program was begun in 1974 to provide a

uniform federal safety net for the elderly, blind, and disabled. In addition, many states

supplement the benefits payable under SSI. The SSI program is means-tested, with both income

limits and asset limits. As such, those on the margin of eligibility for the elderly component of

the program face incentives to reduce labor supply (or earnings) prior to becoming eligible.1

Although the effects of means-tested income support programs on labor supply have been widely

researched in the context of welfare programs for younger individuals and families (e.g., Moffitt,

1992; Blank, 2002), little work has been done on what is effectively a welfare program for the

elderly. In prior research, though, we used cross-state variation in the benefit payments available

under SSI to identify the effects of SSI on the labor supply of potential SSI participants as they

approach the age of eligibility, finding evidence of labor supply declines (Neumark and Powers,

2000).2

          Our evidence that SSI creates disincentives for work and saving among older individuals

is limited in two respects. First, the data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation

(SIPP) that were used were for a small number of years in the mid-1980s to the early 1990s

(1984, 1990, and 1991, to be exact). Second, the analysis was largely limited to using cross-state

variation in SSI benefit levels to identify the effects of SSI, because there was little time-series

variation in SSI benefits from 1984 to 1991. In contrast, this paper uses annual Current

Population Survey (CPS) data covering 1979-2000 to study the effects of SSI on labor supply.

This data source permits us to re-examine our earlier evidence on these effects using the same

identification strategy over a much longer period. More importantly, the CPS data allow us to

1
  In contrast, these incentives are unlikely or less likely to play a role for participants in the disabled and especially
the blind components of the program, which we generally ignore in this paper.
2
  Both the asset and income limits also create incentives to reduce saving near the age of eligibility. This paper does
not study saving, but see Neumark and Powers (1998) for evidence that SSI also reduces saving.

                                                            1
use an alternative strategy that exploits changes in SSI benefit levels over time, within states, and

hence relies on a better control sample consisting of observations on individuals residing in the

same state with similar likelihoods of SSI participation, in periods when SSI benefits differed.

II. The SSI Program

         The SSI program was enacted by the U.S. Congress in 1972 and begun in 1974. Prior to

that year, three separate programs established in the original Social Security Act of 1935 and its

1950 amendments provided means-tested assistance for individuals who were either ineligible

for Social Security or whose Social Security benefits were inadequate: Old-Age Assistance, Aid

to the Blind, and Aid to the Permanently and Totally Disabled. However, federal law established

only broad guidelines for these three programs, and states had great flexibility in setting program

rules and benefit levels (including assessing individuals’ needs). SSI was established to provide

a uniform income floor and common eligibility requirements, while states were free to

supplement SSI payments subject to their own eligibility rules, with one exception noted below.

         Three factors generate variation across states in SSI benefit levels.3 First, states can

choose an optional benefit supplement. They can administer the supplemental program

themselves, or choose to have the Social Security Administration administer their supplemental

programs as long as they maintain the same eligibility rules as the federal program (except that

they are allowed to exclude additional items from income in determining eligibility for the state

supplement). Second, Congress imposed mandatory supplements to ensure that in no state

would citizens already in state programs receive lower benefits in the federal program than they

had previously received under the state program. Because these mandatory supplements did not

apply to individuals first becoming eligible for SSI in 1974 or later, they now apply to very few


3
  The discussion here refers to cash benefits. Some states also fund other expenses for SSI recipients, such as group
living facilities (Committee on Ways and Means, 2000).

                                                          2
individuals. Since we study behavior of individuals approaching the age of eligibility for SSI,

we never need to account for these mandatory supplements. Third, some constraints were

imposed on states’ ability to alter supplemental payments, as in 1976 Congress also mandated

that states pass along cost-of-living increases in federal benefits (to avoid states cutting their

benefits to offset these increases). States can choose to either keep benefit levels or total

expenditures at least as high as the previous year in nominal terms.4 The state supplementation

can be quite dramatic. As of January 2000, the maximum federal benefit was $512 for

individuals, and $769 for couples (when both individuals are aged 65 or over). In that same year

the maximum individual (couple) benefit was $874 ($1,297) in Alaska, $747 ($1,094) in

Connecticut, and $692 ($1,229) in California. However, many states have far more moderate

supplements and 25 had none.

        SSI is a means-tested program. As a consequence, benefits are reduced by income from

other sources, including Social Security, and by financial resources. The federal benefit

reduction formula disregards the first $65 of earned income, and above that reduces the SSI

benefit by 50 cents for every $1 of earned income. It also disregards the first $20 of unearned

income (including Social Security benefits) and above that reduces the SSI benefit dollar-for-

dollar with unearned income. Finally, the SSI benefit is reduced dollar-for-dollar with any other

means-tested transfer income.5 The limitation on financial resources is imposed via an asset

limit, above which the individual or couple is ineligible for any benefit. As of 2000 the federal




4
  These details come from U.S. Social Security Administration (2002) and U.S. Committee on Ways and Means
(2000).
5
  In addition, income from certain home energy and support and maintenance assistance, Food Stamps, most
federally-funded housing assistance, state assistance based on need, one-third of child support payments, income
received infrequently or irregularly, and income from a few other sources is excluded when determining eligibility.

                                                         3
limits were $2,000 for individuals and $3,000 for couples.6 As noted above, when states

administer their own programs they have flexibility to set their own limits on and exclusions for

income and assets. But in practice few states have different rules, and when they do the

differences are typically minor (U.S. Social Security Administration, January 2000).

         The SSI program is large. In December 2000 there were 1.3 million recipients in the

aged component of the program (and overall, 2 million recipients aged 65 and over). About half

of these 1.3 million recipients receive a federal benefit only, and about half receive at least some

SSI benefit via a state supplementation. Total payments for the aged program in 2000 were

approximately $4.8 billion (overall SSI spending was $31.6 billion), about 75 percent of which

was in the form of federal benefits, and the remainder state supplements (U.S. Social Security

Administration, 2001).

III. Theoretical Framework

         In this section, we outline a basic theoretical framework demonstrating why SSI creates

disincentives for labor supply, in the context of a simple two-period model of labor supply

without saving or second period work. For further details and elaboration, see Neumark and

Powers (2000).

         An agent chooses consumption (c) and work hours (h) in the first period and consumption

in the second to maximize utility, u(c1,1-h1) + δuR(c2), where δ is the intertemporal discount rate.

Since all income is consumed each period, the single important choice variable is first period

labor supply. (The budget constraint in period 1, when the individual is too young for SSI, is c1

= w1h1.) First period work hours affect second period retirement income by increasing Social

Security and private pension benefits.

6
 The following assets are excluded from the limit: the prospective recipient’s car, home, and the land the home is
on; life insurance policies with a face value of up to $1,500; burial plots for the individual and immediate family
members; and up to $1,500 in burial funds for the individual and his or her spouse.

                                                          4
       The key complicating feature in analyzing SSI policy is the nonlinearity of the period 2

budget constraint. Let Y0 be the amount of income in retirement that is pre-determined as of

period 1 (e.g., the level of the Social Security benefit based on the agent’s earnings history prior

to period 1), and let B(w1h1) be the additional retirement income in period 2 that depends on first

period earnings (B’>0 and B’’<0 are assumed). If the agent does not participate in SSI, then the

second period budget constraint is c2 = Y0 + B(w1h1) (the “autonomous” budget constraint). If

the agent participates in SSI, but second period income from non-SSI sources (i.e., Y0 + B(w1h1))

is below the disregarded amount, then period 2 income is Y0 + G + B(w1h1) (where G is the

maximum SSI benefit). If second period non-SSI income exceeds the disregard, then period 2

income is G + D (where D is the disregard level), as long as the individual remains eligible for

SSI, Note that if first period earnings generate too much post-retirement income, the agent will

be ineligible for SSI, and period 2 income is Y0 + B(w1h1).

       SSI generosity reduces work effort both infra- and infer-marginally. First, consider the

infra-marginal effects of a small increase in G on the agent’s optimal choice. If he optimally

locates on the autonomous segment of the budget constraint, work effort is unaffected by SSI

benefit generosity. If the agent optimally participates in SSI, there are two cases: either his

private income exceeds the SSI disregard amount, or it does not. If his non-SSI retirement

income is below the disregard amount, additional work leads to both increased first period

consumption and second period (retirement) income, and one can readily show that under

standard conditions, optimal work hours are decreasing in G. Under the assumption that utility

is time-separable, for an SSI participant whose period 2 income exceeds the disregard, the only

incentive to work is to maintain period 1 consumption, because additional private income in

period 2 will be taxed away at a 100% rate by the SSI program. Since SSI cannot be received in




                                                  5
the first period, the benefit G cannot influence the labor supply choice.7

           Due to the segmented budget constraint, one must also consider how changes in SSI

generosity affect the labor supply choice infer-marginally. In Neumark and Powers (2000), we

illustrate how an increase in G shifts both SSI-participation segments of the budget constraint out

relative to the autonomous budget constraint, encouraging SSI participation and reducing work.

In addition, an increase in G widens the range of work hours that produce no additional

retirement income due to SSI policy, further discouraging work.

           When saving is allowed and SSI also has an asset test, B(·) can also be thought of as asset

income, and the arguments developed above imply that saving to increase asset income post-

retirement will be discouraged (see Hubbard, et al., 1995, for a more complete development of

the theory underlying the impact of asset tests on saving). Clearly if asset tests discourage

saving they will also discourage the additional work needed to raise the stock of assets that

would normally be drawn down during retirement. Moreover, assets that are drawn down prior

to retirement can be used to offset reduced labor supply. Thus, with saving in the model the

disemployment incentives of SSI are likely enhanced.

IV. Data

           We use March CPS files from 1980-2001. These files ask respondents about labor

supply in the previous calendar year (usual weekly hours and weeks worked for the previous

calendar year, which can also be used to code employment in the previous calendar year), as well

as during the survey week (employment and hours worked). We examine results using both

measures of employment and hours.

           We restrict attention to male household heads, aged 60 and older. Those aged 65 and

older are used to estimate a model for predicting the probability of SSI participation, based on

7
    Work hours can have no influence on period 2 utility, δuR(G+D).

                                                          6
whether they received income from SSI in the previous calendar year. Those aged 60-64 are

used to estimate the labor supply models. In all the estimations the data are weighted using the

March CPS household weights.

       To the CPS data we append information on SSI benefits at the state level. Through 1983

SSI benefits were set each July, and afterwards they were set in January. For the sample aged 65

and older that we use to predict SSI participation, we use marital status and the wife’s current

age to assign the benefit level for either individuals or couples. For the sample aged 60-64, for

whom we will both predict SSI participation at age 65 and model contemporaneous labor supply,

we assign the couple benefit if the individual is married and his wife is no more than three years

younger than he. The idea here is that in assessing the benefits of SSI participation, the

individual will consider the couples benefit level if his wife is sufficiently close in age (three

years or fewer) that he will face the higher benefit level for most of the prospective retirement

period. To keep things simple, when we are using labor supply measures for the survey week we

use the SSI benefits that prevail in March of the current year, and when we use the labor supply

measures for the previous calendar year we use the SSI benefits that were set in January of that

calendar year (or, prior to 1984, the SSI benefits that were set in July of that year.)

       As noted above and explained in more detail in the next section, we use both cross-

section (across-state) and time-series (within-state) variation in SSI benefits. Nominal maximum

state supplements for selected years, and measures of both of these types of variation, are

reported in Table 1. Looking first at columns (1)-(3) and (1’)-(3’), the table reveals that there

has been and remains considerable variation in state supplements. Alaska, California, Colorado,

and Connecticut have the highest benefits over the long haul, while numerous states have rather

trivial supplements. The table also shows that there have been relatively few sharp changes in

state supplements, with the most noticeable being Wisconsin’s elimination of its supplement for

                                                  7
couples as of 2000.8

        In addition to reporting the supplemental benefit levels, the table provides three measures

of variation in benefits. The first is the real percentage change in the state supplement from 1985

to 2000 (columns (4) and (4’)). For both individuals and couples these percentage changes vary

widely. However, notice that the larger percentage changes (e.g., Washington, DC and South

Dakota) occur for state supplements that are quite small. Thus, a more meaningful measure of

changes in benefits is for the combined federal and state benefit. As shown in columns (5) and

(5’), there is considerably less variation across states in these changes, although it is important to

keep in mind that there is also variation relative to states with no supplementation of benefits, in

which the real value of benefits was virtually unchanged over the sample period. Note, also, that

in most states with supplements the real value of the combined state plus federal benefit declined

over this period. Finally, for each state the table also shows the percentage difference between

the total benefit in the state (state plus federal) and the federal benefit, in columns (6) and (6’).

A comparison of these columns with those showing the time-series variation indicates that the

across-state variation is far more dramatic. This suggests that the estimators that rely on the

time-series (within-state) variation in benefits—while having some important advantages—are

likely to have more difficulty in accurately estimating the effects of SSI.

V. The Empirical Approach

        We expect SSI to affect the work behavior of those with a relatively high likelihood of

eligibility. To identify such individuals, we analyze samples of people aged 65 and over to

identify the characteristics of likely SSI participants. Probit estimates derived from these older

samples are then applied to the characteristics of workers under age 65 to assign a value of the


8
  We report the maximum benefit and use it in the empirical analysis, because we do not know the SSI payments
that are actually received by individuals, and because these would be endogenous with labor supply.

                                                       8
likelihood of future SSI participation to them. Those with a probability of participation above a

particular cutoff are characterized as “likely participants,” and the others as “unlikely

participants.” Relevant characteristics associated with SSI participation include education (a

proxy for permanent income), race and other variables reflecting demographic heterogeneity,

marital status (an indicator of the availability of support from a spouse and intervivos transfers

from a network of relatives) and past welfare use (an indicator of stigma about using welfare, or

of unobservables related to eligibility for or need of income-support programs). Frequently, the

welfare literature has categorized individuals into treatment or control groups based on a single

exogenous characteristic (e.g., family structure or education). Our framework can be viewed as

broadening this approach to allow a multitude of exogenous factors to determine control and

treatment group categorizations.9

         As noted earlier, our previous research on this topic using data from the SIPP relied on

cross-state variation in state SSI supplements. We used this variation to construct alternative

“difference-in-differences” (DD) and “difference-in-difference-in-differences” (DDD)

estimators. In the present research, we instead use a data set covering a longer time period,

which lets us identify the effects of SSI from changes over time in states’ supplemental SSI

payments, using fixed state effects to control for any unmeasured state-related variables that

might influence both labor supply and the generosity of SSI and hence bias the estimates relying

on cross-state variation. This section first explains our earlier approach, and then explains and

highlights the advantages of the approach taken in this paper.

         To simplify the exposition, suppose that we can classify states at a point in time as paying

9
  Since these participation probabilities are properly considered a part of the model, thought must be given as to how
their impact is identified in the analysis. First, the probabilities are estimated using a different sample from the
sample whose labor supply and saving behavior we analyze. Second, the estimates are identified through functional
form given the nonlinearity of the probit model. Third, when available in a data set, we use variables thought to be
correlated with knowledge and use of the welfare system, but not directly influencing current saving and work
decisions, such as previous lifetime experience with another welfare program (e.g., Food Stamps).

                                                          9
either high or low benefits (think of low benefits as equivalent to no benefits). Then we can

further partition the observations of likely and unlikely SSI participants into four groups: likely

participants living in high- or low-benefit states, and unlikely participants living in high- or low-

benefit states.10

         In addition to these basic distinctions, we can further subdivide these groups by age. We

focus most on those aged 62-64 for three reasons. First, given stochastic influences on earnings

and wealth, older workers can form better predictions of post-retirement income. Second, we

suspect that workers pay more attention to the potential receipt of SSI benefits as they approach

the eligibility age.11 Finally, as we show elsewhere (Powers and Neumark, 2003a and 2003b),

the eligibility for early Social Security retirement benefits at age 62 likely enhances the labor

supply disincentives of SSI beginning at age 62, and in other empirical work (Neumark and

Powers, 2000) we found evidence of the sharpest labor supply effects for 62-64 year-olds.12

         To set the stage, although it is not central to our analysis, we begin with the simple

difference estimator. Let the labor supply measure be denoted Y, SUPP be a dummy variable for

states that supplement the SSI benefit (indicating “generous” states), and X a vector of control

variables (education, race, marital status, a dummy variable indicating that spouse is younger by

more than three years, and the state unemployment rate in the corresponding year). Then the

simple difference estimator for the sample of 62-64 year-old likely participants is

(1)      Yis = ζ + α⋅SUPPis + Xisψ + εis.

           In equation (1), α simply measures the difference in labor supply (Y) between likely


10
   This two-way dichotomous classification is useful for exposition. In the empirical analysis the specifications use
continuous variation in benefit generosity.
11
   See Mitchell (1988) for related evidence regarding pensions, and Cagetti (1999) for related evidence with respect
to saving.
12
   In our other work, the smaller data sets we used left us with quite small samples of 62-64 year-olds who were
likely SSI participants. The much larger CPS lets us obtain much larger samples and more precise estimates for this
age group.

                                                         10
participants in states with generous supplements and likely participants in states without

generous supplements. The ‘i’ and ‘s’ subscripts denote individuals and states. In fact we also

estimate this specification pooling across multiple years, in which case a ‘t’ subscript would also

be added, but we omit that subscript here to emphasize the contrast with the estimators below

that exploit more fully the time-series variation in SSI benefits. We label this estimator SD.

       If there are other sources of labor supply differences across states, these may spuriously

be attributed to differences in SSI benefits, as this state-level variation may be correlated with

SUPP. This concern led us to implement DD and DDD estimators that are based on the

introduction of control groups to try to control for state-level labor supply differences across

states. Specifically, we want control groups that will exhibit the same cross-state variation in

labor supply as the older likely participants arising from factors other than SSI benefits. The

effects of SSI can then be identified from the difference in the relationship between SSI benefits

and labor supply between the older likely participants and a control group. We first discuss

control groups that parallel our earlier work in relying only on cross-sectional variation in SSI

benefits, and then move on to those that exploit within-state variation over time.

       One way to control for these state-level state differences when there is primarily cross-

sectional variation in SSI supplements is to use data on younger individuals in the same state

who are also likely participants, assuming that the state-level labor supply differences are

common to likely participants across age groups. In this case the younger individuals control for

these differences and the effects of SSI are identified from differences in labor supply between

younger and older likely participants in high- vs. low-benefit states. Letting OLD be the dummy

variable indicating those aged 62-64, we can then use a sample of, say, 60-64 year-olds to

estimate the DD regression

(2)    Yis = ζ + α⋅SUPPis⋅OLDis + β⋅SUPPis + γ⋅OLDis + Xisψ + εis.

                                                 11
        In this regression, β picks up the difference in Y, assumed common to all ages, between

states with and without generous SSI supplements. γ captures the difference in Y, common to all

states, between 60-61 and 62-64 year-olds. α now captures the extent to which the difference in

Y between 60-61 and 62-64 year-olds differs in states with generous SSI supplements, relative to

states without generous supplements, focusing only on likely participants. We label this

estimator DD-CS.13

        Of course, the DD-CS estimator could still rest on invalid identifying assumptions. In

particular, DD-CS identifies the effect of SSI from the extent to which the difference in Y for

likely participants in high-supplement states vs. low-supplement states is greater (or less) for 62-

64 year-olds than for 60-61 year-olds. But if the slope of the age profile of labor supply is

different in high-supplement states for other reasons, we may be identifying an effect of

something other than SSI. We can solve this problem if we also use the unlikely participants to

capture state-specific differences in age profiles. This difference-in-difference-in-difference

(DDD) estimator requires the assumption that state-specific factors affecting the slopes of age

profiles of labor supply are common to likely and unlikely participants in a state. In this case, we

use the sample of all 60-64 year-olds, and estimate the effect of SSI from the regression

(3)     Yis = ζ + α⋅SUPPis⋅PARTis⋅OLDis + β⋅SUPPis + γ⋅OLDis + δ⋅PARTis

                 + θ⋅SUPPis⋅OLDis + κ⋅SUPPis⋅PARTis + λ⋅OLDis⋅PARTis+ Xisψ + εis.

        In this regression β again picks up the difference in Y between states with and without

generous SSI supplements, γ captures the difference between 62-64 and 60-61 year-olds, and δ

measures the difference between likely and unlikely participants. The simple interactions

capture the differences between older and younger individuals in high- vs. low-supplement states


13
  In some of our earlier work we also used men aged 40-59 as a control group. The closer age group should provide
a better control group as their behavior is more likely to be the same except for the influence of SSI.

                                                       12
(θ), likely and unlikely participants in high- vs. low-supplement states (κ), and 62-64 year-old

likely participants vs. unlikely participants (λ). What α identifies, then, is the extent to which the

difference in Y between 62-64 year-old and 60-61 year-old likely participants, relative to the

difference between 62-64 year-old and 60-61 year-old unlikely participants, varies between high-

and low-supplement states. Thus, α identifies the effect of SSI after netting out state-specific

variation in changes in labor supply with age. We denote this estimator DDD-CS to indicate that

it is a DDD estimator that can be estimated using only the cross-state variation in SSI benefits.

       There is also an alternative DD estimator that controls for state-specific differences in

labor supply using individuals in the state who are of the same age, but who are unlikely

participants. However, we have more confidence in those with characteristics associated with

likely participation serving as a control group for the labor supply behavior of 62-64 year-old

likely participants. Reflecting this (we believe), in other work we have done exploiting

administrative Social Security Administration records matched to SIPP data to estimate similar

specifications, we found that among the two alternative DD estimators, only the one using the

younger likely participants as the control yielded strong evidence of employment disincentives

from SSI (Neumark and Powers, 2002).

       Naturally, this raises questions about using unlikely participants as a second level of

control in the DDD estimator. Indeed, this concern is part of the reason for turning to a data set

that allows us to exploit time-series variation in state supplemental SSI benefits, as the time-

series variation allows the implementation of different estimators using different control groups

to account for spurious sources of associations between SSI and pre-retirement labor supply, and

in particular allows a DDD estimator that does not rely on using the unlikely participants as a

control.

       The estimators described thus far can be implemented with a single cross-section or with

                                                 13
repeated cross-sections and are the ones we use in Neumark and Powers (2000).14 With repeated

cross-sections, time-series variation in benefits played a role, but because our repeated cross-

sections covered a short time period, the primary source of variation was across states. As noted

in the Introduction, however, in this paper we use data covering a much longer time span and

therefore are interested in exploiting the time-series variation in SSI benefits more fully.

        To see the advantages afforded by this time-series variation, consider first the SD

estimator in equation (1). We noted that this estimator is potentially problematic because of

state-level differences in labor supply of older individuals that could be correlated with SSI

benefits. The estimator DD-CS attacks this problem by introducing a control group from the

same cross-sectional data set from which the older individuals are taken—in particular, younger

likely participants. An alternative is to use observations on likely participants in the same age

group, but from different years when SSI benefits were at different levels. This entails

estimating equation (1) for multiple years, with state dummy variables (STATE) to capture the

state-level differences, and year dummy variables (YEAR) to capture common changes over

time, as in

(4)     Yist = ζ + α⋅SUPPist + STATEisπ + YEARitρ + Xistψ + εist,

where we have added a ‘t’ subscript to emphasize using the time-series variation in SSI benefits.

This is an alternative DD estimator, which we denote DD-TS since it uses time-series

observations from other periods in the same state to generate the control group. In this model π

captures state-specific differences in labor supply, and ρ captures differences over time common

to states. The DD estimator α then identifies the effects of SSI from the differences in changes

over time across states with different changes in SSI benefit generosity.


14
  When implemented with repeated cross-sections, year fixed effects are included to absorb time-series fluctuations
in labor market outcomes common to all states.

                                                        14
        The DD estimators DD-TS and DD-CS are based on different assumptions as to what

observations provide the best control group to capture state-level differences in labor supply that

might generate a spurious correlation between SSI benefits and the labor supply of older likely

SSI participants. We are inclined to prefer DD-TS because it uses observations on exactly the

same types of individuals—likely participants aged 62-64—to obtain a control group. On the

other hand, as noted in the discussion of Table 1, there is not a tremendous amount of time-series

variation in SSI benefits, and as the time horizon gets longer we have to be concerned about the

comparability of behavior of older individuals many years apart.

        The estimator DD-TS identifies the effects of SSI from whether labor supply of older

likely participants changes by more in states that increase their benefits than in states that do

not.15 However, just as in the case of DD-CS there is a concern with a spurious relationship

between SSI benefits and labor supply—which motivated the DDD-CS estimator—so too is

there a similar concern in the case of DD-TS. Since this latter estimator uses time-series

variation, however, the concern is that there are changes over time in labor supply that are

spuriously correlated with time-series changes in benefit generosity. In that case, we again want

to introduce a control group that we believe will exhibit the same time-series changes in labor

supply as the older likely participants that are attributable to factors other than SSI, so that the

effects of SSI can be identified from differences in changes in labor supply between older likely

participants and the control group associated with changes in SSI benefits. Paralleling the earlier

discussion, we can use younger likely participants in the same state, with the regression model

(5)     Yist = ζ + α⋅SUPPist⋅OLDist + β⋅SUPPist + γ⋅OLDist + STATEisπ + YEARitρ

                 + OLDist⋅STATEisθ + OLDist⋅YEARitκ + Xistψ + εist.


15
  While we have couched the explanations of the estimators in terms of a dummy variable for generous benefits,
clearly this analysis will be more meaningful in terms of continuous variation in benefits.

                                                       15
       In this model θ captures fixed differences across states between the labor supply of

younger and older likely participants. This parallels the addition of older and younger unlikely

participants to the DD-CS estimator to allow for the possibility that there were differences in the

labor supply profile associated with variation in SSI benefits. There the variation was across

states, so these differences were captured by differencing relative to the profile for unlikely

participants; here the variation is over time, so these differences are captured by differencing

relative to the profile in other years for the same states. κ captures differences in the common

time-series changes in labor supply for older (versus younger) likely participants. The DDD

estimator α then measures the difference in the change in labor supply of older versus younger

likely participants associated with changes in SSI benefits. We denote this estimator DDD-TS.

An important advantage of this estimator relative to DDD-CS is that it does not rely at all on

using data on unlikely participants, a group which, as we noted above, may not be an ideal

control group. The various estimators discussed in this section and used in the next section are

summarized in Table 2.

VI. Results

Descriptive Statistics and Predictors of SSI Participation

       Descriptive statistics for the samples of 62-64 and 60-61 year-old men are reported in the

first two columns of Table 3. All four labor supply measures reveal significant drop-offs after

age 61; for example, the current employment rate falls from 64.6 to 45.1 percent. On other

dimensions, of course, these subsamples are very similar.

         Estimates of the probit model used to predict SSI participation, which in turn is used to

select a group of likely SSI participants for analysis, are presented in column (3); the estimates

have been transformed into marginal effects. SSI participation is based on whether the

individual reported income from SSI in the past year. In the CPS, there is no way of knowing

                                                 16
that the individual was originally a participant in the aged component of the SSI program. In

principle it would be desirable to drop those with a disability—who might be receiving SSI

under the disabled or blind components of the program—from the analysis. But information on

disability is elicited only for those not employed, so that this information is a function of the

dependent variables used in some of our analyses.

           In the SSI participation model, all of the estimates are strongly statistically significant.

Not surprisingly, the real value of the SSI benefit is positively associated with SSI participation.

The magnitude of the estimate implies that a $100 increase in monthly benefits (about a 25

percent increase relative to the sample mean) raises the participation probability by 0.0064, a 20

percent increase relative to the participation rate of men aged 65 and over of 0.0316, implying an

elasticity of 0.85. We would expect that variables positively related to lifetime income or

wealth, as well as current earning opportunities, would be negatively associated with SSI

participation. This is borne out in the negative effect of education, and the positive effect of

black and the state unemployment rate. Similar to what we found in SIPP data, we find that

through 11 years of schooling higher education is associated with a lower likelihood of SSI

participation; participation is lower for those with 12 or more years of schooling, although the

marginal effect of education beyond high school is minimal. This was apparent in a specification

with much more-detailed education controls, and is captured in the specification reported here

(and used throughout) by including an interaction between years of education and a dummy

variable for less than a high school education, as well as a dummy variable for a high school

education or more.16 In addition, given that never married men typically earn less than divorced,

widowed, or separated men, who in turn earn less than married men, net of other controls


16
  For the estimates reported in column (3), for example, relative to someone with eight years of schooling the
probability of participation is lower by 0.007 for someone with ten years of schooling, 0.011 for someone with 11
years of schooling, and 0.036 for someone with 12 or more years of schooling.

                                                        17
(Korenman and Neumark, 1991), as we expect never married men are considerably more likely

to participate in SSI, and divorced, widowed, or separated men somewhat more likely. Finally,

perhaps reflecting both resources and heterogeneity with respect to willingness to take-up public

support programs, Food Stamp recipients are more likely to participate in SSI.

           We use the estimates of this model to predict the probability of SSI participation of 60-

64 year-olds, so that we can identify likely participants.17 For most of our analyses, we use a

cutoff of the 90th centile of the distribution of predicted probabilities of SSI participation to

identify these likely participants. As reported in the last row of column (3), the 90th centile of the

distribution is a 0.035 probability of participation. This is, of course, a relatively low probability,

but there are no doubt many determinants of SSI participation that are unobserved to the

researcher, so that many individuals at this predicted probability have a much higher probability

in fact. In addition, the estimated probability of participation climbs sharply above the 90th

centile, to 0.084 at the 95th centile and 0.470 at the 99th centile. But using a cutoff such as the

99th would yield too small a sample for analysis. If we use the top decile of the distribution, and

one-third of these individuals actually participate, that would apparently account for most

participants, since the actual participation rate for those aged 65 and over in the sample is 0.032.

But given that some participants are likely to come from lower down in the distribution, in

analyses of the robustness of the results we also experiment with using the 70th and 80th centiles.

Conversely, to examine the sensitivity of the estimates to using a more stringent cutoff, we also

report results using the 95th centile.

Labor Supply Estimates—Graphical Analysis

         Prior to presenting the regression results, in order to help cement the intuition underlying

17
   To keep the “treatment” and “control groups” the same, when we predict these probabilities we net out the SSI
supplement, so that individuals in states with different supplements but with identical characteristics (as captured in
the other controls) are assigned the same probability of participation. For the same reason, we do not include fixed
state effects in the participation probits, since these would reflect in large part cross-state variation in SSI benefits.

                                                           18
the central estimators a graphical display of the data and illustration of some of these estimators

is presented in Figure 1. The upper row of Figure 1 illustrates the simple difference (SD)

estimator and the difference-in-differences estimator (DD-CS), which rely on cross-state

variation in SSI supplements. To construct these plots we use the sample of likely participants.

We define by the vector Z all of the control variables in X in equation (1), as well as the year

dummy variables. We then regress both the labor supply measure (usual weekly hours) and the

combined state and federal SSI benefit on Z, and form the residuals. We then plot the residuals

from the labor supply regression against the residuals from the SSI benefit regression. This is

informative because the regression coefficient from the simple regression for these residuals is

exactly the coefficient that would result from estimating equation (1).

       The upper-left-most panel simply presents the residual scatter plot for likely participants

aged 62-64 over the entire sample period. As indicated by the solid line, the simple regression of

the residual hours measure on the residual SSI benefit, which is the SD estimator, is positively

sloped, rather than negatively sloped as predicted by the theory. The center panel in the upper

row presents the same scatter plot, but for 60-61 year-old likely participants. Recall that the

younger likely participants are used as the control sample in the DD-CS estimator. The

regression line for this group also slopes upward. The upper-right-hand panel graphs the

difference in slopes between the regression lines for the 62-64 year-olds and the 60-61 year-olds.

This is the DD-CS estimator. It is downward sloping. The downward slope arises because in the

first two scatter plots labor supply rises less quickly with the SSI benefit for the 62-64 year-olds

than for the 60-61 year-olds. Assuming that the regression line for the 60-61 year-olds reflects

unmeasured state differences associated with both labor supply and SSI benefits, it is the

difference between the two slopes of the regression lines that identifies the effect of SSI. As

shown in the right-hand panel (with a different scale), the difference between these slopes yields

                                                 19
the negative effect that is predicted by the theory.

       The bottom row of graphs displays the DD-TS and DDD-TS estimators that rely on time-

series variation in SSI benefits within states. The observations plotted in these graphs are similar

to those in the top row of graphs, except that prior to running the regressions and calculating the

residuals, all of the variables are demeaned relative to their state-specific means—precisely the

transformation that is done for the fixed effects or within-group estimator. The lower-left-most

graph displays the scatter plot of the residuals from these regressions for the within-state

deviations of hours and benefits (i.e., the deviations of the individual data from the state means

computed over all years) for 62-64 year-old likely participants. The regression line through

these points is the DD-TS estimator. It is downward sloped, consistent with the theoretical

prediction. The second panel in the bottom row is the parallel scatter plot for 60-61 year-olds. It

too is downward sloped. If there were unmeasured changes over time associated with both

changes in labor supply and in SSI benefits, then these 60-61 year-olds serve as a control sample

for this analysis, and the DDD-TS estimator is the difference between these slopes. Such

changes are plausible, because employment among older men was falling over this period for a

host of reasons, and SSI benefits were also falling in real terms, which would generate a positive

correlation between changes in labor supply and changes in SSI benefits. But because the

downward slope is less steep for the 60-61 year-olds, the third graph in the bottom row, which

displays the DDD-TS estimate, is negatively sloped (note that the scale is different), again

consistent with the theory.

Labor Supply Estimates—Regression Analysis

       Regression results from implementing each of the alternative estimators described in

Section V and summarized in Table 2 are reported in Table 4. The first three rows report

estimates that rely on cross-sectional (cross-state) variation in SSI benefits. In the SD estimates

                                                 20
of the effect of SSI on labor supply, reported in the first row, three of the four estimates are

positive, but none are statistically significant. However, when the 60-61 year-olds are used as a

control sample, in the DD-CS estimates in the second row, the estimates become negative, and

for the labor supply measures from the previous calendar year these estimated labor supply

effects are statistically significant (although one at only the ten-percent level). We expect the

results for the previous year’s measures to be stronger, as these likely reflect more permanent

behavior than labor supply measures for a single week. The final cross-sectional estimator is the

DDD-CS estimator, which compares the differences between 62-64 year-old and 60-61 year-old

likely participants to the differences between the 62-64 year-old and 60-61 year-old unlikely

participants. These estimates are quite similar to those from the DD-CS estimator; all are

negative, and again the estimates for the previous year’s labor supply measures are statistically

significant, although only at the ten-percent level.

       The final two rows of Table 4 report the results from the new estimators using the time-

series variation in SSI benefits within states. The DD-TS estimator using only the 62-64 year-

olds yields negative but insignificant estimates. But the preferred DDD-TS estimator, which

compares the relationship between labor supply and benefit changes for 62-64 versus 60-61 year-

olds, yields much stronger evidence of negative effects of SSI benefits on labor supply. For

three of the four labor supply measures the estimated effects are statistically significant, one at

the one-percent level, one at the five-percent level, and one at the ten-percent level. Again, the

stronger evidence emerges for the labor supply measures that cover the entire previous calendar

year, rather than just the survey week. Interestingly, the stronger evidence from the DDD-TS

estimator results mainly from smaller standard errors rather than different coefficient estimates.

       Using the estimates for the calendar year labor supply measures, for the employment

measures the estimated magnitude implies that a $100 increase in monthly SSI benefits (or a

                                                 21
$1,200 increase in annual benefits) reduces the employment rate by 0.05. Based on the figures in

Table 3, this implies an elasticity of −0.36, which considering that this applies only to likely

participants does not seem like an unreasonable magnitude. For hours, the same increase in

benefits reduces hours by 1.87, implying a similar elasticity of −0.34.

        Table 5 presents some robustness analyses of the estimators using time-series variation in

SSI benefits. The first panel of Table 5 varies from the last two rows of Table 4 only by

dropping the CPS sample weights. All of the estimates remain negative, although the estimated

labor supply effects decline a bit in absolute value in almost every case. But for the previous

year’s labor supply measures the DDD-TS estimates remain statistically significant.18

        The next three panels vary the cutoff of the predicted probability of SSI participation

used to identify likely participants, using two lower cutoffs (the 70th and 80th centiles), and one

higher cutoff (the 95th centile). Although we emphasize the DDD-TS estimators more, it is

worth noting that for the alternative cutoffs there is some variation in whether the DD-TS

estimate of the effects of SSI on labor supply is negative. But looking at the results for the

DDD-TS estimator, whatever cutoff is used there is evidence of negative labor supply effects of

higher SSI benefits. Perhaps most interesting, in the DDD-TS estimates the magnitudes of the

labor supply effects generally indicate stronger negative effects the higher the cutoff, and this is

always true going from the 80th, to the 90th, to the 95th centile (the size of the effect is flipped for

the 70th versus 80th comparison in two of the four cases, although the differences are small). For

example, the results for employed last year indicate that a $100 increase in SSI benefits is

associated with a reduction in this probability of 0.018 using the 70th centile, 0.027 using the 80th

centile, 0.050 using the 90th centile (Table 4), and 0.064 using the 95th centile. Moreover, the

18
   Note that the sample sizes change somewhat. That occurs because in the weighted estimates the 90th centile cutoff
is computed based on weighted data, so the actual number of observations above this cutoff can differ from the
unweighted data. The sample sizes can also differ slightly across changes in the specification of the SSI
participation probit because of ties at the centiles used as cutoffs.

                                                        22
statistical evidence is considerably stronger using the highest cutoff, as for the 95th centile all

four of the labor supply estimates are statistically significant (one at the ten-percent level only).

Qualitatively, we would expect to find stronger labor supply disincentives for more likely

participants, as those more likely to participate should be more responsive to the incentives

posed by SSI.19

         Finally, in our work with the SIPP we examined results excluding those with work-

impairing disabilities, because among disabled men younger than 65 there may be some negative

labor supply response to higher SSI payments for the disabled in high-benefit states. As noted

earlier, we cannot identify those with a work-impairing disability in the CPS, except for the non-

employed. Instead, we drop from the 60-64 year-old sample those reporting any SSI income.

Assuming this income flows to the respondent, and not to his spouse or another family member,

receipt of SSI income is an indicator of disability. The results are reported in the final panel of

Table 5, and are very similar to the otherwise comparable estimates in Table 4.

VII. Conclusions

         Economic theory suggests that increased generosity of SSI payments will induce some

labor supply reductions among older individuals who are approaching the age of eligibility for

SSI and have sufficiently low resources that these labor supply reductions will help keep post-

retirement income and assets below the levels that would make them ineligible. This effect is

likely to be particularly noticeable beginning at age 62, when potential future SSI recipients can

replace the income lost from reducing labor supply by taking early social security retirement;

also note that there will be no long-lasting early retirement "penalty" since these are negated


19
  This prediction is not hard and fast, because it is conceivable that the margin on which SSI has its strongest effect
on labor supply is for those with less than the highest likelihood of participation, and not for those who will
participate under almost any circumstances. However, recall that even the 95th centile of the distribution of
predicted probabilities of SSI participation was less than 0.1, so it is likely that throughout the range of cutoffs we
consider we are focusing on those whose behavior may well be influenced by the size of the SSI benefit.

                                                          23
once the household gets on SSI at age 65.

       Past research relying on cross-state variation in SSI benefits found evidence consistent

with the predicted negative labor supply effects. However, a reliance on cross-state variation

necessitated reliance on less-than-ideal control samples. In contrast, this paper uses CPS data

covering a 21-year period, hence permitting identification of the effects of SSI from within-state,

time-series variation in SSI benefits, using a control sample of individuals of similar ages, in the

same states, and with similar probabilities of participating in SSI.

       The evidence points consistently to negative effects of more generous SSI payments on

the labor supply of likely SSI participants aged 62-64. The implied elasticities of labor supply

with respect to benefits, for those with a high probability of SSI participation, are generally in the

range of −0.2 to −0.3, looking at both employment and hours of work.

       These negative labor supply effects do not imply that more generous SSI payments

constitute unwise social policy. Such incentives are an unavoidable consequence of insurance

against reaching old age with very low economic resources. It is likely, however, that these

negative labor supply effects are exacerbated by the low income and asset levels below which

retirees must fall to be eligible for SSI (infer-marginal incentives), and by the 100-percent

confiscation of Social Security income in the SSI formula (infra-marginal incentives). While

bounds are necessary to target the most needy, the negative labor supply effects prior to

eligibility for SSI (and the negative savings effects we have found in our other work) indicate

that the income and asset limits have the perverse effect of inhibiting the accumulation of

resources—however minimal—by the economically-disadvantaged elderly. Thus, while these

findings do not lead to any clear implications regarding how SSI ought to be structured, they

highlight the tradeoffs inherent in structuring and targeting this particular social insurance

program. It is probably worth thinking about alternative ways of structuring SSI that would

                                                 24
increase incentives to accumulate economic resources without generating large and costly

increases in eligibility for SSI. In considering such alternatives, policy-makers may be able to

exploit the inherent limitations to growth in the SSI rolls provided by social security. In

particular, at least insofar as increased resource accumulation is reflected in greater social

security wealth, potential SSI recipients become ineligible for SSI or eligible for reduced SSI

payments as their social security benefits increase.




                                                 25
                                           References

Blank, Rebecca M. 2002. “Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States.” Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 40, No. 4, December, pp. 1105-66.

Cagetti, Marco. 1999. “Wealth Accumulation Over the Life Cycle and Precautionary Savings.”
Unpublished paper, University of Virginia.

Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives. 2000. The 2000 Green Book
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office).

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 1995. “Precautionary Saving and
Social Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 103, No. 2, April, pp. 360-99.

Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark. 1991. “Does Marriage Really Make Men More
Productive?” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 2, Spring, pp.282-307.

Mitchell, Olivia S. 1988. “Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions.” Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 6, No. 1, January, pp. 21-39.

Moffitt, Robert. 1992. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review.” Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 1-61.

Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 1998. “The Effect of Means-Tested Income Support for
the Elderly on Pre-Retirement Saving: Evidence from the SSI Program in the U.S.” Journal of
Public Economics, Vol. 68, No. 2, May, pp. 181-206.

Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 2000. “Welfare for the Elderly: The Effects of SSI on
Pre-Retirement Labor Supply.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 78, No. 1/2, June, pp. 51-80.

Neumark, David, and Elizabeth T. Powers. 2002. “SSI and Labor Supply: Improved Evidence
from Social Security Administrative Files.” Public Policy Institute of California Working Paper
No. 2002-03.

Powers, Elizabeth T., and David Neumark. 2003a. “The Supplemental Security Income Program
and Incentives to Claim Social Security Retirement Early: Empirical Evidence from Matched
SIPP and Social Security Administrative Files.” Unpublished paper, University of Illinois.

Powers, Elizabeth T., and David Neumark, 2003b. “The Interaction of Public Retirement
Programs in the U.S.” American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 93, No. 2,
May, pp. 261-65.

U.S. Social Security Administration. 2002. Understanding Supplemental Security Income.

U.S. Social Security Administration. 2001. Social Security Bulletin Annual Statistical
Supplement.
U.S. Social Security Administration. January 2000. State Assistance Programs for SSI
Recipients.
Table 1: Variation in Monthly SSI Benefits Across States and Over Time
                                                      Individuals                                                            Couples
                                                        Time-series        Cross-section                                    Time-series         Cross-section
                                                          variation           variation                                       variation            variation
                                                     Real % change,     % difference from                                 Real % change,      % difference from
                                                         1985-2000          federal, 2000                                    1985-2000           federal, 2000
                                                               State +                                                             State +
                          1985 1990 2000 State                 federal     State + federal     1985 1990 2000 State                federal      State + federal
                           (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)          (5)            (6)           (1’)     (2’)     (3’)    (4’)        (5’)             (6’)
  State supplements
          AK               261    331      362       -13          -7             71             371     484      528      -11         -6               69
          CA               179    244      180       -37         -14             35             448     588      460      -36        -18               60
          CO                58     54       36       -61         -11              7             278     309      327      -26        -11               43
           CT              141    366      235         4            0            46              86     525      325      136         19               42
          DC                15     15        0      -100           -6             0              30      30        0     -100         -7                0
           HI                5      5        5       -38           -2             1               9       9        9      -38         -2                1
           IA                0      0       22        …             3             4               0       0       44       …           4                6
           ID               78     73       53       -58         -12             10              46      45       19      -74         -8                2
          ME                10     10       10       -38          -3              2              15      15       15      -38         -3                2
          MA               129    129      129       -38         -12             25             202     202      202      -38        -12               26
           MI               27     30       14       -68          -7              3              40      45       28      -56         -6                4
          MN                35     75       81        45            3            16             66       88      111       5          -1               14
          NE                69     38        5       -95         -18              1             100      65       74      -54        -10               10
          NV                36     36       36       -38          -5              7              74      74       21      -82        -12                3
          NH                27     27       27       -38          -4              5              21      21       21      -38         -3                3
           NJ               31     31       31       -38           -5             6              25      25       25      -38         -3                3
          NY                61     86       87       -11           -3            17              76     102      104      -14         -3               14
          OK                60     64       53       -45           -8            10             120     128      106      -45        -10               14
          OR                 2      2        2       -38           -2             0               0       0        0       …          -2                0
           PA               32     32       27       -47          -6              5              49      49       44      -44         -5                6
           RI               54     64       64       -26           -5            13             102     120      121      -26         -6               16
           SD               15     15       15       -38           -3             3              15      15       75      213          5               10
          UT                10      6        0      -100           -4             0              20      12        5      -84         -5                1
          VT                53     63       58       -32          -6             11              96     115      108      -30         -6               14
          WA                38     28       27       -56          -7              5              37      22        1      -98         -8                0
           WI              100    103       84       -48         -12             16             161     166        0     -100        -26                0
          WY                20     20       10       -69          -5              2              40      40       25      -61         -6                3
   Federal benefit         325    386      512       …            …              …             488      579      769      …           …                …
Benefits shown are for the calendar year, for states with supplements. Illinois is omitted because the state decides the benefit on a case-by-case basis.
Minnesota, Washington and Vermont (beginning in 2000) have two levels for different geographic areas. The higher levels are shown.
Table 2: Estimators of the Effects of SSI on Labor Supply
                                              Treatment group                                              Comparison group                  Sample members
                                                     (1)                                                          (2)                              (3)
                                                     Single Cross-Section with Cross-State Variation in SSI Benefits Required
Simple           OLPs in high benefit states                                                OLPs in low benefit states                       OLPs
difference:
SD
Difference-in- OLPs – YLPs in high benefit states                                           OLPs – YLPs in low benefit states                OLPs and YLPs
differences:
DD-CS
Difference-in-     {OLPs – YLPs in high benefit states}                                       {OLPs – YLPs in low benefit states}            OLPs, YLPs,
difference-in-   – {OUPs – YUPs in high benefit states}                                     – {OUPs – YUPs in low benefit states}            OUPs, and YUPs
differences:
DDD-CS
                                                  Repeated Cross-Sections with Time-Series Variation in SSI Benefits Required
Difference-in-     OLPs in high benefit states after benefit increase (year t)                OLPs in low benefit states in year t           OLPs
differences:     – OLPs in high benefit states prior to benefit increase (year t-1)         – OLPs in low benefit states in year t-1)
DD-TS
Difference-in-    {OLPs in high benefit states after benefit increase (year t)               {OLPs in low benefit states in year t           OLPs and YLPs
difference-in-   – OLPs in high benefit states prior to benefit increase (year t-1)}        – OLPs in low benefit states in year t-1)}
differences:        – {YLPs in high benefit states after benefit increase (year t)             – {YLPs in low benefit states in year t
DDD-TS               – YLPs in high benefit states prior to benefit increase (year t-1)}        – YLPs in low benefit states in year t-1)}
The table explains these in terms of two discrete indicators—one for likely versus unlikely participants, and one for states with high SSI benefits
versus those without. The estimating equations in the text, however, carry over to using a continuous measure of the level of SSI benefits in the state.
OLP, OUP, YLP, and YUP stand for older likely participants, older unlikely participants, younger likely participants, and younger unlikely
participants, respectively.
Table 3: Descriptive Statistics and Probit Estimates for SSI Participation
                                        Descriptive statistics,         Probit for SSI          Descriptive statistics,
                                    all male heads of household         participation             likely participants
                                   Ages 62-64         Ages 60-61          Ages 65+          Ages 62-64          Ages 60-61
                                        (1)                 (2)              (3)                (4)                 (5)
Currently employed (%)                 45.1                64.6                                28.0                38.6
Employed last year (%)                 58.1                73.7                                39.4                49.5
Hours last week                        16.5                25.4                                 9.1                14.2
Usual weekly hours last year           23.0                30.8                                14.7                19.7
Real maximum monthly                 419.43              422.78            0.0064            362.49               370.85
federal plus state SSI                                                    (0.0002)
payment (1982-84 $)
Education (years)                      11.9                12.1                                  6.6                6.7

Education x less than high                                                 -0.0035
school education                                                           (0.0001)
High school education or                                                   -0.0639
more                                                                       (0.0021)
Black                                 7.5%               7.9%               0.0039             26.1%              24.2%
                                                                           (0.0010)
Never married                         4.0%               3.7%               0.0384             17.9%              18.8%
                                                                           (0.0034)
Divorced, widowed, or                 12.9%              11.7%              0.0111             31.1%              26.2%
separated                                                                  (0.0011)
Eligible for married couple                                                -0.0156
benefit (married & wife age                                                (0.0010)
65+)
Received Food Stamps last             3.3%               3.6%               0.2420             32.2%              38.1%
year                                                                       (0.0068)
State unemployment rate (%)            6.4                6.4               0.0017               7.1                7.2
                                                                           (0.0002)

Number of observations                 31,728             22,587            135,901             3,501               2,314
Mean participation                                                           0.0316
probability
90th centile of predicted                                                    0.0352
probability for 60-64 year-
olds
In column (3), the marginal effects implied by the probit estimates are reported; standard errors are reported in
parentheses, with t-statistics scaled to equal those in the probit estimation. The standard errors are adjusted to be robust to
heteroscedasticity of the error term across clusters defined by state and year, and to arbitrary correlations of the error
terms within these clusters. The probit includes fixed year effects. In the probit estimation, the SSI benefit is divided by
$100, so the marginal effect can be interpreted as arising from a $100 increase in monthly benefits. When computing
predicted probabilities, the supplement variable was set to its sample mean. Married heads with no corresponding spouse
record in the CPS were excluded from all analyses. The omitted marital status category is married heads with younger
spouses.
Table 4: Alternative Estimators of the Effect of SSI Benefits on Employment and Hours
                                               Currently               Employed           Hours worked last        Usual weekly
                                              employed                  last year                week              hours last year
                                                  (1)                      (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Cross-sectional estimators
SD: equation (1)                            0.007 (0.011)            -0.009 (0.011)          0.495 (0.434)         0.062 (0.469)
                                              [N=3,499]                [N=3,501]               [N=3,499]             [N=3,501]
DD-CS: equation (2)                        -0.007 (0.013)          -0.028 (0.013)**         -0.110 (0.510)        -1.013 (0.551)*
                                              [N=5,813]                [N=5,815]               [N=5,813]             [N=5,815]
DDD-CS: equation (3)                       -0.003 (0.015)           -0.025 (0.014)*         -0.176 (0.539)        -1.156 (0.597)*
                                             [N=54,276]               [N=54,315]              [N=54,276]            [N=54,315]
Within-state estimators
DD-TS: equation (4)                        -0.029 (0.028)            -0.043 (0.031)         -0.862 (1.062)         -1.822 (1.297)
                                              [N=3,489]                [N=3,501]               [N=3,499]             [N=3,501]
DDD-TS: equation (5)                      -0.034 (0.017)*         -0.050 (0.019)***         -0.992 (0.692)       -1.869 (0.749)**
                                              [N=5,803]                [N=5,815]               [N=5,813]             [N=5,815]
The SSI benefit is divided by $100, so the marginal effect can be interpreted as the effect of a $100 increase in monthly
benefits. The SSI benefit is aligned with the labor supply measure, so in columns (1) and (3) the benefit is for the year of
the survey, and in columns (2) and (4) the benefit is for the prior year. The equations include controls for education, race,
marital status, the state unemployment rate, and year, as well as the variables for SUPP, PART, and their interactions as
explained in Section V. Only the estimates of the parameter α in equations (1)-(5) are reported. Standard errors of the
estimates are reported in parentheses. The standard errors are adjusted to be robust to heteroscedasticity of the error term
across clusters defined by state, year, age (when 60-61 year-olds are included), and likely participation (when unlikely
participants are included), and to arbitrary correlations of the error terms within these clusters. ‘*’, ‘**”, and ‘***’
indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at the ten-, five-, or one-percent level. All specifications use a
continuous measure of the SSI benefit, and the 90th centile cutoff for predicted probability of SSI participation.
Table 5: Robustness Analysis of Within-State Estimators of the Effect of SSI Benefits on Employment and Hours
                                            Currently             Employed        Hours worked last    Usual weekly
                                           employed                last year              week         hours last year
                                               (1)                    (2)                  (3)              (4)
Unweighted
   DD-TS                                -0.012 (0.024)         -0.037 (0.030)        -0.487 (0.974)    -1.858 (1.258)
                                           [N=3,254]              [N=3,266]             [N=3,264]        [N=3,266]
   DDD-TS                               -0.025 (0.016)       -0.038 (0.017)**        -0.599 (0.626)  -1.474 (0.701)**
                                           [N=5,423]              [N=5,436]             [N=5,433]        [N=5,436]
70th centile cutoff for predicted
probability of SSI participation
   DD-TS                                 0.006 (0.017)          0.002 (0.019)        -0.064 (0.555)    0.041 (0.796)
                                          [N=10,234]             [N=10,236]            [N=10,234]       [N=10,236]
   DDD-TS                             -0.022 (0.010)**        -0.018 (0.010)*      -0.831 (0.416)**   -0.771 (0.428)*
                                          [N=16,944]             [N=16,949]            [N=16,944]       [N=16,949]
80th centile cutoff for predicted
probability of SSI participation
   DD-TS                                 0.001 (0.026)          0.018 (0.029)         0.502 (1.150)    0.574 (1.226)
                                           [N=6,898]              [N=6,903]             [N=6,898]        [N=6,903]
   DDD-TS                               -0.019 (0.013)        -0.027 (0.014)*        -0.747 (0.558)   -1.071 (0.576)*
                                          [N=11,463]             [N=11,467]            [N=11,463]       [N=11,467]
95th centile cutoff for predicted
probability of SSI participation
   DD-TS                                 0.007 (0.034)          0.002 (0.041)         0.212 (1.455)    0.270 (1.839)
                                           [N=1,661]              [N=1,673]             [N=1,672]        [N=1,673]
   DDD-TS                            -0.056 (0.021)***       -0.064 (0.025)**       -1.607 (0.846)*  -1.948 (0.983)**
                                           [N=2,856]              [N=2,869]             [N=2,867]        [N=2,869]
Excluding current SSI recipients
   DD-TS                                -0.036 (0.028)         -0.048 (0.032)        -1.006 (1.079)    -1.973 (1.374)
                                           [N=3,127]              [N=3,134]             [N=3,133]        [N=3,134]
   DDD-TS                              -0.031 (0.018)*      -0.050 (0.019)***        -0.821 (0.729)  -1.847 (0.788)**
                                           [N=5,170]              [N=5,176]             [N=5,176]        [N=5,176]
See notes to Table 4. Specifications correspond to those in Table 4 aside from the exceptions noted.
                                               Fitted values                           Weekly Hours: Levels                                                             Fitted values                                 Weekly Hours: Levels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10

                                  80                                                                                                                       80



                                  60                                                                                                                       60



                                                                                                                                                           40
                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                           20
                                  20




Weekly Hours: Levels
                                                                                                                         Weekly Hours: Levels
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                   0


                                                                                                                                                           -20
                                  -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -10
                                        -100           0                       200                                400                                            -100           0                            200                                    400                -200          -100            0                100    200
                                                                  Maximum SSI Payment                                                                                                          Maximum SSI Payment                                                                      Maximum SSI Payment
                                                                  SD: Age 62-64                                                                                                                    Age 60-61                                                                                  DD-CS


                                               Fitted values                           Weekly Hours: Within-group diff                                                  Fitted values                                 Weekly Hours: Within-group diff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                           80
                                  80




                                                                                                                                                           40
                                  40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0



                                   0                                                                                                                        0




Weekly Hours: Within-group diff
                                                                                                                         Weekly Hours: Within-group diff
                                  -40                                                                                                                      -40                                                                                            -10
                                                     -100             0                   100                  200                                               -100                   0                        100                         200                -200          -100                 0                   100         200
                                                               SSI Payment: Within-group diff                                                                                               SSI Payment: Within-group diff                                                           SSI Payment: Within-group diff
                                                                DD-TS: Age 62-64                                                                                                                    Age 60-61                                                                                DDD-TS




                                  Figure 1: Graphical Display of Residuals and Alternative Estimators
