NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DECLINE AND RISE OF INTERSTATE MIGRATION
IN THE UNITED STATES:
EVIDENCE FROM THE IPUMS, 1850-1990
Joshua L. Rosenbloom
William A. Sundstrom
Working Paper 9857
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9857
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

For helpful suggestions and comments on earlier versions, the authors thank Marigee Bacolod, Deborah
Garvey, Kris Mitchener, and participants in the Economic History Association session of the ASSA meetings,
New Orleans, January 2001, the meeting of the NBER Development of the American Economy group,
Cambridge, MA, March 2001, and the All-U.C. Group in Economic History Conference, Irvine, CA,
November 2002. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Joshua L. Rosenbloom and William A. Sundstrom. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Decline and Rise of Interstate Migration in the United States:
Evidence from the IPUMS, 1850-1990
Joshua L. Rosenbloom and William A. Sundstrom
NBER Working Paper No. 9857
July 2003
JEL No. N3, J6
ABSTRACT
We examine evidence on trends in interstate migration over the past 150 years, using data
from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series of the U.S. Census (IPUMS). Two measures of
migration are calculated. The first considers an individual to have moved if she is residing in a state
different from her state of birth. The second considers a family to have moved if it is residing in a
state different from the state of birth of one of its young children. The latter measure allows us
estimate the timing of moves more accurately. Our results suggest that overall migration propensities
have followed a U-shaped trend since 1850, falling until around 1900 and then rising until around
1970. We examine variation in the propensity to make an interstate move by age, sex, race, nativity,
region of origin, family structure, and education. Counterfactuals based on probit estimates of the
propensity to migrate suggest that the rise in migration of families since 1900 is largely attributable
to increased educational attainment. The decline of interstate migration in the late nineteenth century
remains to be explained.
Joshua L. Rosenbloom
Department of Economics
University of Kansas
1300 Sunnyside Avenue
Lawrence, KS 66045-2113
and NBER
jrosenbloom@ku.edu

William A. Sundstrom
Department of Economics
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
Wsundstrom@scu.edu

1. Introduction
The mobility of the American population has played an important role in the country’s economic
development. The settlement of the frontier and urbanization are two of the great themes of American
economic history. Efforts to study the history of internal migration in the United States have been
hampered by a variety of data limitations, however. Since 1940 researchers have been able to make use
of data on recent migration experience collected in the Census, the Current Population Survey, and panel
data sets.1 For evidence that extends prior to that date, however, researchers have often been obliged to
rely on indirect measures calculated using either census survival methods or aggregate data on the native
population’s state of residence and state of birth.2 For the study of internal migration, such data have
major limitations: the census survival method only measures net migration (rather than gross flows in and
out of a location), and both measures are aggregate and thus are of limited use in examining the factors
affecting individual migration decisions.3
In this paper we explore two ways of utilizing individual-level data from population censuses
assembled in the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, or IPUMS (Ruggles 1997), to derive new
measures of long-run trends in the migration of the native born within the United States. By using
information on age in combination with state of birth and state of residence, we can follow interstate
migration patterns for successive synthetic birth cohorts of individuals from 1850 through 1990. This
allows us to describe changes in migration rates over time and how the propensity to leave one’s state of
birth varied with individual characteristics. Unfortunately, this measure of migration has some serious
deficiencies: it fails to indicate the timing of an individual’s move between birth and the census and fails

1

See Shryock (1965, ch. 1).
The Census survival approach calculates net migration for a state or region as the difference
between the actual change in population between successive censuses, and the predicted change, based
on national survival rates for each age group within the population. The state-of-birth/state-of-residence
approach looks at changes in the numbers living outside the state in which they were born between
censuses.
3
Some specialized studies use linked census samples to follow individuals over a decade or two
(see Schaefer 1989; Ferrie 1997, undated; Stewart 2003).
2

1

to count moves subsequent to leaving the birth state. For families with children, however, we can obtain
a much more precise measure of recent family moves by matching children with their parents and
comparing a young child’s state of birth with the family’s state of residence at the time of the census.
Both measures suggest that overall migration rates followed a U-shaped trajectory between 1850
and 1990, falling from 1850 until roughly the turn of the century and rising thereafter, especially after
1940. The propensity to move varied with individual characteristics, such as gender, race, and region of
origin. We estimate migration probits on census cross sections to identify the marginal impact of these
characteristics. Until around 1920, adult men were more likely to have left their state of birth than were
adult women, but in recent decades this gender difference has essentially disappeared. Only during the
Great Migration of African-Americans during the middle of the twentieth century did overall migration
propensities of blacks exceed those of whites: both before and since, African-Americans have been less
likely to leave the state of their birth than whites. Among families with children, black families
continued to have lower migration rates than whites even after World War II, suggesting that the Great
Migration consisted disproportionately of single and/or childless individuals.
Examining the role of region of birth, we find that individuals born in the Northeast region had
the lowest migration propensities over much of the period, although regional differences had narrowed
by 1990. In the postwar period, southerners and westerners have been the most likely to move between
states.
Perhaps our most interesting finding is the potential role of rising educational attainment in
explaining the upward trend in migration propensity over the past 100 years. Education is strongly
correlated with mobility. Using our migration measure based on moves by families with children, we
estimate the impact of education in cross section and use the coefficients from a single census year to
calculate a counterfactual migration series for changing characteristics, taking advantage of Goldin’s
(1999) recent estimates of high-school graduation rates for years before 1940. The counterfactual does a
good job tracking the rise in migration propensity since the early 1900s, and changing educational
2

attainment was the principal driving force. This finding cannot be considered an adequate causal
account, however, due to omitted variables that were likely to have been correlated with education, such
as occupation and income.
In the next section we review the literature on the history of internal migration in the United
States, its causes and effects. The third section describes our measure of lifetime migration based on
state of birth, discusses its limitations, and summarizes our findings on cohort and life-cycle migration
patterns and differences by sex, race, and region of birth. The fourth section employs the family
migration measure based on child’s state of birth, again examining covariates of migration, and presents
the counterfactual exercise that shows the important effect of education. The fifth section offers
conclusions and directions for further research.

2. Internal migration in the United States since 1850
The geographical mobility of Americans is a well-known trait of the national character.
According to figures cited by Greenwood (1997), as of 1970 the average American would make nearly
twice as many residential moves during her or his lifetime as would the average resident of Britain or
Japan. Migration– along with regional differences in rates of natural increase– has played a central role
in the geographical redistribution of the U.S. population. Eldridge (1964), examining the sources of
population “displacement” by region from 1870 to 1950, shows the centrality of westward migration in
the population increase of the West, the role of out-migration from the South in offsetting the South’s
high rate of natural increase, and the net effect of European immigration to the Northeast in offsetting
lower rates of natural increase there. Until the 1920s, net migration into the Northeast and North Central
regions was dominated by European immigrants, while internal migration played a dominant role in the
South and West. These net interregional migration flows obscure much of the underlying population
movement. For example, after 1910, the net migration from the South was largely into the Northeast and
North Central regions, which in turn contributed the bulk of the migrants to the West.
3

Since 1950 there have been important changes in internal migration patterns. Most crucially,
since about 1970 the flow of migrants out of the South has been reversed, with the South becoming the
region with the largest net in-migration (Greenwood 1997). Around the same time, the longstanding
historical pattern of net migration from nonmetropolitan to metropolitan areas also reversed. During the
postwar period, differences in employment growth across states can be attributed primarily to migration,
rather than differences in rates of natural increase (Blanchard and Katz 1992).
Economic accounts of internal migration have often stressed locational differentials in wages or
incomes as the driving force of migration patterns (see Greenwood 1997 for an overview of the
literature). In this sense migration can be seen as a process of equilibration of the national labor market.
Using published census data from 1850, 1880, 1900, 1920, and 1960, Gallaway and Vedder (1971)
examine the effect of income differentials on interstate migration flows, as measured by the number of
individuals born in one state but residing in another. They find that the migration into a state increases
with its per-capita income and decreases with its population density and distance from the state of origin.
Over these years, the estimated elasticity of migration with respect to income increased, while that with
respect to distance fell. The latter result is consistent with declining costs of moving over the period.
Although Gallaway and Vedder find a significant role for geographical income differentials in
determining migrant flows, other studies of this effect have obtained mixed results (Greenwood 1997).
Recent research suggests that other economic factors– in addition to local average wages or incomes–
should be considered important determinants of migration patterns. Steckel (1983) and more recently
Stewart (2003) stress the importance of specific human capital in farming as a factor directing westward
migration flows historically. In particular, migrating farmers tended to move roughly along lines of
latitude, presumably because of latitude-specific knowledge about crops and livestock. Theoretical
models that assume heterogeneous worker skills imply that migration propensities should depend not
only on the mean wage but also on the dispersion of wages (skilled workers want to migrate to places

4

where skills are highly rewarded).4 This prediction is confirmed empirically by Borjas et al (1992).
Locational differences in employment growth or unemployment rates have been found in some studies to
have a greater impact than wage differentials.5 Differences in government transfer programs or spending
across location may also affect migration flows, as Fishback et al (2001) find for New Deal spending.
Given Gallaway and Vedder’s finding that internal migration redistributed labor from low- to
high-wage states, it might be surmised that internal migration played a large role in the convergence of
state wages and per-capita incomes over the past 120 years. Rosenbloom (1990, 1996) has argued that
regional convergence in wage rates during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, at least
outside of the South, coincided with the emergence of cross-regional labor-market institutions and
informational flows. However, the direct evidence linking labor-market and income convergence during
the twentieth century is not strong. Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1991) find that migration explains only a
small part of overall economic convergence across states. And as Kim (1998) notes, the process of
convergence involved not only within-sector wage convergence but also convergence in industry
composition, which may have been due to causes other than the integration of labor markets.
One enduring puzzle relating to convergence within the United States is the persistent difference
in real wages (and per capita incomes) between the South and the rest of the country. The catch-up of the
South, particularly after the Great Depression, was a significant source of economic convergence within
the United States (see Wright 1986, Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1991, Mitchener and McLean 1999). Yet
why did labor migration fail to narrow this gap before the 1940s? Wright (1986) has argued that prior to
the New Deal, the southern labor market remained isolated from the rest of the country, in large part
because the demand for low-skilled labor in the industrializing North was satisfied by European

4

Greater dispersion of opportunities may also attract job seekers who are willing to search long
enough to find a high-wage offer (David 1974).
5
See Treyz, et al (1993) and Blanchard and Katz (1992). The theoretical claim that
unemployment rates should affect migration decisions was made by Todaro (1969), and has been
explored using historical data by Hatton and Williamson (1992).
5

immigrants, while flows of information and migrants between North and South were never established.
Fishback (1998) has also noted that for a time southerners found high-wage opportunities by moving
westward within the South. Better evidence on gross migration flows between the South and the rest of
the country will help us better assess the degree and causes of southern isolation.
The path dependence of migrant flows when migrant stocks affect the propensity of migration
has been emphasized by Carrington et al (1996) as a significant factor in the delay of African-American
migration to the North, in spite of the lower wages and greater social and political oppression of blacks in
the South.6 An alternative explanation of the delayed timing of the Great Migration is that prior to the
1920s black employment opportunities in the North were severely constrained by competition from
unskilled European immigrants, given the racial preferences of northern employers (Collins 1997). The
special obstacles to black migration do not, of course, provide an explanation for the persistent NorthSouth wage gap for white workers.
Migration decisions are also influenced by the personal characteristics of potential migrants. The
migration propensity of adults, at least for long-distance moves, tends to decline with age and to increase
with education.7 Schwartz (1976) argues that these properties are implications of the equilibrium
relationship between earnings, education, and experience; additionally, education may be associated with
better sources of information, greater ability to process information about opportunities, or lower risk
aversion. The age effect is also partly attributable to changes in family status and career that are
correlated with age (Sandefur and Scott 1981). Unemployed individuals are more likely to move than the

6

For reviews of the evidence on the importance of the stock of fellow migrants from the same
source location in explaining migration flows (so-called chain migration), see also Greenwood (1975)
and Rosenbloom (1994). The presence of fellow migrants may reduce migration costs by providing
credit or housing and may increase expected benefits of moving by providing information on work
opportunities and actual contacts or referrals with local employers.
7
See Long (1973), Schwartz (1976). More educated individuals are also be more likely to
engage in international migration. Recent work by Chiquiar and Hanson (2002), for example, finds that
the typical Mexican immigrant to the United States is better-educated than the average Mexican who
stays in Mexico.
6

employed, other things equal (DaVanzo 1978). Married couples are less likely to move if both
individuals are in the labor force (Greenwood 1997). A distinct advantage of using the individual-level
samples of the PUMS to examine historical migration behavior is that it becomes possible to control for
the impact of demographic characteristics and family labor allocation decisions on migration
probabilities.
In this paper we focus on broad trends in the propensity to migrate and the demographic
covariates of that propensity. We leave to future work an analysis of the responsiveness of migration to
differences in economic opportunities across location.

3. Migration patterns revealed by state of birth, 1850-1990
Using data from the IPUMS, our first measure of migration is based on whether an individual
was living in the state in which he or she was born at the time of the census. We employ samples from
thirteen census years spanning the period from 1850 through 1990.8 The IPUMS combines census
microdata files produced by the U.S. Census Bureau since 1960 with new historical census files produced
at the University of Minnesota and elsewhere.9 Each census in the IPUMS data included questions on the
state of birth and state of residence of the native-born population along with questions about each
individual’s age at the time of the census and other demographic characteristics, such as gender and race.
Because we are concerned with internal migration between states, we restrict our attention to the native
born. Our second measure of migration, using the birthplace of a child, allows us to consider interstate

8

Data from the 1890 and 1930 censuses are not included in the IPUMS data set. The original
manuscript schedules of the 1890 census were destroyed by fire, and the 1930 data are still subject to the
72-year census confidentiality rules.
9
We use the full IPUMS general samples available for each year, with the following special
cases: for 1850 and 1860, the samples of the free population; for 1900, the preliminary new sample
drawn by researchers at the University of Minnesota; for 1970 the Form 2 State sample, for 1980,
subsamples 0-19 of the 5% sample (thus generating a random 1% sample of the population); for 1990,
the 1% unweighted state sample. Choice of samples in 1970 and 1980 was based on obtaining the most
complete information about state of birth and state of residence.
7

migration of families with foreign-born parents. Before exploring the historical trends in migration
revealed by the data on state of birth, we consider their relationship to more direct measures of migration
that are available for 1940 and later.

Reliability and limitations of measuring migration using state of birth
Using information on state of birth and state of residence to measure interstate migration will
understate the size of gross migration flows for several reasons. First, we can only ascertain whether a
person has ever moved between birth and the census; the number and exact timing of moves cannot be
known. Second, some individuals who have moved during their lifetime will be missed by our measure,
because they have moved away from their state of birth and later returned to it.10 Third, we do not
capture within-state moves.11
The potential size of the first two biases can be examined using census data on five-year
migration rates in 1940, 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990. These censuses asked individuals where they were
residing five years prior to the census date.12 For these years we can examine the correlation of ever
moving (since birth) and five-year moving, as well as the frequency of return migration to the state of
birth. Toward this end we have drawn a samples of individuals satisfying each of the following selection
criteria: (1) known state of birth (state or DC); (2) known state of residence (state or DC) five years prior
to the census; (3) known state of residence (state or DC) at the time of the census; (4) ages 10-79.
Table 1 shows the percentages having moved since birth and in the last 5 years, broken down
into 10-year age groups. The age pattern revealed by the table suggests that the probability of having
moved in the past 5 years is greatest for young adults (20-29) and tends to tail off beyond that age, while

10

These problems have been recognized for some time. An early exploration is Ross and Truxal

(1931).
11

Ferrie (undated) found that three-fourths of all moves between 1850 and 1860 were between
places within the same state.
12
The 1950 census asked where individuals resided one year before the census, but only the socalled sample line individuals, subset of the full sample. We have not used this variable here.
8

the probability of ever having changed state since birth appears to be cumulative, as one would expect,
but rises at a decreasing rate with age.
By following birth cohorts across successive censuses, we can estimate the proportion of an age
cohort who left their state of birth during the 10 years preceding the census. The implied age profiles are
shown in Figure 1.13 This can be compared with the age profile of the proportion reporting an interstate
move in the 5 years prior to the census, in Figure 2. Clearly, both measures show that the propensity to
move declines dramatically with age. It is also clear that the measure based on state of birth misses a
large number of moves. The 10-year propensity based on birth state is lower in nearly every case than
the corresponding 5-year propensity based on the migration question. The proportional magnitude of the
bias rises with age, presumably reflecting additional moves by individuals who have already left their
birth state.
Clearly, migration estimates based on comparing state of birth with state of residence are a better
measure of gross migration the greater the proportion of migrants who are leaving their state of birth for
the first time. Table 2 classifies individuals who moved within 5 years prior to the census into three
categories: (1) those who left their state of birth during those 5 years; (2) those who returned to their state
of birth after having lived elsewhere 5 years prior; and (3) those who were not living in their state of birth
5 years prior and moved to another (third) state by the year of the census.14 Note that the second of these
categories consists of people who did migrate but who will not be counted as movers in our state-of-birth
based measure, because as of the census they were back in their state of birth.
For younger people (between 10 and 29), more than half of 5-year moves involved leaving the
state of birth in 1940, and about half in 1970-1990. Not surprisingly, the percentage of 5-year moves that

13

For example, the figure of 6.5% for 30-39 year olds in 1960 is equal to the proportion of 30-39
year olds who were living outside their birth state in 1960 minus the percentage of 20-29 year olds who
were living outside their birth state in 1950. This number can be negative as it is for some age groups in
1970, either because of sampling variation or potentially net return migration to the state of birth.
14
We cannot obtain these numbers for 1960 because the data do not report the state of residence
in 1955, only whether that state was different from the state of residence in 1960.
9

involved leaving the birth state falls with age. For individuals in their 40s, less than one-third of moves
involved leaving the state of birth in most years. Clearly, age profiles of migration based on leaving the
birth state are going to be excessively concave, because an increasing proportion of moves are not picked
up by the measure. It is also noteworthy that the proportion of moves that involved returning to the state
of birth from elsewhere shows no systematic age pattern.
Individuals who have moved at least once in their lifetime are more likely to move again. This
can be seen in Table 3, which gives the percent who moved during the 5 years preceding the census,
conditional on whether they had moved between birth and 5 years prior. In each age category, those who
had left their birth state by t-5 were much more likely to move to another state between t-5 and t. This is
true even when we don’t count those who returned to their state of birth between t-5 and t (last column).
Thus there appears to be persistent heterogeneity in migration propensities. Whether this is a trait of
individuals or perhaps a characteristic of locations that tend to receive migrants (e.g. more volatile
economic opportunities, hence receiving but also sending away many migrants) remains to be
determined.
These findings suggest that migration rates based on state of birth must be treated with caution.
They are likely to be more informative for younger people. In addition to their imprecision in terms of
the timing of moves, their inability to capture moves subsequent to leaving the birth state implies that
they systematically underestimate the propensity to move, especially for older individuals. Although we
report some general trends and demographic variation using this measure here, we think it is crucial to
obtain more accurate estimates of migration, which we are able to do for families with children, as
reported later in the paper.

Long-run trends in the propensity to leave the birth state
Figure 3 plots migration propensities for the full samples of the native-born as a function of age
at each census. For most age groups, lifetime migration propensities exhibit a downward trend between
10

1860 and sometime around 1900. For 30-39 year olds, for example, the percent having left their birth
state fell from 42 percent in 1860 to 31 percent in 1900. The trend is clearly upward after 1940, although
measured migration rates appear to have been unusually low in 1940 at the end of the Great Depression.15
For ages 30-39, the propensity to migrate rose from about 30 percent in 1940 to around 37 percent in
1990.
For individuals under 40, the pattern describes a long U shape, with the lowest point occurring
around 1900, especially if we smooth over the unusually depressed migration rates of 1940. The trough
occurs later for the older age groups, although as we have seen the measure based on birth state becomes
a less reliable measure of migration rates as we examine older individuals. Interestingly, the trough in
migration propensities among the younger native born coincides with the period of heaviest foreign
migration into the country.
The compression of the migration rates across the older age groups after 1920 suggests that
migration has become increasingly concentrated among the young. By 1970, a person in her 70s was no
more likely to be living outside the state of her birth than a person in her 30s. This flattening of the age
profile of migration for older individuals is evident in cohort age profiles based on these migration
rates.16 The phenomenon of the increased age concentration of migration is of some interest, although
given the inability of this measure to capture a large percentage of moves among older individuals one
must be wary of drawing strong inferences from the age profiles.

Covariates of migration propensity
Using the IPUMS data we can estimate a simple descriptive model of migration propensity to see
how demographic characteristics and location of origin affected the probability of leaving the birth state

15

Familiar tales of the “Okie” migration notwithstanding, interstate migration rates were low
overall during the Depression.
16
Cohort age profiles are plotted in an appendix available from the authors.
11

over time, and to determine whether changes in these characteristics might account for the observed
historical trends. Here we present the results of estimating a probit model of the interstate move for 3039-year-olds.17 The regressors are age, gender, race, region of birth, and physical size of state. We
include a control for state size because interstate moves are more likely to be observed from smaller
states just because the border is likely to be closer. For this purpose we use the square root of the land
area of the state of origin.18
Probit coefficients for each census year are provided in the appendix Table A1. Most of the
coefficients are significantly different from zero in most years. To summarize trends in the effects of the
variables, Figures 4-7 plot the time path of the estimated effect of each regressor on the move probability
(dP/dX).19 For dummy variables, these effects represent the change in predicted probability of switching
the variable from 0 to 1, evaluated at the means of the other variables. These marginal effects should be
compared against an average move probability for this age group of between 0.3 and 0.4, depending on
the year.
Figure 4 shows the gender differential. Before 1940, women were less likely than men to report
having left their birth state. After 1940 the coefficient on female is occasionally statistically significant,
but is very small: there is today essentially no gender differential. Figure 5 shows the trend in the
coefficient on black (the comparison group is all non-blacks, which consists predominantly of whites).
The 1850 and 1860 censuses included only free persons, so the sample of African-Americans shifts
dramatically after the Civil War. Still, the picture is consistent with black migration rates being

17

Use of the 30-39 age group here is a compromise. For younger individuals, the rate of leaving
the birth state is a more reliable indicator of recent migration, but their migration decision was likely
made by someone else (parents). An individual who is 30-39 at the time of the census has been an adult
for at least 10 years, and Figures 1 and 3 suggest that most individuals who will ever leave their birth
state are likely to have done so by the time they are 39.
18
If all states had similar shapes, then the average distance to the nearest border would be
proportional to the dimensions of the state, or the square root of the area. A more sophisticated measure
would need to take account of different shapes and population concentrations within states.
19
We exclude a plot of the age variable, which only captures the effect of changing age between
30 and 39 and is thus of limited interest.
12

substantially lower until around 1900. By 1950, blacks were much more likely to have left their birth
state, a reflection of the Great Migration out of the South. The racial differential has since then returned
to within 5 percentage points of parity.
Figure 6 shows the effect of region of birth, relative to the Northeast. The sample sizes of
individuals born in the West for censuses before 1900 are very small, and the coefficients have been
excluded here. The migration rates here include interstate moves within the region of birth, so these
regional differentials do not necessarily represent the rate of out-migration from the region as a whole.
Throughout the period, individuals born in the Northeast were the least likely to have left their state of
birth by their 30s. Individuals born in the Midwest were the most peripatetic in the early 1900s, whereas
southerners and westerners have generally been the most likely to move since 1940. By 1990, regional
differences were quite small.
Finally, Figure 7 shows the effect of state size, as measured by the square root of area. As
expected, the effect is usually negative, indicating that a person born in a large state is less likely to have
reported leaving that state by her 30s. The effect is fairly large: the difference in move probability
between an individual born in New York versus one born in California would have been on the order of 6
percentage points in 1970, just because of the difference in area. Interestingly, this effect has tended to
become stronger over time, contrary to what one might expect given declining real transportation costs.

Can changing demographic characteristics account for the long-run trends in mobility?
The probit results reveal systematic variation in the probability of leaving the birth state by
gender, race, region of origin, and state size. We can use a simple counterfactual to judge whether
changes in these variables over time might account for the pronounced U shape in the migration
propensity. Figure 8 shows one such counterfactual for 30-39 year olds. In the diagram, the actual
migration rates are indicated by black diamonds. The white triangles show the results of a
counterfactual. In each census year, the probability of an interstate move is predicted for each individual,
13

using her or his actual X values and the probit coefficients from 1920.20 These predicted probabilities
were then averaged over the whole sample to obtain the probabilities displayed in the figure. Clearly,
changes in these observable characteristics cannot account for the actual historical experience.

4. Migration of families with children
The largest drawback of migration measures based on an adult individual’s place of birth is their
inability to narrow down the timing of moves or measure repeat migration. For families with children,
we can construct an alternative measure from census data that largely avoids these problems by
comparing where the children were born with where the family was residing at the time of the census.
For example, suppose a family living in Illinois reports that its five-year old child was born in
Mississippi. Then we might conclude that the family moved sometime during the five or so years prior to
the census date. In addition to allowing us to track migration over relatively short periods, the childbirthplace measure of migration has the advantage that we can use it to examine the internal migration of
foreign-born as well as native-born adults.21
To construct the child-based measure from the IPUMS, we matched children ages 0-9 with their
parents. Our sample consists only of families with both parents present and residing in an identified state
or D.C. at the time of the census. For the years 1850-1870, the census data do not permit direct
identification of spouses and own children; for those years, we used the IPUMS imputed family
relationships, which are considered fairly reliable.
One child– referred to hereafter as the reference child– was selected at random from each such
household, a procedure that allows us to avoid the problem of multiple observations for each family,
which would give disproportionate weight to families with more children in the 0-9 age range.22 The unit

20

1920 was chosen simply because it stands at the middle of our full span of years.
Steckel (1983) also used children’s birth states to examine the timing of moves.
22
In future research we will attempt to make use of the information on migration provided by
multiple children.
21

14

of observation can thus be thought of as a two-parent family with at least one young child. Because we
are interested in internal migration, an observation is included only if the reference child was born in the
United States, in an identified state or D.C.23 We conclude that the family moved sometime between the
birth of the reference child and the census if the child’s state of birth and the family’s current state of
residence are different.
Measuring the internal migration of adults using a child’s place of birth suffers from two obvious
flaws. The first is that there is not a one-for one correspondence between the child being born in a
different state and the family having resided in that state at the time of the birth. Some births may take
place while a family is traveling, or perhaps because a mother may live temporarily with a relative during
the period of the birth. The second problem is that families with children may not be representative of
the migration behavior of the population as a whole. Recent evidence suggests, for example, that
migration propensities fall after marriage and with the coming of children (e.g., Sandefur and Scott
1981).
The importance of the first objection appears to be relatively small. Two types of evidence
support our claim that when the child’s state of birth and the family’s state of residence differ, it is likely
that the family actually moved during the interim. First, as we show below, the probability that the states
of birth and residence are different increases substantially with the age of the child, as it should if
migration is at work, because older children have been at risk of moving for a longer period of time.24
Second, there is a high degree of correlation between the child-based migration measure and
responses to the 5-year migration questions available beginning in 1940. The censuses of 1940 and 1960
through 1990 asked individuals where they lived 5 years prior to the census. Children born during the

23

The results presented here are unweighted; a check for 1940 suggests that the results are quite
similar when we apply census household weights.
24
If births away from home were the principal cause of discrepancies between state of birth and
current residence, the incidence of this discrepancy would not increase significantly with the age of the
reference child.
15

year following that date would have been reported as 4 years old at the time of the census, while children
born during the year preceding that date would have been reported as 5. It seems reasonable, then, to
compare the census 5-year migration measure with a child-based migration measure for reference
children ages 4-5, an age range whose average birth date will be approximately 5 years before the census
date.
Table 4 compares our measure based on the reference child’s birth state with several alternatives
based on the census 5-year migration question: for parents in the family sample, and then for all men 2049 years old. Although the kid-based measure tends to be a little greater than the census measure in the
within-sample comparisons, it is generally quite close. Examining the last column, it is also interesting
to note that the kid-based measure is rather close to the 5-year measure for all men ages 20-49. Thus we
can have some confidence that our measure is reasonably representative of the migration rate for the
prime-age population as a whole, even though it is based only on a sample of two-parent families.25
Table 5 is a cross-tabulation of the two measures within the family sample. The measures are
correlated, but not perfectly so. There are a number of moves picked up by the kid-based measure that
are not reflected in the father’s reported migration status, and somewhat fewer discrepancies in the
opposite direction. The sources of these discrepancies are a topic for further inquiry, but it cannot be
assumed a priori that the estimate based on the census’s 5-year residence question is superior. For
example, it seems plausible to us that parents’ memories regarding where they were living when a child
was born may be more accurate than their memories about where they were living on a specific date 5
years ago. Given the substantial correlation between the measures, and the positive relationship between
the child-based migration rate and the age of the reference child, we are confident that the child-based
measure is at least a reasonable approximation of family migration propensities.26

25

It may be less representative for specific population sub-groups, such as African-Americans
(see below).
26
We can also examine the extent to which the birth state of children 4-5 years old and the state
of residence of the father 5 years prior were the same. This percentage was 96.5 in 1940, 92.4 in 1970,
16

Interstate migration propensities of families with children
Figures 9 and 10 present the basic trends of interstate migration rates using the kid-based
measure. Figure 9 presents the rates for each age of the reference child, while Figure 10 is for 4-5 year
olds, the measure closest to a 5-year migration rate. The U shape of the series of migration propensities
that appeared in the birthplace data for adults is also evident here. Migration rates tended to fall between
1850 and 1880 and began to rise after 1900, particularly after 1940. In Figure 9, the older the child
observed, the greater the likelihood of a move (the curves shift up with age), consistent with the older
child’s longer period at risk of migration.
The strong dip in migration rates in 1940 is noteworthy. In Figure 9, this dip is especially
dramatic for nine-year-olds, and hardly evident at all for one-year-olds. A child of nine in 1940 was born
in 1930 or 1931 and lived through the worst years of the Great Depression, when migration rates were
apparently dramatically reduced. A child of age one in 1940 was born in 1938 or 1939, when the
economy was in recovery and migration had presumably picked up again. The evidence of age
compression in migration rates in 1940 illustrates the promise of the children’s birthplace measure as a
means of pinpointing the timing of changes in migration propensity. It also suggests that 1940 was an
unusual year for migration rates, and that the overall trend was probably upward after 1900.

Gross interregional migration flows
Using the family-based migration measure we can also track gross interregional flows over time.
Figures 11 through 14 show gross in- and out-migration rates for the four U.S. regions over the period
1850-1990. Out-migration from the Northeast and the South exhibit the familiar U-shaped pattern, while
in-migration was U-shaped for the Midwest and downward sloping for the West during the late
nineteenth century. After 1900, out-migration rates rise in every region. An interpretation of these

92.0 in 1980, and 93.1 in 1990. It cannot be derived for 1960 given the variables in the census sample.
17

patterns would be that around the middle of the 19th century, migration rates were high as people left the
Northeast and South and populated the Midwest and West. Overall migration propensities declined as
the settlement process slowed in the late 1800s. After 1900, the rising propensity to move was associated
with increased interregional flows in all directions.

Covariates of five-year moves by families with children
We estimated migration probits analogous to those presented in Section 3, using as a dependent
variable the migration measure based on families with a reference child 4 or 5 years old. The
independent variables included the age of the child (to control for the extra year at risk of moving for a
five-year-old), the ages of each parent, the race and nativity of the father27, the number of siblings in the
household and the presence of a very young (under 2) sibling, and two characteristics of the state of birth
of the reference child: state size and region. Probit coefficients for each census year are provided in the
appendix Table A2. The regressors used here are available for each year in our samples. Below we
consider the effects of literacy and education, which are not consistently available across all years.
In most years, the basic controls have the expected signs. The migration propensity tends to be
greater if the reference child is a year older (5 instead of 4), which is consistent with the pattern in Figure
9. Older parents tend to be somewhat less likely to move, although the coefficient on the age of the
mother is not often statistically significant. Migration is significantly less likely from a larger state after
1940, although the effect is rather small in magnitude. Families with more children are less likely to
move, although interestingly this effect is offset by a greater tendency for families with children under 2
to migrate. In most years, families with foreign-born fathers are less likely to move, but these
coefficients are not consistently statistically significant.

27

Nativity and race of the mother tend to be highly collinear with these characteristics of the
father, and added little explanatory power to the probit, so they were excluded in the estimates reported
here.
18

The probit results indicate that families with a black father were less likely to move in almost
every census year. The difference is both statistically and economically significant. In 1950 and 1960,
for example, near the height of the African-American migration, black families in the sample were
actually about 5 percentage points less likely to move than whites, relative to an average migration rate
on the order of 13 percent. This contrasts with the finding above (Figure 5) that black adults were overall
more likely than whites to have left their birth state at mid-century. The discrepancy is explained by the
fact that the black migrants during these years were disproportionately single, childless, and/or single
parents, as compared with the white migrants. By 1990, the racial gap in migration propensities had
closed completely, a change that may reflect convergence in migration behavior or possibly changes in
sample composition.28

Increased educational attainment and the rise of migration rates
The IPUMS samples allow us to include an additional covariate for the father’s literacy for the
years 1850 through 1920, and the father’s educational attainment for 1940 on.29 Education has a strong
and statistically significant positive effect on migration propensity. Figure 15 shows the effects of
literacy and educational dummy variables when they are added to the demographic variables considered
above. The effect of literacy is generally rather small, but it is positive and significantly different from
zero by 1900. From 1940 on, educational attainment has a large and significant positive effect.
The strength of the education variable suggests that rising educational attainment over the course
of the twentieth century might help explain rising rates of internal migration. Unfortunately, the census
only began asking about educational attainment in 1940. Still, it is possible to use the estimated effect of

28

Between 1970 and 1990, the percentage of black families with children headed by a single
parent increased substantially. Consequently, our sample of two-parent black families represents a
declining proportion of all black families, and cannot be assumed to be representative of the
characteristics and migration behavior of all black families.
29
We have also run the probits including the mother’s literacy and education, with qualitatively
similar results.
19

education in one of the census cross-sections to generate a counterfactual estimate of the impact of
education using aggregate measures of educational attainment. Specifically, we make use of Goldin’s
(1999, Table CG.A.11) series on high-school graduation rates to predict the propensity to migrate. We
first estimate a model of migration, including as regressors the above demographic variables and a
dummy variable for the father having 12 or more years of schooling. We then use the probit coefficients
from one of the years and the mean values of the regressors and Goldin’s high-school graduation rate in
each year to predict the time path of the migration rate. To the extent that this counterfactual tracks the
increase in actual migration rates, we can conclude that rising education is a plausible explanation of the
trend.
The calculation is necessarily imprecise. First, census responses may overstate actual
educational attainment, so the measure of schooling that we use in our estimates is subject to
measurement error (Goldin 1998).30 Second, using the means of the regressors to predict probabilities
from the probit is not strictly correct, because of the nonlinearity of the probit function. Third, we have
had to estimate the stock of high-school graduates for synthetic cohorts in the prime-age population from
Goldin’s “flow” series of high-school graduates among 17-year-olds. To do this, we have simply
assumed that the percentage of high-school graduates in any given cohort remains constant, and
calculated an unweighted average of the percentage of graduates among 27, 37, and 47-year olds each
decade.31 Finally, the use of high-school graduation as the sole measure of educational attainment fails to
capture the large impact of additional schooling on migration propensity at all schooling levels, which
can be seen in Figure 15. Undoubtedly more sophisticated estimates could be developed, but our purpose

30

In addition, years of schooling fail to capture the quality of education, which varied by region,
race, and census year.
31
For example, the percentage of 17-year-olds who graduated from high school was 6 in 1900, 9
in 1910, and 16 in 1920. Thus we calculate the percentage of 27, 37, and 47 year olds who were highschool graduates in 1930 as (16+9+6)/3 = 10.3%. These three ages are roughly consistent with the ages
of most fathers in our family sample. This procedure simply ignores the diluting effect of immigrants
who arrived after age 17 and were presumably less likely to be high-school educated than those who were
children in the United States.
20

here is to see whether the rough magnitude of the education effect is large enough to have made a
significant contribution to the rise of migration rates since 1900.
We ran the counterfactual using probit coefficients from 1940, 1960, and 1990. All three tell a
similar story. The results using the 1960 coefficients are presented in Figure 16. The heavy series with
diamond markers is the actual average 5-year migration rate from our samples. The series labeled “Mean
HS (a)” is the counterfactual that uses the 1960 probit coefficients, sample means of the demographic
variables each year, and the percent high school graduates based on the Goldin series for each year. The
series labeled “Mean HS (b)” coincides with Mean HS (a) before 1940 and then replaces the Goldin
high-school series with the reported high-school graduate rates from our samples after 1940. Table 6
reports the values of the two high-school variables used in the counterfactuals.
Although the decade-to-decade changes differ between the actual and counterfactual series, it is
clear that the counterfactuals account quite well for the basic upward trend in migration propensity over
the past hundred years. And it is education doing the work here. The counterfactual series labeled “1920
HS” holds the high-school graduate rate fixed at its 1920 level, while allowing all the other regressors to
vary over time. This counterfactual, which excludes the effect of changing educational attainment,
exhibits a slight upward trend, but leaves most of the increase unaccounted for.
The counterfactuals show that the association between education and migration is strong enough
to account for essentially the entire increase in migration propensities of families with children over the
twentieth century. Identifying the exact mechanisms whereby schooling might have encouraged or
facilitated mobility are beyond the scope of this paper, but it is not hard to think of some. Educated
workers may be better informed of distant opportunities elsewhere, they may possess general skills that
are more readily transferred to new places or labor markets, and they may be less capital-constrained,
which would matter if moving involves a large fixed cost.32 But correlation need not imply causation.

32

For further discussion see Chiswick (2000).
21

Educational attainment could also be a proxy for omitted variables, such as occupation or income.
Occupation is available in the census sample for every year, but we have not included occupational
controls here because occupation is likely to be endogenous to interstate moves. An important area for
future research is to investigate the underlying mechanisms whereby education was associated with the
increasing geographical mobility of Americans.

5. Conclusions
The IPUMS data show considerable promise for describing and analyzing internal migration over
the past century and a half. In this paper we have presented two alternative measures of interstate
migration derived from information on current residence and place of birth: one for individuals, based on
the individual’s state of birth, and the other for families with young children, based on the child’s state of
birth. Both measures suggest that for the country as a whole, migration propensities followed a broad Ushaped trend after 1850, falling until around the turn of the century and then rising gradually over much
of the twentieth century.
The migration measure based on moves by families with young children takes advantage of
census information to pinpoint the timing of interstate moves with much greater accuracy than they can
be by examining the state of birth of adults. Still, the measure has some disadvantages. Because we have
restricted our sample to two-parent families, we do not capture the behavior of single parents or childless
adults. The technique could easily be extended to the migration of single parents, but cannot be used for
the childless. This appears to pose a particular problem in examining the migration behavior of AfricanAmericans during the Great Migration, for it would appear that these migrants were disproportionately
childless. On the other hand, because so much of the Great Migration took place after 1940, the state-ofbirth variables employed here can be augmented by direct migration questions from the census for those
without children.

22

Probit analysis of 5-year migration rates derived from the family data suggests that rising
educational attainment offers a potential explanation of the upward trend of migration propensity after
1900, although it could also be proxying for other factors. In future work with these data, we plan to
explore the role of education in increasing mobility, geographic patterns of gross and net interstate
migration, and the role of economic incentives in the migration decision. In particular, we are interested
in the elasticity of migration with respect to locational differences in wages or incomes. This question is
central to understanding the role of migration in the geographical integration of labor markets.

23

References
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Convergence across States and Regions,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1 (1991), 107-182.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1 (1992), 1-75.
Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars, and Stephen J. Trejo, “Self-Selection and Internal Migration in
the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics 32:2 (September 1992), 159-85.
Carrington, William J., Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath, “Migration with Endogenous Moving
Costs,” American Economic Review 86:4 (September 1996), 909-30.
Chiquiar, Daniel, and Gordon H. Hanson, International Migration, Self-Selection, and the Distribution of
Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 9242 (October 2002).
Chiswick, Barry R., “Are Immigrants Favorably Self-Selected? An Economic Analysis,” in Caroline D.
Brettell and James F. Hollifield, eds., Migration Theory: Talking Across Disciplines (New York:
Routledge: 2000).
Collins, William J., “When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black Migration,”
Journal of Economic History 57:3 (September 1997), 607-632.
DaVanzo, Julie, “Does Unemployment Affect Migration?–Evidence from Micro Data,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 60:4 (November 1978), 504-514.
David, Paul A., “Fortune, Risk, and the Microeconomics of Migration,” in Paul A. David and Melvin W.
Reder, eds., Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz (New
York: Academic Press, 1974), 21-88.
Eldridge, Hope T., “Demographic Analyses,” Part One of Eldridge, Hope T., and Dorothy Swaine
Thomas, Population Redistribution and Economic Growth: United States, 1870-1950, vol. III,
Demographic Analyses and Interrelations (Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1964).
Ferrie, Joseph P., “Migration to the Frontier in Mid-Nineteenth Century America: A Re-Examination of
Turner’s ‘Safety Valve’,” Working paper (July 1997).
Ferrie, Joseph P., “How Ya Gonna Keep ‘Em Down on the Far [When They’ve Seen Schenectady]?:
Rural-to-Urban Migration in 19th Century America, 1850-1870,” Working paper (Undated).
Fishback, Price V., “Operation of ‘Unfettered’ Labor Markets: Exit and Voice in American Labor
Markets at the Turn of the Century,” Journal of Economic Literature 36:2 (June 1998), 722-65.
Fishback, Price V., William C. Horrace, and Shawn Kantor, “Do Federal Programs Affect Internal
Migration? The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility During the Great Depression,” NBER
Working Paper No. 8283 (May 2001).

24

Gallaway, Lowell, and Richard K. Vedder, “Mobility of Native Americans,” Journal of Economic
History 31:3 (September 1971), 613-649.
Goldin, Claudia, “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of Secondary
Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic History 58:2 (June 1998), 345-74.
Goldin, Claudia, “A Brief History of Education in the United States,” NBER Working Paper Series on
Historical Factors in Long Run Growth, Historical Paper 119 (August 1999).
Greenwood, Michael J., “Research on Internal Migration in the United States: A Survey,” Journal of
Economic Literature 13:2 (1975), 397-433.
Greenwood, Michael J., “Human Migration: Theory, Models, and Empirical Studies,” Journal of
Regional Science 25:4 (1985), 521-44.
Greenwood, Michael J., “Internal Migration in Developed Countries,” ch. 12 in Mark R. Rosenzweig and
Oded Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and Family Economics, vol. 1B (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1997),
647-720.
Gregory, James N., “The Southern Diaspora and the Urban Dispossessed: Demonstrating the Census
Public Use Microdata Samples,” Journal of American History 82:1 (June 1995), 111-134.
Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson, “What Explains Wage Gaps between Farm and City?
Exploring the Todaro Model with American Evidence, 1890-1941,” Economic Development and Cultural
Change 40:2 (January 1992), 267-94.
Kim, Sukkoo, “Economic Integration and Convergence: U.S. Regions, 1840-1987,” Journal of Economic
History 58:3 (September 1998), 659-83.
Long, Larry H., “Migration Differentials by Education and Occupation: Trends and Variations,”
Demography 10:2 (May 1973), 243-58.
Mitchener, Kris James, and Ian W. McLean, “U.S. Regional Growth and Convergence, 1880-1980,”
Journal of Economic History 59:4 (December 1999), 1016-42.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L., “One Market or Many? Labor Market Integration in the Late NineteenthCentury United States,” Journal of Economic History 50:3 (September 1990), 85-107.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L., “Looking for Work, Searching for Workers: U.S. Labor Markets after the Civil
War,” Social Science History 18 (Fall 1994), 377-403.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L., “Was There a National Labor Market at the End of the Nineteenth Century?
New Evidence on Earnings in Manufacturing,” Journal of Economic History 56:3 (September 1996),
626-56.
Ross, Frank A., and Andrew G. Truxal, “Primary and Secondary Aspects of Interstate Migration,”
American Journal of Sociology 37:3 (November 1931), 435-444.

25

Ruggles, Steven, and Matthew Sobek, et. al., Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 2.0
(Minneapolis: Historical Census Projects, University of Minnesota, 1997).
Sandefur, Gary D., and Wilbur J. Scott, “A Dynamic Analysis of Migration: An Assessment of the
Effects of Age, Family and Career Variables,” Demography 18:3 (August 1981), 355-68.
Schaefer, Donald F., “Locational Choice in the Antebellum South,” Journal of Economic History 49:1
(March 1989), 145-65.
Schwartz, Aba, “Migration, Age, and Education,” Journal of Political Economy 84:4, part 1 (August
1976), 701-20.
Shryock, Henry S. Jr., Population Mobility within the United States (Chicago: Community and Family
Study Center, University of Chicago, 1965).
Steckel, Richard H., “The Economic Foundations of East-West Migration during the 19th Century,”
Explorations in Economic History 20 (1983), 14-36.
Stewart, James I., “Migration to the Agricultural Frontier and Economic Mobility, 1860-1880,” Paper
presented at 42nd Cliometrics Conference, North Carolina State University (May 2003).
Todaro, Michael P., “A Model of Labor Migration and Urban Unemployment in Less Developed
Countries,” American Economic Review 59:1 (1969), 138-48.
Treyz, George I., Dan S. Rickman, Gary L. Hunt, and Michael J. Greenwood, “The Dynamics of U.S.
Internal Migration,” Review of Economics and Statistics 75:2 (May 1993), 209-214.
Wilson, Franklin D., “Components of Change in Migration and Destination-Propensity Rates for
Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Areas: 1935-1980,” Demography 25:1 (February 1988), 129-39.
Wright, Gavin, Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the Civil War (New
York: Basic Books, 1986).

26

Table 1: Comparison of interstate migration rates since birth and in the five years preceding
census (percent)

Age group
10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

Moved since birth
12.6
23.3
30.4
33.1
34.5
36.1
38.2

Moved last five years
4.5
8.7
7.5
5.1
3.9
3.3
2.6

1960

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

19.2
32.3
34.8
35.6
36.1
36.6
37.6

8.6
19.8
11.1
6.5
4.6
4.4
3.9

1970

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

19.1
32.9
34.9
35.5
35.4
35.8
35.8

8.5
19.9
12.2
6.6
4.2
4.3
3.7

1980

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

22.3
31.9
38.1
39.3
39.4
39.7
40.2

9.3
17.0
12.9
7.4
4.8
5.2
3.8

1990

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

21.8
32.7
36.7
40.8
41.0
41.2
41.6

9.3
16.8
12.1
8.0
5.5
5.2
3.7

1940

Source: IPUMS samples of U.S. Census (Ruggles 1997). Samples restricted to individuals with known
state of residence at time of birth, 5 years prior to the census, and on the census date.

Table 2: Distribution of 5-year movers (percent)

Age group
10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

Returned to
birth state
18.1
13.7
17.3
18.9
18.0
18.8
17.1

Left birth state
62.9
62.4
46.3
37.5
35.1
33.3
35.8

Moved between two
non-birth states
18.9
23.9
36.4
43.7
46.9
47.9
47.0

1970

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

18.9
19.0
22.9
21.8
21.3
22.0
22.2

49.4
50.1
31.0
29.6
31.1
36.2
35.9

31.8
30.9
46.2
48.7
47.6
41.8
41.9

1980

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

17.6
17.8
19.9
21.4
18.5
17.3
17.7

48.8
47.2
31.7
27.8
32.5
39.1
35.9

33.6
34.9
48.5
50.7
49.0
43.7
46.4

1990

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

18.0
16.9
20.4
18.7
20.0
18.5
19.4

51.1
48.3
33.5
29.6
31.2
35.7
34.4

30.9
34.7
46.1
51.7
48.8
45.8
46.2

1940

Source: See Table 1.

Table 3: Percent moving during 5 years prior to census by previous migration status

Age group

Lived in same state
at birth and 5 years
before census
3.2
6.7
4.8
2.8
2.1
1.7
1.5

Moved between birth and 5 years before census
Include returns
to birth state
15.8
17.2
14.2
10.0
7.5
6.1
4.5

Exclude returns
to birth state
8.1
10.9
9.6
7.0
5.4
4.4
3.3

1940

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

1970

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

5.0
13.6
5.7
3.0
2.0
2.4
2.1

26.0
37.1
24.9
13.3
8.3
7.9
6.7

16.3
23.0
16.6
9.2
5.7
5.2
4.4

1980

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

5.6
11.0
6.4
3.4
2.5
3.3
2.3

24.4
33.4
24.0
13.8
8.4
8.2
6.2

16.0
22.1
17.0
9.7
6.1
5.9
4.5

1990

10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

5.8
11.2
6.3
4.0
2.9
3.1
2.2

24.3
31.6
23.0
14.2
9.4
8.3
6.0

15.3
21.2
15.9
10.4
6.6
5.9
4.2

Source: See Table 1.

Table 4: Comparison of kid-based and census 5-year move probabilities (percent)

Year
1940
1960
1970
1980
1990

Kid-based
measure
7.0
13.3
14.3
15.2
14.7

Mothers
6.1
12.5
13.0
13.4
12.2

Census 5-year migration rate
Family sample
All Men 20-49
Fathers
Fathers 20-49
6.0
6.2
7.7
12.9
13.2
14.9
13.3
13.7
14.9
13.5
13.6
14.2
12.3
12.4
13.2

Notes: Kid-based measure is percentage of children ages 4 or 5 at the time of the census whose birth state
differed from the family’s state of residence on the census date. Census migration rate is percentage of
individuals reporting a state of residence five years before the census date different from their state of
residence on the census date.
Source: IPUMS samples.

Table 5: Cross-tabulation of kid-based and census 5-year migration measures (percent)

Father
Year

Kid

1940

No move
Move

92.0
2.0

1.0
5.0

1960

No move
Move

84.2
2.9

2.5
10.4

1970

No move
Move

83.1
3.6

2.6
10.7

1980

No move
Move

82.5
4.1

2.3
11.1

1990

No move
Move

83.8
3.9

1.6
10.7

Notes and source: See Table 4.

No move

Move

Table 6: High school graduation rates used in counterfactuals (percent)

Year
1850
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990

Mean HS (a)
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.7
4.0
6.0
10.3
18.0
32.0
46.3
60.0
68.7
72.7

Mean HS (b)
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.7
4.0
6.0
10.3
21.9
40.4
52.7
65.6
79.7
87.8

Source: Goldin 1999, Table CG.A.11, IPUMS samples.

Table A1: Coefficients from migration probits for 30-39 year olds with known state of birth
Dependent variable: Living in state different from birth state
Coefficients expressed as marginal probability (dF/dX) evaluated at sample means
Variable
Age
SE
Female
SE
Black
SE
Midwest
SE
South
SE
West
SE
Sqrt(land area)/100
SE

1850
0.007470
0.001248
-0.054093
0.007230
-0.149191
0.020012
0.075374
0.013447
0.194897
0.007885
-0.381215
0.029606
-0.012290
0.004360

1860
0.001875
0.001084
-0.064455
0.006265
-0.132490
0.019083
0.078710
0.009787
0.099209
0.007102
-0.379314
0.018374
0.002050
0.003930

1870
0.007765
0.000903
-0.047649
0.005258
-0.108162
0.007725
0.073618
0.007697
0.052590
0.006611
-0.241073
0.030601
-0.007760
0.003370

1880
0.004239
0.000761
-0.044031
0.004416
-0.080941
0.006682
0.087745
0.006215
0.031799
0.005756
-0.149853
0.028304
-0.012700
0.002650

1900
0.005497
0.000781
-0.037224
0.004625
-0.047748
0.007685
0.146313
0.006369
0.065167
0.006803
0.037069
0.019461
-0.024790
0.002370

1910
0.003291
0.000792
-0.036952
0.004574
-0.013515
0.007699
0.161674
0.006528
0.053735
0.006864
0.040298
0.016267
-0.013570
0.002090

Age
SE
Female
SE
Black
SE
Midwest
SE
South
SE
West
SE
Sqrt(land area)/100
SE

1940
0.004918
0.000376
-0.002576
0.002185
0.065480
0.003933
0.113972
0.003231
0.101487
0.003300
0.189344
0.006400
-0.015320
0.000879

1950
0.001181
0.000366
-0.006090
0.002091
0.109616
0.004000
0.102522
0.003088
0.113035
0.003131
0.177524
0.005404
-0.013420
0.000833

1960
0.003767
0.000353
-0.002765
0.002015
0.069436
0.003599
0.088859
0.002948
0.146942
0.002963
0.114901
0.004790
-0.018020
0.000767

1970
0.000607
0.000370
-0.012827
0.002148
0.030468
0.003616
0.063798
0.003169
0.120286
0.003149
0.098666
0.004933
-0.021550
0.000809

1980
0.004926
0.000324
0.001693
0.001849
0.032519
0.003150
0.029447
0.002709
0.041417
0.002716
0.068468
0.003889
-0.026650
0.000696

1990
0.003241
0.000287
0.003957
0.001638
-0.050828
0.002575
0.015994
0.002372
0.018647
0.002455
0.044175
0.003327
-0.024810
0.000610

Source: IPUMS samples.

1920
0.003625
0.000461
-0.023834
0.002652
0.012006
0.004638
0.138028
0.003807
0.067820
0.004108
0.100672
0.008891
-0.012600
0.001140

Table A2: Coefficients from migration probits for families with 4-5 year old reference child
Dependent variable: Reference child living in state different from birth state
Coefficients expressed as marginal probability (dF/dX) evaluated at sample means
Variable
Child age
SE
Mother's age
SE
Father's age
SE
Father black
SE
Father for-born
SE
Number of children
SE
Sibling under 2
SE
Midwest
SE
South
SE
West
SE
Sqrt(land area)/100
SE

Child age
SE
Mother's age
SE
Father's age
SE
Father black
SE
Father for-born
SE
Number of children
SE
Sibling under 2
SE
Midwest
SE
South
SE
West
SE
Sqrt(land area)/100
SE

1850
0.015811
0.010167
0.001941
0.001075
-0.000811
0.000916
-0.064391
0.024310
-0.004864
0.015485
-0.006614
0.003091
0.003015
0.011485
0.045729
0.015688
0.091357
0.015717

1860
0.022120
0.024312
0.000364
0.000965
-0.001309
0.000822
-0.074811
0.025333
-0.018418
0.009892
-0.006114
0.002865
0.005933
0.009947
0.016670
0.011355
0.053633
0.013183
-0.046753
0.034344
-0.012130 -0.006390
0.006380 0.004720

1870
0.008661
0.006987
-0.000328
0.000732
-0.000479
0.000607
-0.055392
0.008781
-0.015813
0.007844
-0.001561
0.002229
0.018111
0.008490
0.018212
0.009453
0.005855
0.010306
-0.038146
0.019842
-0.004330
0.003710

1880
0.012638
0.005362
-0.000614
0.000572
-0.000315
0.000456
-0.052395
0.006429
-0.010585
0.006229
-0.007855
0.001804
-0.000219
0.006334
0.035177
0.007884
0.011393
0.008582
0.049674
0.024862
-0.004070
0.002660

1900
0.004626
0.005887
-0.000874
0.000648
-0.000134
0.000536
-0.028331
0.008520
-0.001064
0.007480
-0.003743
0.001951
-0.017414
0.006763
0.036708
0.009277
0.021408
0.010488
0.038215
0.022462
-0.002370
0.002550

1910
0.026588
0.007093
-0.001135
0.000829
0.000015
0.000662
-0.055552
0.009659
0.000292
0.009273
-0.009735
0.002421
0.011944
0.009092
0.034663
0.010896
0.012922
0.011590
0.035400
0.021301
0.000808
0.002950

1940
0.004707
0.003393
-0.000841
0.000388
0.000156
0.000316
-0.020668
0.005398
-0.024020
0.005110
-0.009445
0.001173
-0.002885
0.004853
0.041629
0.006266
0.055146
0.006286
0.085134
0.012784
-0.003120
0.001300

1960
0.020119
0.003762
-0.001296
0.000490
-0.003323
0.000433
-0.052902
0.005698
0.009809
0.010629
-0.010165
0.001461
0.015122
0.005015
0.030697
0.005959
0.090982
0.006572
0.085233
0.009499
-0.007330
0.001320

1970
0.012992
0.004087
0.000090
0.000522
-0.003777
0.000464
-0.052467
0.006126
-0.007136
0.009249
-0.006385
0.001599
0.009249
0.005586
0.016766
0.006408
0.079369
0.006834
0.125872
0.010592
-0.013370
0.001480

1980
0.013329
0.004440
0.001086
0.000630
-0.001768
0.000530
-0.039071
0.007185
-0.010533
0.008096
-0.007800
0.002272
0.020579
0.006339
0.009096
0.007114
0.043975
0.007226
0.095006
0.010439
-0.013780
0.001560

1990
0.006821
0.004210
0.000069
0.000558
-0.001983
0.000482
0.001749
0.007994
-0.021082
0.006539
-0.004297
0.002249
0.015766
0.006035
0.007461
0.006993
0.060109
0.007081
0.056912
0.008985
-0.011710
0.001360

Source: IPUMS samples.

1950
0.020998
0.003393
-0.000282
0.000429
-0.002884
0.000358
-0.053283
0.005136
-0.016221
0.007529
-0.021938
0.001206
0.034942
0.004900
0.030561
0.005550
0.075995
0.005695
0.135839
0.010060
-0.009620
0.001260

1920
0.009116
0.004305
0.000004
0.000481
-0.001020
0.000399
-0.015213
0.007730
0.002477
0.005660
-0.010354
0.001467
-0.004151
0.005424
0.033120
0.006745
0.038410
0.007570
0.062981
0.013181
0.000559
0.001730

Figure 1
Percentage of age cohort having left birth state during preceding 10
years, by age at the time of the census
25

20

15
1960
1970
1980
1990

10

5

0

-5
20-29

30-39

40-49

50-59

60-69

70-79

Figure 2
Census 5-year migration rates,
by age at census (percent)
25

20

15

1960
1970
1980
1990
1940

10

5

0

-5
20-29

30-39

40-49

50-59

60-69

70-79

Figure 3
Proportion having left state of origin by age group,
IPUMS samples
0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

0.0

0-9
10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

Figure 4
Effect of gender on probability of leaving birth state, 30-39 year olds,
differential for female relative to male
0.01
0.00
-0.01

dF/dX

-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
-0.06
-0.07
1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

Note: Effect based on probit coefficient, controlling for age,
race, region of origin, and size of state of origin.

1990

Figure 5
Effect of race on probability of leaving birth state, 30-39 year olds,
differential for black relative to white
0.15
0.10

dF/dX

0.05
0.00
-0.05
-0.10
-0.15
-0.20
1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

Note: Effect based on probit coefficient, controlling for age,
gender, region of origin, and size of state of origin. White
includes all non-black races.

1990

Figure 6
Effect of region of origin on probability of leaving birth state,
30-39 year olds, relative to Northeast (=0)
0.25
0.20

dF/dX

0.15
0.10

Midwest
South
West

0.05
0.00
-0.05
-0.10
1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

Note: Effect based on probit coefficient, controlling for age,
gender, race, and size of state of origin.

1990

Figure 7
Effect on probability of leaving birth state of increasing the size of
the state of origin by 100 units (square root of square km),
30-39 year olds
0.005
0.000

dF/dX

-0.005
-0.010
-0.015
-0.020
-0.025
-0.030
1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

Note: Effect based on probit coefficient, controlling for age,
gender, race, and region of origin. For comparison, a move
from NY to CA would increase sqrt(area) by 286.

1990

Figure 8
Actual and counterfactual rates of leaving birth state,
30-39 year olds
0.40
0.38
0.36

Proportion

0.34
0.32
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.24
0.22
0.20
1850

1870

1890
Actual

1910

1930

1950

1970

Counterfactual using 1920 coefficients

1990

Figure 9
MIgration rates by age of reference child
0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

0.00

0 years
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years

Figure 10
Five-year interstate migration rate based on 4-5 year olds
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

0.00

Figure 11
Gross 5-year interregional migration rates of families with children,
Northeast (as percent of families in region 5 years prior to census)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

0

in
out

Figure 12
Gross 5-year interregional migration rates of families with children,
Midwest (as percent of families in region 5 years prior to census)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

0

in
out

Figure 13
Gross 5-year interregional migration rates of families with children,
South (as percent of families in region 5 years prior to census)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

0

in
out

Figure 14
Gross 5-year interregional migration rates of families with children,
West (as percent of families in region 5 years prior to census)
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

18
50
18
60
18
70
18
80
18
90
19
00
19
10
19
20
19
30
19
40
19
50
19
60
19
70
19
80
19
90

0

in
out

Figure 15
Marginal effect of father's literacy or educational
attainment on 5-year migration propensity
(relative to illiterate or 0-4 years of schooling)
0.30
0.25
0.20
literate
5-8 years
9-11 years
12 years
13-15 years
16+ years

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
-0.05
1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

Figure 16
Effect of father's high-school education on predicted 5-year move
probabilities, using 1960 probit coeffs. and mean characteristics
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12

Actual
Mean HS (a)
Mean HS (b)
1920 HS

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

