NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANTICIPATED RAMSEY REFORMS
AND THE UNIFORM TAXATION PRINCIPLE:
THE ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Martín Uribe
Working Paper 9862
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9862
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

We would like to thank Princeton University and the European Central Bank for their hospitality during the
writing of this paper. We benefitted from comments of seminar participants at Rutgers University, the ECB,
the Bundesbank, the University Torcuato Di Tella Summer Camp (Buenos Aires), the NBER Summer
Institute, Duke University, Indiana University, the London School of Economics, the University of Illinois,
and New York University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Anticipated Ramsey Reforms and the Uniform Taxation Principle:
the Role of International Financial Markets
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 9862
July 2003
JEL No. F41, E52, E61, E63
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the role of asset-market completeness for the properties of optimal policy. A
suitable framework for this purpose is the small open economy with complete international asset
markets. For in this environment changes in policy represent country-specific risk diversifiable in
world markets. Our main finding is that the fundamental public finance principle whereby when
taxes on all final goods are available, it is optimal to tax final goods uniformly fails to obtain. In
general, uniform taxation is optimal because it amounts to a nondistorting tax on fixed factors of
production. In the open economy this principle fails because when households can insure against
the risk of a policy reform, initial private asset holdings are contingent on actual policy and thus no
longer represent an inelastically supplied source of income. Two further differences between optimal
policy in the closed and open economies with complete markets are: (a) In the open economy,
optimal consumption and income tax rates are unchanged in response to government purchases
shocks. By contrast, in the closed economy tax rates do respond to innovations in public spending.
(b) In the open economy, the Friedman rule is optimal only if the Ramsey planner has access to
consumption taxes. In the absence of consumption taxes, deviations from the Friedman rule are
large. On the other hand, in the closed economy, the availability of either consumption or income
taxes suffices to render the Friedman rule optimal.
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
grohe@econ.rutgers.edu

Martín Uribe
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
uribe@econ.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

This paper presents an investigation into the role of asset market completeness for the
properties of optimal policy in dynamic general equilibrium models of the macroeconomy. We
focus on environments in which it is possible for individual agents to insure themselves against
policy uncertainty. An ideal framework for this purpose is the small open economy model
with complete international asset markets. In this environment, policy changes represent
idiosyncratic, country-specific shocks, against which domestic residents can insure by trading
in international financial markets.
Since the seminal work of Lucas and Stokey (1983), a large body of research has been
devoted to characterizing optimal fiscal and monetary policy in dynamic macroeconomic
settings. Most of the existing work, however, has limited attention to closed economy environments. In the closed economy, policy changes represent aggregate uninsurable risk. We
instead study Ramsey allocations in a small open economy with access to complete international asset markets. To facilitate comparison, all other aspects of the model economy are
deliberately kept as in existing related closed-economy studies. In particular, money demand
is motivated by a cash-in-advance constraint, and an interest-elastic velocity of circulation
is rationalized by assuming the existence of cash and credit goods as in Lucas and Stokey
(1983). The government must finance a stream of unproductive consumption by printing
money, issuing one-period, state-noncontingent nominal debt, and levying proportional taxes
on income and consumption. The government is assumed to be benevolent in the sense that
it conducts policy so as to maximize the welfare of the representative agent. The government
has access to a commitment technology, so that announced policies are perfectly credible.
Output is produced using labor as the sole input. We further restrict attention to the case
of fully flexible prices.
In the closed-economy version of our model, when the government has access to labor
and consumption taxes, optimal policy features a uniform tax on all final goods. This
finding is related to Coleman (2000) who shows that uniform taxation is optimal in a closed,
real economy with capital accumulation. In fact, these results are applications to dynamic
settings of a general principle of modern public finance. Namely, that in the presence of an
inelastically supplied factor, taxing all final goods at the same proportional rate amounts to
an undistorting capital levy on the inelastically supplied factor.
A central result of this paper is to show that the uniform taxation principle fails to obtain
in an open economy with complete asset markets. The reason for the failure of this general
result is that in the open economy under complete markets the initial wealth of private agents
is no longer an inelastically supplied factor. Households can purchase assets whose payoff
is contingent on the tax regime in place in future dates and states. As a consequence, the
initial net foreign asset position of the country is a function of the tax regime and therefore
represents an endogenous variable for the Ramsey planner.
The dependence of net foreign assets on tax policy introduces an additional margin for the
Ramsey planner to exploit. In particular, the Ramsey government faces a tradeoff between
a policy that eliminates wedges between marginal rates of substitution and marginal rates
of transformation and one that maximizes the amount of foreign assets that households will
bring into the state in which the Ramsey reform takes place. The first source of tension calls
for taxing all final goods at the same rate. The second source of tension requires setting a
1

low average tax rate on consumption, as foreign assets are fully allocated to consumption
over the agent’s lifetime. The result of this tradeoff is a tax structure that deviates from
the principle of uniform taxation in favor of lower consumption tax rates and higher income
taxes.
We find that for plausible parameterizations the deviations from the principle of uniform
taxation are severe. In our economy there are three types of good, cash goods, credit goods,
and leisure. The government has access to proportional consumption and income taxes.
Consumption taxes apply to both consumption goods uniformly. Income taxes represent
a subsidy on leisure. In addition, the government controls the nominal interest rate. The
nominal interest amounts to an indirect tax on consumption of cash goods. Therefore,
under uniform taxation the nominal interest rate should be zero and the consumption tax
rate should be equal to the negative of the income tax rate. In our economy the Ramsey
planner sets the nominal interest rate to zero thus taxing both types of consumption at the
same rate. However, the Ramsey planner does not tax consumption and leisure uniformly.
Indeed, for the baseline calibration, it is optimal for the government to tax consumption and
to subsidize leisure. Specifically, the Ramsey policy features a consumption tax rate of 9
percent and an income tax rate (a leisure subsidy) of 55 percent.
One may wonder why the violation of the uniform taxation principle occurs across consumption and leisure but does not extend to the consumption of cash and credit goods. In
other words, one may ask why the Friedman rule turns out to be Ramsey optimal. The
intuition behind this result is that a positive nominal interest rate is a less efficient way of
taxing consumption than is an explicit consumption tax. The reason is that positive nominal
interest rates represent a tax on only a fraction of total consumption expenditures, namely,
expenditures on cash goods. Therefore positive nominal interest rates introduce a wedge
between the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal rate of transformation of cash
for credit goods. A consumption tax, on the other hand, applies uniformly to both cash and
credit goods, and thus does not distort this margin.
A further consequence of assuming that residents of the small open economy have access
to complete international asset markets is that neither the Ramsey real allocation nor its
associated consumption and income tax rates adjust in response to government spending
shocks. Government purchases shocks introduce pure wealth effects, which domestic agents
can fully insure against via international financial markets. Thus, given tax rates, the household has no incentive to alter either consumption nor labor supply. The government therefore
finds it optimal to keep tax rates unchanged. It is clear from this argument that the neutrality of government spending shocks vanishes when agents cannot hedge against such shocks.
This is the case either when the economy is closed, so that government purchases shocks
become aggregate uninsurable risk, or when markets are incomplete in the open economy.
A natural question then is how the Ramsey government manages to finance government
purchases shocks in the open economy with complete markets. The Ramsey planner collects
the necessary revenue entirely through surprise changes in the price level. Unexpected inflation represents a capital levy on private holdings of nominal public debt. Thus, surprise
changes in the price level are tantamount to a non-distorting lump-sum tax.
The fiscal consequences of productivity shocks, although not entirely, are also accommodated to a large extend through surprise changes in inflation. Thus, under the optimal
policy inflation is highly volatile. Under the baseline calibration, our model implies that the
2

optimal standard deviation of inflation is 11 percentage points per year. It follows that high
volatility of the inflation rate is a necessary characteristic of optimal policy in the open economy with consumption and income taxes. This need not be the case in the closed economy.
We show that when both consumption and income taxes are available, the Ramsey planner
can support the Ramsey allocation in the closed economy with a constant path of prices.
A further differences between the Ramsey policy in the open and the closed economies
is that in the open economy the availability of consumption taxes is a prerequisite for the
optimality of the Friedman rule. Indeed, in the absence of consumption taxes, optimal
deviations from the Friedman rule can be large. In the open economy with income taxes
only, we find that for the baseline parameterization the average nominal interest rate is 30
percent per year.
The reason why the Ramsey planner resorts to the inflation tax in the open economy
when consumption taxes are unavailable is that a tax on domestic output does not cover all
sources of income. National income in the open economy consists of the sum of domestic
value added and interest income on the country’s net foreign asset holdings. An output tax
thus captures only the non-interest sources of income. Because, as pointed out above, the
nominal interest rate represents a tax on purchases of cash goods, and because eventually
all income is spent on consumption, by setting a positive nominal interest rate, the Ramsey
planner can collect indirectly tax revenue from all sources of national income. In the closed
economy, the Friedman rule is optimal whether the planner has access to consumption taxes
or not. The reason is that in the closed economy an output tax applies to all sources of
income and thus there is no need for the Ramsey planner to use the consumption tax as an
indirect income tax.

2

Anticipated Ramsey Reform and the Uniform Taxation Principle: a Simple Example

In this section, we show by means of a simple example that uniform taxation ceases to be
Ramsey optimal when the Ramsey reform is anticipated and agents can insure against this
eventuality in international asset markets. Consider an economy in which agents live for 2
periods, period −1 and period 0. In period −1, agents’ only activity is to trade in financial
markets. In period 0 agents consume and work. In period 0 the economy is either in state 1
or in state 2. In state 1, the government undergoes a Ramsey reform. The probability that
state 1 occurs is exogenous and denoted by π ∈ (0, 1). The Ramsey planner values only the
utility of the representative agent in state 1. We assume that the Ramsey government can
perfectly commit to any preannounced policy. We will show that the Ramsey planner finds
it in its own best interest to announce already in period −1 his tax policy for state 1. In
this way, the planner can design tax policies so as to induce private agents to shift resources
into the state in which it is in power, state 1, via international capital markets.
Agents are endowed with claims against the government promising to pay b units of
consumption in period 0. In period 0, the government can levy proportional labor income
taxes, τ , and consumption taxes, φ. The budget constraint of the representative household

3

in period −1 is then given by:
E−1 r[b + (1 − τ )wh] ≥ E−1 r(1 + φ)c,

(1)

where the random variable r denotes the price of one unit of consumption in a particular
state of the world in period 0 divided by the probability of occurrence of that state, w
denotes the wage rate in period 0, h denotes labor supply, and c denotes consumption in
period 0. The left-hand side of the budget constraint represents the present discounted value
of income. Income consists of asset returns and after tax wage receipts. The right-handside of the budget constraint shows the present discounted value of after-tax consumption
expenditures. The representative household chooses contingent plans for consumption and
hours worked, {c, h}, so as to maximize expected utility,
max E−1 U (c, h)
subject to (1) taking as given b and the stochastic processes for {τ, φ, r}. Let θ̄ > 0 denote
the Lagrange multiplier associated with the household’s intertemporal budget constraint (1).
Then the household’s first-order optimality conditions are (1) holding with equality and
Uc (c, h) = θ̄r(1 + φ)
−Uh (c0 , h0 ) = θ̄r(1 − τ )

(2)
(3)

for every state.
Output is assumed to be produced with a linear technology
y = h.
For firms to produce a positive and finite quantity it must be the case that w = 1.
The government in each state of period 0 must satisfy its budget constraint:
τ h + φc = g + b,

(4)

where g denotes government purchases, which are assumed to be exogenously given. Likewise
government liabilities, b, are exogenous.

2.1

Ramsey Policy in a Closed Economy

We first characterize optimal anticipated Ramsey policy in a closed economy because in this
case optimal policy conforms to the uniform taxation principle. The intuition why in this
case uniform taxation is optimal is as follows. In our economy private agents are identical.
As a consequence in equilibrium there is no borrowing or lending among them. Thus, in
the closed economy the only assets in positive aggregate net supply are government bonds.
However, by assumption, the amount of government bonds outstanding in each state is
exogenous. It follows that private agents are not able to shift resources across states. In
other words, initial private wealth in period 0 is inelastically given and, in particular, cannot
be influenced by policy. Therefore, it is optimal (non-distorting) for the government to fully
4

tax this inelastically supplied factor. Applying a uniform tax on consumption and leisure is
an indirect way of levying a tax on initial wealth.
Let x1 denote the value of a variable x in state 1. In state 1, the household’s problem
consists in maximizing U (c1 , h1 ) subject to b1 + (1 − τ1 )h1 ≥ (1 + φ1 )c1 . The first-order
conditions of this problem are the budget constraint holding with equality and
−

Uh (c1 , h1 )
1 − τ1
=
.
Uc (c1 h1 )
1 + φ1

(5)

In a closed economy, goods markets must clear state by state, that is,
h1 = g + c1 .

(6)

The Ramsey problem consists in maximizing U (c1 , h1 ) subject to (4) evaluated in state 1,
(5), and (6).
The Pareto optimal allocation in state 1 is the solution to the problem of maximizing
U (c1 , h1 ) subject to the feasibility constraint h1 = g + c1 . Therefore, the Pareto optimal
values of {c1 , h1 } are given by the solution to the following two equations: h1 = c1 + g
and −Uh (c1 , h1 )/Uc (c1 , h1 ) = 1. We now show that the Pareto optimal allocation can be
supported as a competitive equilibrium by setting τ1 = −φ1 . This implies that uniform
taxation of all goods must be Ramsey optimal. Clearly, when τ1 = −φ1 , the Pareto values
of c1 and h1 solve (5) and (6). It remains to show that there exists a value φ1 satisfying
φ1 = −τ1 and (4) evaluated in state 1. It is straightforward from equations (4) and (6) that
this value of φ1 is given by φ1 = −(g + b1 )/g.1
It is worth pointing out that in this example uniform taxation emerges as the Ramsey
optimal policy regardless of the fiscal regime of state 2. We next show that in the open
economy, the Ramsey fiscal regime in one state departs from the uniform taxation principle
regardless of the policy regime in place in the other state.

2.2

Ramsey Policy in the Open Economy

We now consider a small open economy with free capital mobility. The main insight is that
in an open economy with access to complete international asset markets, uniform taxation
fails to be Ramsey optimal. This result depends crucially on the fact that the Ramsey reform
is anticipated. To keep the problem as close as possible to the closed economy case, assume
that the household is endowed in period −1 with an asset which promises that the household
will receive b units of goods in period 0. A competitive equilibrium in the open economy
is then a set of stochastic processes {c, h} and a positive constant θ̄ satisfying (1), (2), (3),
and (4), given state contingent tax policies φ, τ , the exogenous pricing kernel r, the level of
government spending g, and government liabilities b.
There are two formal differences between the open and the closed economies. First, in
the open economy domestic absorption need not equal domestic production state by state.
1

Of course, for there to exist a competitive equilibrium consistent with the Pareto values for c1 and
h1 , it must be the case that φ1 > −1, that is, that b < 0. Alternatively, if the representative household
was assumed to be endowed with a sufficiently large amount of goods, then the Pareto allocation could be
decentralized even with b > 0.

5

That is, in the open economy equation (6) does not apply. Second, in the open economy
the contingent claim prices {πr1 , (1 − π)r2 } are no longer an endogenous variable but rather
determined in international capital markets whose prices the small open economy has to take
as given.
An important determinant of optimal policy is the assumed strategic behavior of governments. One possibility is to focus on Nash equilibria where each government i, i = 1, 2,
takes the fiscal policy of the other government, τj , φj , j 6= i, as given. We believe that
this specification of government behavior is not the most appealing one. For, in t;his case,
players have no choice about their fiscal policy. Specifically, given τj and φj , there exists a unique pair τi , φi , i 6= j that can be supported as a competitive equilibrium outcome. To see this, consider, for example, the reaction function of government 1. Since
government 1 takes as given τ2 and φ2 , equations (2), (3), and (4) evaluated in state 2
uniquely determine c2 , h2 , and θ̄ as functions of τ2 and φ2 . It then follows from the intertemporal budget constraint (1) that d(τ2 , φ2 ) + b1 = (1 + φ1 )c1 − (1 − τ1 )h1 , where
d(τ2 , φ2 ) ≡ (1 − π)r2 [b2 + (1 − τ2 )h2 − (1 + φ2 )c2 ]/(πr1 ). This expression together with
(2), (3), and (4) evaluated in state 1 then implies unique values for φ1 and τ1 . That is,
when government 1 takes both τ2 and φ2 as given, then it in fact ends up with no choice
over its own fiscal policy. Therefore, the resulting Nash equilibrium cannot be regarded as
one in which any government follows a Ramsey-optimal policy. This result is driven by two
features of the assumed behavior of governments: (a) Each government takes as given a tax
policy for the other government that in general (off equilibrium) does not satisfies the other
government’s budget constraint. (b) In choosing a tax regime, each government is assumed
to ensure that it is consistent with a competitive equilibrium, given the policy of the other
government.
Alternatively, one could conceive a situation in which each government assumes that the
other government will choose fiscal policies that ensure fiscal solvency under all possible
circumstances (on or off equilibrium). Specifically, this can be achieved by postulating that
each government chooses its fiscal policy assuming that the other government can choose
only one tax instrument independently. For example, , suppose that government 1 chooses
takes τ2 as given.
To derive the reaction function of government 1, it is convenient to present a simpler
characterization of the competitive equilibrium: Values for {c1 , h1 , θ̄} satisfying
πr1 (h1 − g − c1 ) + (1 − π)r2 [h(θ̄) − g − c(θ̄)] = 0
Uc (c1 , h1 )c1 + Uh (c1 , h1 )h1 − θ̄r1 [g + b + c1 − h1 ] = 0,

(7)
(8)

where h(θ̄) and c(θ̄) are the solution to (2), (3), and (4) evaluated in state 2, are the same
as those satisfying (1)-(4).
To establish this claim, we first show that any {c1 , h1 , θ̄} that satisfy (1)-(4) also satisfy
(7) and (8). Use (4) to write (1) as (7). Then use (2) and (3) to eliminate φ1 and τ1 from
(4) evaluated in state 1 to get (8). Next we show that any {c1 , h1 , θ̄} that satisfy (7) and
(8) also satisfy (1)-(4). From the definition of the functions c(θ̄) and h(θ̄), it follows that
equations (2), (3), and (4) hold in state 2. Pick φ1 and τ1 so that (2) and (3) evaluated in
state 1 hold. Now use these expression to eliminate the marginal utility terms from (8) to
get that (4) holds in state 1. So all that is left to show is that (1) holds. Use (7) and replace
h − g − c in each state with (4). It follows that (1) is satisfied.
6

Recall that the Ramsey planner can announce in advance which policy he will follow
should he be elected, that is, should state 1 materialize. Indeed, it is in the Ramsey planner’s
best interest to do so, for in this way he can attract resources into state 1. The Ramsey
problem then consists in choosing {c1 , h1 , θ̄} at time −1 so as to maximize (??) subject to
(7) and (8), given b, g, contingent claim prices {r0 }, and the functions h(θ̄) and c(θ̄).
The question is whether optimal anticipated Ramsey policy displays uniform taxation,
that is, is φ1 +τ1 = 0, or in terms of the marginal rate of substitution, will −Uh (c1 , h1 )/Uc (c1 , h1 ) =
1. The answer is in general not. To see this let λ and µ be the Lagrange multiplier on (7)
and (8),respectively. The Lagrangian of the Ramsey problem can be written as
L = U (c1 , h1 )

+λ πr1 (h1 − g − c1 ) + (1 − π)r2 [h(θ̄) − g − c(θ̄)]

+µ Uc (c1 , h1 )c1 + Uh (c1 , h1 )h1 − θ̄r1 [g + b + c1 − h1 ]
The associated first-order conditions with respect to c1 and h1 are


∂(Uc (c1 , h1 )c1 + Uh (c1 , h1 )h1 )
Uc (1) − λπr1 + µ
− θ̄r1 = 0
∂c1


∂(Uc (c1 , h1 )c1 + Uh (c1 , h1 )h1 )
− θ̄r1 = 0
−Uh (1) − λπr1 + µ −
∂h1
In the general case, in which µ, the multiplier on the government’s budget constraint is
non-zero, uniform taxation holds only if for the Ramsey real allocation
∂(Uc (c1 , h1 )c1 + Uh (c1 , h1 )h1 )
∂(Uc (c1 , h1 )c1 + Uh (c1 , h1 )h1 )
=
∂c1
∂h1
This is clearly not the case for many commonly used specifications of the period utility
function. For example, in the business cycle literature attention is typically restricted to
preference specifications that are consistent with the facts that per capita consumption is
growing over time whereas per capita hours are not. King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988)
show that for period utility function of the form U (c, h̄ − h), the only period utility function
compatible with growth in consumption but not in hours is U (C, h̄−h) = c1−σ /(1−σ)v(h̄−h)
for σ ≥ 0 and log(c) + v(h̄ − h) for σ = 1. For this class of utility functions, we have that
Uc c + Uh h = U (1 − σ + v 0 /vh). It follows that unless v 0 /vh is independent of h, uniform
taxation fails. Therefore we conclude that for preference specifications that are standard in
business cycle analyzes, anticipated Ramsey reforms do not abide to the principle of uniform
taxation.
The intuition for this result is as follows. Uniform taxation is optimal because it acts
as a non-distorting tax scheme on the initial wealth. Initial wealth is typically regarded
as an inelastically supplied factor. As such it is optimal to tax it fully. However, when
Ramsey reform are anticipated, then the amount of initial wealth that agents bring into
the period is no longer an inelastically supplied factor. Indeed it is a function of the tax
policies that will be implemented in that period. So the Ramsey planner has an incentive
to design the tax structure in such a way that agents shift a lot of wealth out of state 2 into
state 1. This can be achieved by taxing consumption relatively less. (Our numerical work
7

in section 4 shows this for an infinite horizon monetary economy). In the argument above
we assumed that the Ramsey planner can commit in period -1 to the policy actions he will
take in period 0. Typically, in the study of Ramsey policy commitment is interpreted as the
government binding its hands to do in later periods (in which it is in power) what it promised
to do in the first period (it came into power). We extend the meaning of commitment by
assuming that the Ramsey government can commit ex ante, that is, even before it takes
over the government, to its future actions. If we were to assume the contrary, that is,
the commitment technology becomes available only once the government is in power, then
uniform taxation re-emerges as the central characteristic of optimal taxation. In that case
the Ramsey government will take initial wealth as exogenously given and will choose to tax
it fully. However, the latter assumption about the availability of the commitment technology
is less appealing for one may wonder what exactly it is that allows the government to commit
to its actions for any future date and any future contingency but deprives it from doing so
one period before the government takes power. Clearly, if the commitment technology is
in the control of the government it will want to use it even before it actually gets elected
because as we have just shown it yields higher utility to its constituents.

3

The Model

In this section, we develop a simple infinite-horizon model of a small open economy. A
demand for money is motivated by a cash-in-advance constraint. Sales are assumed to have
to be carried out in the buyer’s currency2 . Prices are assumed to be flexible. Asset markets
are complete. The government finances an exogenous stream of unproductive consumption
by issuing non-state-contingent nominal debt, levying distortionary income and consumption
taxes, and printing money.

3.1

Households

Consider an economy populated by a large number of identical households. Each household
c
has preferences defined over processes of consumption of cash goods, cm
t , credit goods, ct ,
and labor effort, ht . Preferences are described by the utility function
E0

∞
X

c
β t U (cm
t , ct , ht ),

(9)

t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) denotes the subjective discount factor, and E0 denotes the mathematical
expectation operator conditional on information available in period 0. The single-period
utility function U is assumed to be increasing in both consumption goods, decreasing in
effort, strictly concave, and twice continuously differentiable.
Each period t ≥ 0, households can purchase two types of financial assets: fiat money,
Mt , and one-period, state-contingent, nominal assets, Dt+1 , which pay one unit of currency
2

Alternatively, one could assume that the seller’s currency is used in transactions. For a comparison of
the consequences of these two alternative transaction technologies for savings, investment, and the exchange
rate, see Helpman and Razin (1984).

8

in a particular state of period t + 1. Money holdings are motivated by a cash-in-advance
constraint on purchases of cash goods of the form
Mt ≥ Pt (1 + φt )cm
t ,

(10)

where Pt denotes the domestic currency price of consumption goods and φt stands for a
proportional consumption tax rate. At the beginning of each period t, after all shocks are
realized, the household chooses its desired holdings of money and contingent claims. Letting
Wt denote the representative household’s nominal financial wealth at the beginning of period
t, we have that
Wt ≥ Mt + Et rt+1 Dt+1 .
The variable rt+1 denotes the period-t price of a claim to one unit of currency in a particular
state of period t + 1 divided by the probability of occurrence of that state conditional on
information available in period t. Thus, the second term on the right-hand side of the above
expression denotes the cost of all contingent claims purchased at the beginning of period t.
Note that Et rt+1 is the period-t price of an asset that pays one unit of currency in every state
in period t + 1. Thus Et rt+1 represents the inverse of the risk-free gross nominal interest
rate. Formally, letting Rt denote the gross risk-free nominal interest rate, we have
Rt =

1
.
Et rt+1

(11)

After the financial market is closed, the household supplies hours in the labor market and
shops for consumption goods. The household’s wealth at the beginning of period t + 1 is
then given by
c
Wt+1 = Mt + Dt+1 + Pt (1 − τt )(wt ht + Πt ) − Pt (1 + φt )(cm
t + ct ),

where τt denotes the income tax rate, wt denotes the real wage rate, and Πt denotes profits
from the ownership of firms.3 Note that because Dt+1 is a random variable measurable with
respect to the information set of period t + 1, Wt+1 is also a random variable measurable
with respect to the information set available in period t + 1. The right-hand side of this
expression displays the difference between the sources of wealth at the beginning of period
t + 1 and consumption expenditures: money carried over from the previous period, Mt ,
plus the payoff of state-contingent claims, Dt+1 , plus wage and profit income net of taxes,
c
Pt (1 − τt )(wt ht + Πt ), minus consumption expenditures, Pt (1 + φt )(cm
t + ct ). Combining the
above three expressions yields the following period-by-period budget constraint
Et rt+1 Wt+1 ≤ Wt −

Rt − 1
c
Mt + Rt−1 [Pt (1 − τt )(wt ht + Πt ) − Pt (1 + φt )(cm
t + ct )].
Rt

(12)

In addition to this budget constraint, the household is subject to the following borrowing
constraint that prevents it from engaging in Ponzi schemes:
lim Et qt+j Wt+j ≥ 0,

j→∞
3

(13)

Note that we are imposing the same tax on labor income as on profits. Taxing profits at a rate less
than one hundred per cent and different from the tax rate applied to labor income, may induce the Ramsey
planner to deviate from the Friedman rule (see Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2001). In this case the Ramsey
planner taxes pure profits indirectly by taxing consumption of cash goods.

9

at all dates and under all contingencies. The variable qt denotes the period-zero price of one
unit of currency to be delivered in a particular state of period t divided by the probability
of occurrence of that state given information available at time 0 and is given by
qt = r1 r2 . . . rt ,

(14)

with q0 ≡ 1. The assumption that preferences display no satiation implies that utilitymaximizing households will always choose allocations such that constraints (12) and (13)
c
both hold with equality. Sequences for {Mt , cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying these two constraints with
equality are the same as those satisfying the following single intertemporal constraint:4
W0 + E0

∞
X

qt+1 Pt (1 − τt )(wt ht + Πt ) = E0

t=0

∞
X

c
qt+1 [Pt (1 + φt )(cm
t + ct ) + (Rt − 1)Mt ] . (15)

t=0

This expression states that total wealth in period zero, which consists of the sum of initial financial wealth and the present discounted value of after-tax labor and profit income,
must equal the present discounted value of consumption expenditures including inflation-tax
c
∞
payments. The household chooses the set of processes {cm
t , ct , ht , Mt }t=0 , so as to maximize
(9) subject to (10) and (15), taking as given the set of processes {Pt , wt , rt+1 , τt , φt , Πt }∞
t=0
and the initial condition W0 . Let the multiplier on the intertemporal budget constraint be
denoted by λ. Define
qt Pt
(16)
λt ≡ λ t .
β
Then the first-order conditions associated with the household’s maximization problem are (10),
(15) holding with equality, and
c
U1 (cm
t , ct , ht ) = (1 + φt )λt

(17)

c
U1 (cm
t , ct , ht )
= Rt
c
U2 (cm
t , ct , ht )

(18)

−

c
(1 − τt )wt
U3 (cm
t , ct , ht )
=
m c
U1 (ct , ct , ht )
(1 + φt )Rt

(Rt − 1)[Mt − Pt (1 + φt )cm
t ] = 0.

(19)
(20)

The interpretation of these optimality conditions is straightforward. First-order condition
(17) states that consumption taxes introduce a wedge between the marginal utility of consumption of cash goods and the marginal utility of real wealth. Optimality condition (18)
shows that the nominal interest rate, Rt , breaks the equality between the marginal rate of
substitution of cash and credit goods and their marginal rate of transformation (unity). As
the opportunity cost of holding money, Rt , increases, households consume relatively more
credit goods and less cash goods. Equation (19) shows that the income tax rate, the consumption tax rate, and the nominal interest rate distort the consumption/leisure margin.
Given the wage rate, households will tend to work less and consume less the higher are τt , φt ,
or Rt . According to first-order condition (20), when the opportunity cost of holding money
4

See Woodford (1994).

10

is strictly positive, Rt > 1, the cash-in-advance constraint is binding. In this case, money
is dominated in rate of return by interest bearing assets, so households choose not to hold
nominal balances beyond the amount strictly necessary to buy the desired quantity of cash
goods.

3.2

Firms

Output, denoted by yt , is produced with a concave technology that takes labor services, ht ,
as the only factor input,
(21)
yt = zt hηt ,
where zt is an exogenous and stochastic productivity shock and η ∈ (0, 1] is a constant
parameter. In closed-economy studies of optimal monetary and fiscal policy it is customary
to assume that the production function is linear in labor (η = 1). In the open economy this
assumption is more problematic because it allows for the possibility of corner solutions. In
particular, when η = 1, the equilibrium labor supply, and thus output, may be nil in certain
states. We avoid this problem by assuming that the marginal product of labor goes to
infinity as effort approaches zero. This problem does not arise in closed economies because
in such environments zero output implies zero consumption (or negative consumption if
public consumption is positive).5
Firms operate in a perfectly competitive environment. Firms can sell either in domestic
or foreign markets. Sales must be carried out in the buyer’s currency. Therefore, in each
period t ≥ 0, firms can sell goods in domestic markets at the price Pt or in foreign markets
at the price Pt∗ . Firms receive payments for goods sold in the goods market of period t
and must pay for the factor inputs used in that market after the financial market of period
t has closed. Like households firms have access to complete assets markets. Due to the
presence of exchange rate risk, in the financial market of period t + 1, the real value of
profits generated in the goods market of period t is random (measurable only with respect
to the information set of period t + 1). Firms are assumed to fully insure against this risk.
Thus, profit distributions in the financial market of period t + 1 are measurable with respect
to the information set of period t and are given by
Pt Πt = zt hηt [αt Pt + (1 − αt )Pt∗ Rt Et rt+1 et+1 ] − Pt wt ht .

(22)

Here, αt ∈ [0, 1] denotes the fraction of production sold domestically. Note that profits
generated in period t are available to households only at the beginning of period t + 1. This
is why the exchange rate prevailing in period t + 1 is used to convert foreign sales revenues
into domestic currency. The firm chooses αt and ht so as to maximize expected profits. It
follows from the first-order conditions of the profit-maximization problem that for firms to
be indifferent between selling domestically and abroad, it must be the case that
Pt = Rt Pt∗ Et rt+1 et+1 .

(23)

Given this condition, firms will choose to demand labor so as to equate the marginal product
of labor to the real wage rate
wt = zt ηhtη−1 .
(24)
5

The main results of the paper still obtain when η is assumed to be unity.

11

3.3

The government

The government faces a stream of public consumption, denoted by gt , that is exogenous,
stochastic, and unproductive. Government expenditures are financed by levying income
taxes at the rate τt and consumption taxes at the rate φt , by printing money, and by issuing one-period, risk-free, nominal obligations, which we denote by Bt . We assume that the
government cannot issue or hold state-contingent assets. We believe that, as a first approximation, this assumption describes well actual financing practices by national governments.
Let At denote nominal government liabilities at the beginning of period t. In the financial
market of period t the government issues money and bonds to finance these liabilities. That
is,
At = Mt + Bt .
At the beginning of period t + 1, total government liabilities are given by
c
At+1 = Mt + Rt Bt + Pt gt − Pt τt (wt ht + Πt ) − Pt φt (cm
t + ct ).

Note that At belongs to the information set of period t − 1 for all t ≥ 0. Combining the
above two expressions, we obtain the government’s sequential budget constraint
c
At+1 = Rt At + Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt (wt ht + Πt ) − φt (cm
t + ct )],

(25)

for t ≥ 0. The government is subject to a no-Ponzi-game constraint of the form
lim Et qt+j At+j ≤ 0,

j→∞

(26)

at all dates and under all contingencies. This constraint is a requirement for the existence
of well defined Ramsey equilibria. In the closed economy, the no-Ponzi-game constraint on
private households implies that in equilibrium limj→∞ Et qt+j At+j ≤ 0. So there is no need
to impose constraint (26). This is because in the closed economy the private sector’s asset
holdings must necessarily match the government’s total liabilities. In the open economy this
is not the case. For both the government and private agents have access to international
capital markets. Thus, the no-Ponzi-game restriction on private households no longer guarantees that the government is not running a Ponzi scheme against the rest of the world.
We assume that a prerequisite for the government to have access to international financial
markets is the satisfaction of a borrowing limit like the one given in equation (26).
A benevolent government seeking to maximize the welfare of private agents will always
choose asset processes such that (26) holds with strict equality. Otherwise, it could implement a lump-sum transfer to private agents, thereby making them better off, without violating its no-Ponzi-game constraint. The monetary/fiscal regime consists in the announcement
of state-contingent plans for the nominal interest rate and the tax rates, {Rt , τt , φt }.

3.4

Equilibrium

We assume free capital mobility. This means that the following no-arbitrage condition must
hold
et+1
∗
= rt+1
; t ≥ 0,
(27)
rt+1
et
12

∗
where rt+1
denotes the period-t foreign-currency price of a claim to one unit of foreign
currency delivered in a particular state of period t+1 divided by the probability of occurrence
of that state conditional on information available in period t.
∗
denote the foreign risk-free nominal interest rate. Then combining
Let Rt∗ ≡ 1/Et rt+1
(23) with the no-arbitrage condition (27) yields

Pt = et Pt∗

Rt
.
Rt∗

(28)

Note that this law-of-one-price condition differs from the usual one, namely Pt = et Pt∗ , by
the interest rate differential, Rt /Rt∗ . This modification of the law-of-one-price condition is a
consequence of two features of our model. First, goods must be purchased with the buyers’
currency and second, in each period goods markets open only after financial markets have
closed.6
We assume that (in period −1) households are able buy contingent claims whose pay-off
is contingent upon the realizations of the exogenous shocks and any potential policy regime
changes occuring in any period t ≥ 0. As a result, we one can show that the individual
household’s marginal utility of wealth, λt , can be written as
λt = θ

qt∗ Pt∗ Rt
,
β t Rt∗

(29)

where θ is an exogenous parameter. To obtain this expression, consider the maximization
problem of the household in period −1. Let λ̃ be the Lagrange multiplier on the household’s
intertemporal budget constraint in period −1 (i.e., the multiplier on the t = −1 version
m c
of equation (15)). Then, the first-order condition with respect to cm
0 is βU1 (c0 , c0 , h0 ) =
(1 + φ0 )λ̃q̃0 P0 . Here q̃0 denotes the price in period -1 of one unit of domestic currency in
a particular state of period zero normalized by the probability of occurrence of that state
conditional upon information available at date -1. At the same time, evaluating equations
c
(16) and (17) at t = 0 yields U1 (cm
0 , c0 , h0 ) = (1 + φ0 )λP0 . It follows that λ = λ̃q̃0 /β. Also
note that by (27) and (28) qt Pt = e0 Pt∗ qt∗ Rt /Rt∗ and that q̃0 = q̃0∗ e−1 /e0 . Combining the last
three expressions and defining θ = q̃0∗ e−1 λ̃/β, yields λ = θPt∗ qt∗ Rt /(Pt qt Rt∗ ). Combining this
expression with (16) we obtain equation (29). Note that θ depends on variables measurable
with respect to information sets dated before period 0. The Ramsey planner in general will
internalize the dependence of λ̃—and thus of θ—on his actions. However, it should be clear
from the example presented in section 2 that as the probability of reform becomes small,
this dependence vanishes. We assume that the probability of reform is indeed small, so that
the Ramsey planner can treat θ as given. We note that the failure of uniform taxation does
not depend on this assumption, as demostrated by the example of section 2.
Combining (22) with (23), equilibrium profits are given by
Πt = zt hηt − wt ht .
Using this expression in the government budget constraint (25) to eliminate profits, we obtain
c
At+1 = Rt At + Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )].
6

(30)

The usual law-of-one-price condition would obtain if one were to assume that transactions must be
carried out in the sellers’ currency, as is maintained, for example, in Stockman (1980) and Helpman (1981),
or if one were to assume that goods markets open before that period’s financial markets (Svensson timing).

13

For households to have well defined demand functions it must be the case that the nominal
interest be non-negative, that is,
Rt ≥ 1.
We are now ready to formally define an equilibrium.
Definition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium With Consumption and Income Taxes) A
competitive equilibrium is a set of stochastic processes {Pt , et , rt+1 , Mt , At+1 , cct, cm
t , ht , qt ,
wt , yt , λt } satisfying (10), (11), (14), (17), (18), (19), (20), (21), (24), (26) holding with
equality, (27), (28), (29), and (30) given the parameter θ, exogenous stochastic processes
∗
, qt∗ }, policy sequences τt , φt , and Rt ≥ 1, and the initial condition A0 .
{gt , zt , Pt∗ , rt+1
Note the definition of a competitive equilibrium involves neither the variable W0 nor the
household’s intertemporal budget constraint, equation (15). The reason is that in equilibrium
W0 adjusts endogenously across different states of the world in period 0 to guarantee that (29)
holds for a given value of θ. That is, given equilibrium values for contingent plans for
{Pt , et , rt+1 , Mt , At+1 , cct , cm
t , ht , qt , wt , yt , λt } one can find the value of W0 that is associated
with the competitive equilibrium from equation (15).
3.4.1

Primal Form of the Competitive Equilibrium

The following proposition presents the primal form of the competitive equilibrium.
Proposition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium in Primal Form) Given initial conditions A0
∗
and e0 , the positive parameter θ, and exogenous stochastic processes for {zt , gt , Pt∗ , rt+1
}, conm c
tingent plans {ct , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and
X 

A0
η
c
−1
∗
m
c
θ
= E0
β t U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + η U3 (t)ht + θxt (zt ht − gt − ct − ct )
e0
t=0
∞

(31)

are the same as those satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10) (11), (14), (17), (18), (19), (20),
(21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (29), and (30), where x∗t ≡ Pt∗ qt∗ /(β t Rt∗ ),
∗
.
qt∗ = r1∗ . . . rt∗ , and Rt∗ = 1/Et rt+1
Proof: See appendix A.
The proposition states that any real allocation satisfying the single intertemporal implementability constraint given by equation (31) can be supported as a competitive equilibrium.
By comparison, in the closed economy the primal form of the competitive equilibrium consists
of the implementability constraint (31) coupled with a period-by period feasibility constraint
η
c
requiring that domestic absorption equals domestic production, that is cm
t + ct + gt = zt ht .
It follows immediately that under the Ramsey allocation welfare must be at least as high in
the open economy as in the closed economy.

4

Ramsey Allocations

As is well known, the Ramsey planner would like to inflate away the initial level of nominal
liabilities by setting an infinite price level in period zero. This is because in this model
14

initial inflation represents a lump-sum capital levy. We avoid this unrealistic feature of
the unrestricted Ramsey plan by assuming that the initial nominal exchange rate, e0 , is
arbitrarily fixed. The Ramsey optimization problem then consists in maximizing (9) subject
to (31), and U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, given initial government liabilities measured in units of foreign
currency, A0 /e0 .

4.1

Analytical Results

The following proposition shows that under weak restrictions on preferences the Friedman
rule is optimal in the open economy when consumption and income taxes are available.
The restrictions on preferences we impose are the same as those assumed in the related
closed-economy literature.
Proposition 2 (Optimality of the Friedman Rule in the Open Economy When
Consumption and Income Taxes are Available) Assume that the single-period utility
function is strictly increasing in cm and cc , strictly decreasing in h, and concave. Assume
further that U (cm , cc, h) = f (cm , cc )v(h), where f is homogeneous of degree k. Then, the
Friedman rule is Ramsey optimal.
Proof: The strategy of the proof is to solve a modified Ramsey problem in which we do not
impose the constraint U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and then to show that the solution does not violate
it. In this case the Lagrangian takes the form
L = E0

∞
X
t=0




A0
η
c
−1
∗
m
c
β t U (t) + ξ U1 (t)cm
,
t + U2 (t)ct + η U3 (t)ht + θxt (zt ht − gt − ct − ct ) −ξθ
e0

where ξ is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the implementability constraint (31). The
c
∞
first-order optimality conditions with respect to {cm
t , ct , ht }t=0 and ξ are:
c
−1
∗
U1 (t) + ξ[U11 (t)cm
t + U1 (t) + U21 (t)ct + η U31 (t)ht ] = ξθxt

(32)

c
−1
∗
U2 (t) + ξ[U12 (t)cm
t + U22 (t)ct + U2 (t) + η U32 (t)ht ] = ξθxt

(33)

−ξθηx∗t zt htη−1

(34)

X 

A0
η
c
−1
∗
m
c
= E0
β t U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + η U3 (t)ht + θxt (zt ht − gt − ct − ct )
e0
t=0

(35)

c
−1
−1
U3 (t) + ξ[U13 (t)cm
t + U23 (t)ct + η U33 (t)ht + η U3 (t)] =
∞

θ

Using the particular functional form of the period utility function assumed in the statement
of the proposition, we can write the optimality conditions (32) and (33) as
U1 (t)[1 + ξ(k + η −1 v 0 (ht )ht /v(ht ))] = ξθx∗t
U2 (t)[1 + ξ(k + η −1 v 0 (ht )ht /v(ht ))] = ξθx∗t .
Taking the ratio of these expressions yields U1 (t)/U2 (t) = 1. Therefore, the constraint
U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 is not violated. It follows from equation (18) that Rt = 1, that is, it follows
that the Friedman rule is optimal.
15

The reason why the Friedman rule turns out to be optimal is quite intuitive. In this
model, the nominal interest rate, Rt , represents an indirect tax on a subset of consumption
goods, namely cash goods. This is because the nominal interest rate is the opportunity cost
of holding real balances, which in turn are required to carry out purchases of cash goods.
Thus, a positive interest rate introduces a wedge between the marginal rate of substitution
between cash and credit goods and the marginal rate of transformation between these goods
(unity). On the other hand, the proportional consumption tax φt represents a less distorting
way to tax private spending as it applies to all types of goods uniformly. Consequently, the
Ramsey planner chooses to give up completely the use of the nominal interest rate as a tax
on consumption and to fully rely instead on regular consumption taxes for this purpose.
Having shown that the Friedman rule is optimal, it is straightforward to establish that
uniform taxation fails to be Ramsey optimal.
Proposition 3 (Uniform Taxation is Not Ramsey Optimal) Assume that the singleperiod utility function is strictly increasing in cm and cc, strictly decreasing in h, and concave.
Assume further that U (cm , cc , h) = f (cm , cc)v(h), where f is homogeneous of degree k. Then,
uniform taxation, that is, τt = −φt , fails to be Ramsey optimal.
Proof: Under the assumptions of the proposition equation (34) can be written as
U3 (t)[1 + ξ[k + η −1 v 00 (t)/v 0 (t)ht + 1/η] = −ξθηx∗t zt htη−1

(36)

Combining this equation with (32) yields
−

[1 + ξ(k + η −1 v 0 (ht )ht /v(ht ))]
U3 (t)
= ηzt htη−1
U1 (t)
[1 + ξ(k + η −1 v 00 (ht )ht /v 0 (ht ) + η −1 )]
−1 0

[1+ξ(k+η v (ht )ht /v(ht ))]
Because for general preference specifications [1+ξ(k+η
−1 v 00 (h )h /v 0 (h )+η −1 )] is different from
t t
t
unity, uniform taxation fails.
The intuition for the failure of uniform taxation is the same as the one developed in
section 2 for the simple two-period economy. When the Ramsey reform is anticipated, then
the Ramsey planner wants to follow a policy that induces private agents to bring a lot of
wealth into the state of the world in which the Ramsey planner is in power. Uniform taxation,
however, acts as a lump-sum tax on initial wealth and thus discourages agents to bring a
large stock of wealth into the Ramsey state. As a result uniform taxation is no longer the
optimal policy.
Finally, it is worth noting that except for the intertemporal implementability constraint,
government purchases, gt , do not enter in any of the Ramsey planner’s optimality conditions.
It follows immediately that the realization of the government spending shock in period t
c
does not affect that period’s real allocation. In other words, in the Ramsey solution, cm
t , ct ,
and ht are uncorrelated with gt . Moreover, it follows from the decentralized version of the
primal form of the competitive equilibrium that if the real allocation is uncorrelated with
government purchases, then so are the consumption and income tax rates, φt and τt (see
equilibrium conditions (17), (19), and (29)). It is also clear from the first-order conditions of
c
the Ramsey problem that in each period t ≥ 0, the real allocation, cm
t , ct , and ht , depends
only on the realization of the productivity shock in that period, zt , and on the Lagrange

16

multiplier associated with the implementability constraint, which in turn depends only on
the initial state of the economy (g0 ,z0 ,A0 /e0 ). We highlight these results in the following
proposition:
Proposition 4 (Neutrality of Government Purchases Shocks) In the Ramsey soluc
tion, cm
t , ct , ht , τt , and φt are uncorrelated with government purchases, gt . The stochastic
processes followed by all of these variables inherit the properties of the stochastic process of
the productivity shock zt .
The intuition behind this result is straightforward. Innovations to government purchases
have pure wealth effects on households. However, given our maintained assumption of complete international asset markets, households can fully insure this source of risk. It follows
that given tax rates, households’ demands for consumption and leisure are unaffected by
government purchases shocks. This implies that the size and elasticity of the consumption
and income tax bases are unchanged in response to government spending shocks. It is then
not surprising that the Ramsey planner chooses to keep tax rates unchanged. One may then
wonder how the planner finances the government purchases shock. The Ramsey government
finances all innovations to government purchases with lump-sum (i.e., nondistorting) taxes
on private holdings of nominal public debt via surprise changes in the price level. It follows
also that innovations in government spending are associated with depreciations of the domestic currency. This is because by PPP the rate of depreciation of the domestic currency
is proportional to domestic inflation.7
By contrast, shocks to the level of labor productivity alter the Ramsey allocation. The
reason is that technology shocks affect the equilibrium wage rate and variations in the real
wage rate cannot be insured against to the extend that only a domestic resident can earn
the domestic wage rate. That is, to take advantage of, say, a higher wage rate, the domestic
resident has to work more. No one else can do it for him. As a consequence, hours of work
will depend on the level of technology.

4.2

Dynamic Properties of Ramsey Allocations

We now turn to the characterization of the dynamic properties of the Ramsey allocation.
The optimality conditions of the Ramsey problem are too complex to be solved analytically.
However, the exact numerical solution can be obtained. Before explaining our numerical
solution algorithm, we present a baseline calibration of the model.
4.2.1

Calibration

The time unit is meant to be one year. We assume that prior to the implementation of
the Ramsey policy, the economy is in a steady-state competitive equilibrium. To pin down
the deep structural parameters of the model, we assign numerical values to a number of
long-run relations. These values reflect key observed long-run features of industrialized open
economies. In the pre-Ramsey competitive equilibrium, the average real interest rate is 4
7

See equation (28) and recall that Rt = 1 under the Ramsey plan, that Pt∗ is assumed to grow at a
constant rate, and that Rt∗ is assumed to be constant.

17

percent and the average inflation rate is also 4 percent. Thus, the nominal interest rate is 8
percent. The public-debt-to-GDP ratio is 40 percent and GDP money velocity is 5.8. In this
steady state the consumption tax rate and the income tax rate are restricted to be the same.
The share of government purchases to in GDP is assumed to be 20 percent. Households
devote on average 20 percent of their time to work and the labor share in GDP is 80 percent.
In the steady-state the country has a trade balance surplus of 2 percent of GDP. We assume
that there no external shocks. That is, both rt∗ and Pt∗ are assumed to be nonstochastic.
In addition, we assume that the foreign inflation rate and nominal interest rate equal their
domestic counterparts of 4 and 8 percent, respectively. This means that r∗ = 1/R∗ = 1/1.08
∗
= 1.04. Because in the domestic economy the discount factor must
and that π ∗ = Pt∗ /Pt−1
satisfy β = π/R, it follows that x∗ is constant. We normalize x∗ to unity.
We assume that the period utility function takes the form
 m αm c αc
γ
(c ) (c ) (1 − h)1−αm −αc
m c
(37)
U (c , c , h) =
γ
The parameter γ is assigned a value so that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,
1/(1 − γ), is equal to 1/3, a value that falls within the range typically used in equilibrium
business cycle studies.
We assume that government purchases and productivity shocks follow independent twostate Markov processes. Specifically, zt can take on the values z h = 1+∆z or z l = 1−∆z with
∆z > 0 and transition probabilities defined by the parameter φz ≡ Prob(zt+1 = z i |zt = z i ),
i = h, l. We assume that zt has a standard deviation of 0.04 and a first order serial correlation
of 0.82. Similarly, gt takes on the values g h = g + ∆g and g l = g − ∆g , with ∆g > 0 and
transition probabilities described by the parameter φg ≡ Prob(gt+1 = g i |gt = g i ), i = h, l.
We assume that on average gt is 20 percent of GDP and that gt has a standard deviation of
0.00382 and a first-order serial correlation of 0.9.
The above restrictions imply the deep structural parameter values shown in table 1. A
detailed derivation of how the structural parameters are identified can be found in appendix
B.
4.2.2

Exact Numerical Solution Method

Using the particular functional form of the period utility function given in equation (37),
c
∗
optimality conditions (32) and (33) can be solved for cm
t and ct as functions of ht , xt , and ξ
to obtain
1/[(αm +αc )γ−1]
 αc γ
ξθx∗t
αm
m
m
∗
ct = c (ht , xt ; ξ) ≡
αc
αm v(ht )[1 + ξ(k + η −1 v 0 (ht )ht /v(ht ))]
and

αc m
c (ht , x∗t ; ξ)
αm
c
Using cm (ht , x∗t ; ξ) and cc (ht , x∗t ; ξ) to eliminate cm
t and ct from optimality condition (34) one
obtains an expression of the form
cct = cc (ht , x∗t ; ξ) ≡

H(ht , zt , x∗t ; ξ) = 0.
18

Table 1: Calibration
Parameter

Value

Description

β
αm

0.9615 Subjective discount factor
0.0504 Preference parameter

αc
γ
η

0.1885 Preference parameter
-2 Preference parameter
0.8 Technology parameter

θ
A0 /e0
R∗

3.6560 Parameter governing domestic private wealth
0.1705 Initial public liabilities in foreign currency
1.08 Foreign gross nominal interest rate

x∗
gh

1 External shock
0.0590 High realization of government consumption

gl
φg
zh

0.0514 Low realization of government consumption
0.95 Prob(gt+1 = g i |gt = g i ), i = h, l
1.04 High realization of productivity shock

zl
φz

0.96 Low realization of productivity shock
0.91 Prob(zt+1 = z i |zt = z i ), i = h, l

Note: The time unit is one year.
Given values for zt , x∗t , and ξ, this expression can be solved numerically for ht using any
standard nonlinear equation solver. Recall the productivity shock zt is assumed to take on
two values, z h and z l , and that because we are assuming no external shocks, x∗t is constant.
Guess a value for ξ. Then solving the above equation for z h and z l one obtains two values for
hours, hh (ξ) and hl (ξ). In turn, using the functions cm (h, x∗ ; ξ) and cc(h, x∗ ; ξ), yields two
values for consumption of cash and credit goods, cmh (ξ), cml (ξ), cch (ξ), ccl (ξ). Now consider
c
−1
the optimality condition (35). Note that the expression U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + η U3 (t)ht +
η
c
θx∗ (zt ht − gt − cm
t − ct ) can be written as x(zt , gt ; ξ). Define the vector X(ξ) as


x(z h , g h ; ξ)
 x(z l , g h ; ξ) 

X(ξ) = 
 x(z h , g l ; ξ)  .
x(z l , g l ; ξ)
Now construct the vector
Y (ξ) = (I − βΠ)−1 X(ξ),
where Π is the 4×4 transition probability matrix of the state vector [zt ; gt ]0 . If the state of
the world in period 0 is i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4), then ξ is the solution to optimality condition (35),
which can be written as
A0
θ
= Y i (ξ),
e0
19

where Y i denotes the i-th element of the vector Y . This is a nonlinear equation, which can
be solved using standard numerical packages. In this way one obtains one value of ξ for each
state in period zero.
4.2.3

Unconditional Moments and Impulse Responses

Table 2 displays a number of unconditional moments of key endogenous variables.8 The

Table 2: Dynamic properties of the Ramsey allocation in the small open economy
Variable
τ
φ
π
R

y
h
c
tb/y
a
g
z

Mean Std. Dev. Auto. corr. Corr(x, y) Corr(x, g) Corr(x, z)
55.1
0.373
0.82
1
0
1
8.6
1.32
0.82
-1
0
-1
-2.6
11.1
0.0101
-0.394
0.323
-0.394
0
0
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
-6.52
10.7
0.0101
-0.394
0.323
-0.394
0.0832
0.0113
0.82
1
0
1
0.0445
0.00537
0.82
1
0
1
0.185
0.00259
0.82
1
0
1
-194
37.1
0.821
0.992
-0.126
0.992
0.17
0.035
0.873
0.586
-0.81
0.586
0.0552
0.00382
0.9
0
1
0
1
0.04
0.82
1
0
1

Note. τ , φ, π, R, , and tb/y are expressed in percentage points, and y, h, c, a,
g, and z in levels.
Ramsey equilibrium looks strikingly different from the pre-Ramsey competitive equilibrium.
The planner relies heavily on income taxes. The average income tax rate is 55 percent,
whereas in the pre-Ramsey economy it is 12 percent. The Ramsey planner set the consumption tax rate at a much lower level than the income tax rate, 8.6 percent. Thus, the
pre-Ramsey tax structure, with income and consumption tax rates restricted to be equal to
each other is far from optimal. In addition, the Ramsey planner gives up completely the
use of seignorage as a source of revenue, since, as shown above, the nominal interest rate is
zero at all times. By contrast, in the pre-Ramsey economy, the interest rate is on average 8
percent.
The differences in tax structures have strong implications for the long-run levels of consumption and labor effort. In the pre-Ramsey economy workers dedicate 20 percent of their
time to work. By contrast, the Ramsey economy is a leisure society. Workers allocate only
4.5 percent of their time to remunerated work. As a result, output is much lower in the
Ramsey economy than in the pre-Ramsey steady state: 0.08 versus 0.28. At the same time,
consumption falls slightly as the economy moves from the pre-Ramsey to the Ramsey policy
8
The moments are unconditional with respect to the initial exogenous state, (z0 ,g0 ), but not with respect
to the initial level of government liabilities A0 /e0 , which is fixed as described above.

20

from 0.215 to 0.185. The combination of a pronounced decline in output and a modest
reduction in consumption results in a drastic trade balance deterioration under the Ramsey
policy. The trade balance deficit is 200 percent of GDP in the Ramsey economy, while in the
pre-Ramsey economy it displays a moderate surplus of 2 percent of GDP. The Ramsey economy is able to support a trade deficit of this magnitude because private agents are insured
against the possibility of a Ramsey-type policy reform.
One may wonder whether the optimal tax structure in the open economy does resemble
that of a closed economy with capital accumulation. After all, a country’s net foreign asset
position can be thought of as a capital stock. The answer to this question is that the tax
structures are very different. In the closed economy with capital accumulation and consumption and labor income taxes, the Ramsey tax structure consists of taxing consumption
and subsidizing labor effort at the same rate. Moreover the consumption tax/labor subsidy
is typically well in excess of 100 percent (Coleman, 2000). Such a fiscal policy taxes all
goods (consumption and leisure) at the same rate and is equivalent to a pure levy on the
initial stock of physical capital. The tax structure we obtain in the open economy is quite
different, for consumption is taxed but leisure is subsidized.9 The reason behind this difference in results is that in the open economy, due to the existence of complete asset markets,
the initial net foreign asset position of the economy is not an inelastically supplied factor.
Rather, it is a function of the state of the world in period zero. One aspect of the state of
the world in period zero is the particular tax policy in place. More specifically, before period
zero, agents engage in asset transactions that ensure that their marginal utility of wealth is
proportional to that of foreign agents, which is an exogenous variable, at all dates and under
all possible contingencies. As a consequence, the country’s asset position in period zero is
state contingent as well.
Table 2 also shows that the Ramsey government ‘front loads’ taxes. That is, the benevolent government uses large unexpected changes in the price level as a lump-sum tax on
nominal government bond holdings. The standard deviation of inflation is 11 percent. A
two-standard error band around the mean of -2.6 percent encompasses inflation rates in the
range -24.6 and +19.6 percent. Moreover, inflation is virtually uncorrelated over time, with
a serial correlation of 0.01.10 The fact that in the open economy the government chooses to
use the price level to front load taxation when both income and consumption taxes are at
the planners disposal stands in stark contrast to what happens in a closed economy. It can
be shown that in the closed economy, the Ramsey planner can always choose consumption
tax rates in such a way as to support full price stability.
The model also implies a high volatility of the depreciation rate of the domestic currency, t ≡ et /et−1 . The depreciation rate is a constant fraction of domestic inflation. For
reasonable calibrations the factor of proportionality is close to unity. To see this, use PPP
9

With η < 1, τt is a tax on income rather than labor. However, we have verified that the qualitative
features of the Ramsey tax structure are unchanged when η is set at unity, a value at which τt becomes a
labor income tax rate.
10
Indeed, 1/πt is perfectly serially uncorrelated. To see this note that (17) implies that λt =
βRt Et λt+1 /πt+1 . Now use equation (29), the fact that Rt = 1, and the assumption of no external shocks to
get Et [1/πt+1 − 1/β] = 0. It follows that Cov(1/πt , 1/πt+1 ) = E(1/πt − 1/β)Et (1/πt+1 − 1/β) = 0.

21

(equation (28)) to write
πt Rt−1 Rt∗
.
t = ∗
∗
πt Rt Rt−1
Because foreign inflation and the foreign interest rate are assumed to be constant, and the
Friedman rule holds domestically, we have that
t =

πt
.
π∗

We set π ∗ equal to 1.08, a number close to unity. As a result, the volatility of the domestic
depreciation rate is approximately equal to that of the domestic inflation rate. A way to
delink the behavior of the devaluation rate from that of domestic inflation is to introduce
nontraded goods and either sectorial shocks or nominal frictions.
Movements in government spending do not affect the business-cycle properties of the
Ramsey real allocation. Specifically, if the only source of uncertainty was government purchases shocks, then hours, consumption, and output would be constant over time. This is
because households are fully insured against government purchases shocks (via international
financial markets) and the economy is too small to affect world prices. The government is
able to support constant tax rates in response to government purchases shocks because it can
fully finance the resulting changes to its budget through unexpected inflation. Therefore, the
price level is highly sensitive to government purchases shocks, as the capital levy embodied
in surprised inflation serves as the sole absorber of such innovations to the fiscal budget.11
Figure 1 displays the impulse response of the Ramsey economy to a one-standarddeviation increase in government purchases. In response to a positive and persistent government purchases shock real government liabilities decline and converge to their long-run
level gradually. The initial decline is the result of the surprise inflation engineered by the
government, whose liabilities are all in nominal terms. Real government liabilities fall by
much more than what is needed to finance the current increase in gt . This is because the
increase in gt is persistent and therefore the government needs to collect revenues to finance
not only the current increase in gt but also the future expected increases.
A temporary increase in government purchases leads to a trade balance deterioration. In
response to the increase in government purchases, the economy uses the trade balance to
smooth out private consumption. This behavior illustrates the general principle in international finance that the trade balance is used to finance temporary endowment shocks.
Figure 2 depicts the response of the Ramsey economy to a one-standard-deviation increase
in the productivity shock, zt . Unlike in the case of government purchases shocks, productivity
shocks induce movements in the real allocation and tax rates. It follows that all of the
variation in the real allocation and tax rates is due to productivity shocks. Real variables and
tax rates inherit the properties of the stochastic process of the technology shock. However,
as in the closed economy with income taxes only, the income tax rate is remarkably smooth
over the business cycle. The standard deviation of τt is only 0.4. A two-standard-deviation
band around the mean tax rate of 55 percent lies within the interval 54 to 56 percent. On
11
The fact that the correlation between πt and gt is low, 0.3, is not at odds with the intuition given above.
For it is the correlation between πt and innovations in gt that should be close to one.

22

the other hand, the consumption tax rate is four times as volatile as the income tax rate,
with a two-standard-deviation band spanning the range 6 to 11.2 percent.12
In response to a positive technology shock, the planner finds it optimal to increase the
labor income tax rate and to decrease the consumption tax rate. The increase in the labor
income tax rate is a consequence of the fact that periods of high productivity are particularly
good times to tax income, as the tax base is larger at any level of effort. The planner therefore
substitutes income tax revenue for consumption tax revenue. This substitution allows the
government to keep the distortion of the leisure/consumption margin, which is given by
(1 − τt )/(1 + φt ), relatively constant.

5

An Economy With Income Taxes Only

In closed economy environments, the ability of the government to levy income taxes suffices
to make the Friedman rule part of the optimal policy mix. We show in this section that
in the open economy environment laid out above this is not the case. Our analysis focuses
on how the absence of a consumption tax instrument affects the quantitative features of the
economy under optimal fiscal and monetary policy.
The competitive equilibrium of an economy with income taxes only can be defined directly
by imposing φt = 0 in the definition of the competitive equilibrium in the economy with both
income and consumption taxes given in definition 1. Formally, we have
Definition 2 (Competitive Equilibrium With Income Taxes Only) A competitive equilibrium with income taxes only is a set of stochastic processes {Pt , et , rt+1 , Mt , At+1 , cct,
cm
t , ht , qt , wt , yt , λt } satisfying (11), (14), (18), (21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27),
(28), (29), and
(38)
Mt ≥ Pt cm
t
c
U1 (cm
t , ct , ht ) = λt

−

(39)

c
U3 (cm
(1 − τt )wt
t , ct , ht )
=
m c
U1 (ct , ct , ht )
Rt

(40)

(Rt − 1)(Mt − Pt cm
t ) = 0
At+1 = Rt At + Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt −

(41)
τt zt hηt )

(42)

∗
given the exogenous stochastic processes {gt , zt , Pt∗ , rt+1
, qt∗ }, policy sequences τt and Rt ≥ 1,
and the initial condition A0 .

The primal form of the competitive equilibrium is significantly different that of the economy with both consumption and income taxes. In particular, the primal form of the competitive equilibrium with income taxes only includes one additional restriction tieing the
marginal utility of consumption of credit goods to an exogenous foreign variable at each
date and state. The following proposition presents a formal statement of the primal form.
12

The volatility of the consumption tax rate depends on the particular parameterization of preferences. For
example, as γ approaches zero, preferences become log-linear in consumption and leisure, and the volatility
of φt converges to zero.

23

Proposition 5 (Primal Form in an Economy With Income Taxes Only) Given initial conditions A0 and e0 , the positive parameter θ, and exogenous stochastic processes for
∗
c
}, contingent plans {cm
{zt , gt , Pt∗ , rt+1
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (31), and
c
∗
U2 (cm
t , ct , ht ) = θxt

(43)

are the same as those satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (11), (14), (18), (21), (24), (26) holding
with equality, (27), (28), (29), (38), (39), (40), (41), and (42), where x∗t ≡ Pt∗ qt∗ /(β t Rt∗ ),
∗
.
qt∗ = r1∗ . . . rt∗ , and Rt∗ = 1/Et rt+1
Proof: See appendix A.
c
The Ramsey planner chooses stochastic processes cm
t , ct , and ht so as to maximize (9)
subject to U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (31), and (43), taking as given the initial condition A0 /e0 , and
the processes x∗t , zt , and gt . It follows immediately from the first-order conditions of the
Ramsey problem that, as in the economy with two tax instruments, the real allocation,
c
cm
t , ct , and ht , depends only on the current realization of the technology shock zt and
the Lagrange multiplier associated with the implementability constraint. This means, in
particular, that the real allocation, the income tax rate, and the nominal interest rate are
all uncorrelated with government purchases. It also implies that innovations in government
purchases are completely financed by surprise changes in the price level. The following
proposition summarizes this result.

Proposition 6 (Neutrality of Government Purchases Shocks in the Economy with
Income Taxes Only) In the economy with income taxes only, under the Ramsey soluc
tion, cm
t , ct , ht , τt , and Rt are uncorrelated with government purchases, gt . The stochastic
processes followed by all of these variables inherit the properties of the stochastic process of
the productivity shock zt .
Table 3 displays unconditional moments in the economy with income taxes only. In construction the table, the calibration of the structural parameters is identical to that used for
the economy with both consumption and income taxes, which is summarized in table 1. The
model admits an exact numerical solution method similar in nature to the one applied to
the economy with two tax instruments described in section 4.2.2.
A striking feature of the economy with income taxes only is that the Friedman rule
fails dramatically.13 The average nominal interest rate is 30 percent per year. A positive
nominal interest rate allows the Ramsey government to indirectly tax consumption. In
particular, purchases of cash goods are subject to a cash-in-advance constraint. Thus, by
rasing the opportunity cost of holding cash, the government is implicitly collecting revenue
from consumption expenditures.
The planner does not substitute seignorage income one for one for consumption tax
revenue. To see this note that in the economy with income and consumption taxes, the
13

This result is related to independent work by Cunha (2002). Cunha studies Ramsey policies in a small,
open, incomplete markets economy with traded and nontraded goods in which the Ramsey planner is assumed
to have access only to a non-state-contingent labor income tax. Cunha shows that the Friedman rule is not
optimal and conjectures that it would be optimal if the planner could tax consumption of tradables and
nontradables at different rates.

24

Table 3: Dynamic Properties of the Ramsey Allocation in the Economy with Income Taxes
Only (φt = 0)
Variable
τ
π
R

y
h
c
tb/y
a
g
z

Mean Std. Dev. Auto. corr. Corr(x, y) Corr(x, g) Corr(x, z)
52.3
0.383
0.82
1
0
1
27.2
20.2
0.0495
-0.517
0.263
-0.517
29.3
1.48
0.82
-1
0
-1
22
18.7
0.0606
-0.523
0.272
-0.523
0.0996
0.0121
0.82
1
0
1
0.0558
0.0057
0.82
1
0
1
0.192
0.00142
0.82
1
0
1
-151
29.4
0.821
0.991
-0.132
0.991
0.131
0.0332
0.855
0.75
-0.661
0.75
0.0552
0.00382
0.9
0
1
0
1
0.04
0.82
1
0
1

Note. τ , φ, π, R, , and tb/y are expressed in percentage points, and y, h, c, a,
g, and z in levels.

share of consumption of cash goods in total consumption is about 20 percent ( and equal to
αm /(αm +αc ). Thus, since the nominal interest rate is a tax only on cash goods, a one-for-one
substitution of seignorage for consumption tax revenue would require setting the nominal
interest rate roughly five times as high as the consumption tax rate in the economy with
consumption taxes. This would require a nominal interest rate of about 45 percent. Instead,
the planner settles for a lower nominal interest rate of 30 percent. The reason why the
planner chooses not to make up the entire loss of consumption tax revenue with seignorage
revenue is that a positive nominal interest rate is a less efficient way of taxing consumption
than an explicit uniform consumption tax. This is because a positive nominal interest rate
distorts not only the consumption leisure margin but also the cash-credit margin.
The non optimality of the Friedman rule depends on the particular parameterization
of the model. In particular, when in the economy with income and consumption taxes
the optimal consumption tax rate is positive, then in the economy with income taxes only
the nominal interest rate is positive. On the other hand, for parameterizations for which
the optimal consumption tax is negative in the economy where both tax instruments are
available, the Friedman rule holds in the economy without consumption taxes. In this case
the planner would like to set the nominal interest rate at a negative value so as to subsidize
consumption. However this is not possible in a competitive equilibrium because it would
create a pure arbitrage opportunity.14
The behavior of income tax rates is virtually unchanged by the disappearance of the
consumption tax instrument. The mean income tax rate is 52 percent in the economy with
income taxes only. This value is slightly less than the mean income tax rate of 55 percent
14

For example, when η is lowered to 0.5, then in the economy with both tax instruments the optimal
consumption tax is −17.2 percent, and in the economy with income taxes only the Friedman rule is optimal.

25

implied by the model with both income and consumption taxes. When the government loses
the consumption tax instrument, income from regular taxation (i.e., income and consumption
tax revenue) falls by about 17 percent. This shortfall in revenues is fully taken up by inflation
taxes. Both forecast able and unforcastable changes in the price level become larger. The
average inflation rate increases from -2.6 percent in the economy with two tax instruments
to 27 percent in the economy with income taxes only, and the standard deviation of inflation
increases from 11 to 20 percentage points.
Because the nominal interest rate varies over the business cycle, the model displays deviations of PPP from its mean. The coefficient of variation of PPP (i.e., std(PPP/mean(PPP))
is 3.3 percent.15 It is worth noting that deviations from PPP occur in spite of the fact
that there is a single traded good and no barriers to trade. The key factors behind the
implied deviations from PPP are that trades are made in the buyer’s currency and that the
nominal interest rate is time varying. Absence of either one of these two factors implies the
reemergence of PPP.16

6

An Economy With Consumption Taxes Only

In the economy with income and consumption taxes analyzed in section 3, we found that
the Friedman rule holds under the Ramsey policy. On the other hand, deviations from the
Friedman rule are large in the economy with income taxes only. A natural question is whether
the availability of consumption taxes alone suffices to make the Friedman rule optimal, or
whether it is the combination of both tax instruments that makes it optimal. Two other
striking characteristics of optimal policy in both the economy with income and consumption
taxes and the economy with income taxes only are the large trade balance deficits and
the use of highly volatile and serially uncorrelated price changes as a way to tax nominal
government debt in a lump-sum fashion. In this section, we investigate the robustness of
these characteristics of the Ramsey policy in an open economy where the government has
access only to consumption taxes.
The equilibrium conditions in the economy with consumption taxes only are the same as
those associated with the economy where both consumption and income taxes can be levied
with the exception that τt must be zero at all times and under all contingencies. Specifically,
the labor supply schedule (19) and the government’s sequential budget constraint (45) now
become
c
wt
U3 (cm
t , ct , ht )
=
(44)
−
m c
U1 (ct , ct , ht )
Rt (1 + φt )
c
At+1 = Rt At + Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − φt (cm
t + ct )]

(45)

We then define a competitive equilibrium as follows:
15

This follows from the fact that std(PPP/mean(PPP))=std(Rt/mean(R)) ×100 = 0.0618/1.875 × 100,
where Rt is the gross domestic nominal interest rate.
16
It is immediate to see that if one assumes that transactions are carried out in the seller’s currency, then,
because shoppers acquire the desired amounts of domestic and foreign monies in the same period in which
they plan to spend it, the condition Pt = et Pt∗ must hold. At the same time, when purchases are made
in the buyer’s currency but the domestic and foreign nominal interests are constant, then the condition
Pt = et Pt∗ Rt /Rt∗ collapses to Pt = et Pt∗ R/R∗ . Thus, the volatility of Pt /(et Pt∗ ) is zero.

26

Definition 3 (Competitive Equilibrium With Consumption Taxes Only) A competitive equilibrium in the economy with consumption taxes only is a set of stochastic processes
{Pt , et , rt+1 , Mt , At+1 , cct, cm
t , ht , qt , wt , yt , λt } satisfying (10), (11), (14), (17), (18), (20),
(21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (29), (44), and (45) given the exogenous
∗
, qt∗ }, policy sequences φt and Rt ≥ 1, and the initial constochastic processes {gt , zt , Pt∗ , rt+1
dition A0 .
The following proposition provides the primal form of this competitive equilibrium.
Proposition 7 (Primal Form in an Economy with Consumption Taxes Only) Given
initial conditions A0 and e0 , the positive parameter θ, and exogenous stochastic processes for
∗
c
}, contingent plans {cm
{zt , gt , Pt∗ , rt+1
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (31), and
−U3 (t) = ηzt htη−1 θx∗t

(46)

are the same as those satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10) (11), (14), (17), (18), (20), (21),
(24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (29), (44), and (45), where x∗t ≡ Pt∗ qt∗ /(β t Rt∗ ),
∗
).
qt∗ = r1∗ . . . rt∗ , and Rt∗ = 1/(Et rt+1
Proof: See appendix A.
The Ramsey problem consists in maximizing (9) subject to U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (31), and
(46), taking as given A0 /e0 , and the exogenous processes x∗t , gt , and zt .
Consider a modified version of the Ramsey problem where the restriction U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1
is dropped. Under the functional form for the period utility function assumed in proposition 2, Ramsey problem’s first-order conditions are (31), (46), and
f1 [v(1 + ξk) + ξv 0 h/η + µv 0 ] = ξθx∗
f2 [v(1 + ξk) + ξv 0 h/η + µv 0 ] = ξθx∗
f [v 0 + v 0 ξ(η −1 + k) + ξv 00 h/η] + ξθx∗ ηzhη−1 = −µ[f v 00 + η(η − 1)zhη−2 θx∗ ],
where ξ and µt denote the Lagrange multipliers on (31), (46), respectively, and k is the degree
of homogeneity of f . Dividing the first of these expressions by the second yields f1 /f2 = 1.
It follows immediately that U1 (t)/U2 (t) = 1. Thus, the unconstrained solution satisfies the
restriction U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1. Moreover, by equation (18) the nominal interest rate associated
with the Ramsey allocation is zero at all dates and states, which is to say that the Friedman
rule is optimal. We summarize this result in the following proposition.
Proposition 8 (Optimality of the Friedman Rule in the Open Economy When
Only Consumption Taxes are Available) Assume that the single-period utility function
is strictly increasing in cm and cc , strictly decreasing in h, and concave. Assume further that
U (cm , cc , h) = f (cm , cc )v(h), where f is homogeneous of degree k. Then, the Friedman rule
is Ramsey optimal in the economy with consumption taxes only.
The intuition for the optimality of the Friedman rule in the economy with consumption taxes
only is the following. As explained earlier, the nominal interest rate is an implicit tax on
the consumption of cash goods. However, compared to a uniform tax on total consumption,
27

a positive nominal interest rate is an inferior fiscal instrument. For it distorts an additional
margin, namely, the cash-credit consumption margin. Thus, the availability of an explicit
uniform tax on consumption of cash and credit goods makes the benevolent government give
up completely the use of a positive nominal interest rate for fiscal purposes.
Simple inspection of the first-order conditions of the Ramsey problem reveals that the
real allocation in period t is independent of the realization of government purchases in that
period. As in the economies with consumption and income taxes and income taxes only,
this is a consequence of the fact that private households can fully insure against government
purchases shocks. It follows that : (1) Tax rates are uncorrelated with government purchases;
(2) All innovations in government purchases are financed through unexpected changes in the
price level; and (3) fluctuations in the real allocation are due exclusively to variations in the
level of technology, zt .17 We summarize these findings in the next proposition.
Proposition 9 (Neutrality of Government Purchases Shocks in the Economy with
c
Consumption Taxes Only) In the Ramsey solution, cm
t , ct , ht , and φt are uncorrelated
with government purchases, gt . The stochastic processes followed by all of these variables
inherit the properties of the stochastic process of the productivity shock zt .
Table 4 presents unconditional moments of selected macroeconomic and policy variables

Table 4: Dynamic Properties of the Ramsey Allocation in the Economy with Consumption
Taxes Only(τt = 0)
Variable
φ
π
R

y
h
c
tb/y
a
g
z

Mean Std. Dev. Auto. Corr. Corr(x, y) Corr(x, g) Corr(x, z)
30.6
1.52
0.82
1
0
1
-2.88
9.8
0.00742
-0.345
0.351
-0.345
0
0
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
-6.79
9.41
0.00742
-0.345
0.351
-0.345
0.301
0.0232
0.82
1
0
1
0.223
0.0103
0.82
1
0
1
0.202
0.00118
0.82
1
0
1
14.2
6.35
0.823
0.98
-0.201
0.98
0.17
0.0326
0.88
0.495
-0.869
0.495
0.0552
0.00382
0.9
0
1
0
1
0.04
0.82
1
0
1

Note. τ , φ, π, R, , and tb/y are expressed in percentage points, and y, h, c, a,
g, and z in levels.
of the economy with consumption taxes only. The calibration and solution techniques are
17

It can be shown that in the special case of a linearly homogeneous production technology, η = 1, the
consumption tax rate is constant across dates and states. In this case, innovations in both government
spending and productivity are financed via surprise inflation.

28

as explained in section 4. In the case with income taxes only, the lack of one regular tax
instrument was in part made up by using the inflation tax. Here this does not happen. All
lost income tax revenue is replace with consumption tax revenue. This is reflected in an
increase in the consumption tax rate from 9 percent to 31 prevent when the Ramsey planner
is forced to give up the income tax instrument.
Without the income tax (i.e., without subsidies to leisure), households increase their labor
supply by almost a factor of 5 relative to the case in which both income and consumption
taxes are levied optimally. Consequently, average domestic output increases by about 400
percent. Consumption also increases but by much less, roughly 10 percent. The trade
balance therefore experiences a dramatic reversal from a deficit of 200 percent of GDP in the
economy with two taxes to a surplus of 14 percent of GDP in the economy with consumption
taxes only.
As in the economies with income and consumption taxes or income taxes only, the Ramsey
planner uses the inflation rate as a lump-sum tax on private sector’s holdings of nominal
government liabilities. This reflected in the fact that price level changes are highly volatile
and virtually serially uncorrelated. The standard deviation of inflation is 10 percentage
points and its serial correlation is 0.007.

7

Incomplete Asset Markets

It is a well-known result that in the closed economy neoclassical model (i.e., in closed, real
economies with capital accumulation), when the government has access to both consumption
and income taxes, the Ramsey allocation is Pareto optimal. Moreover, the policy that
implements the Ramsey plan features a constant consumption tax rate and a constant labor
subsidy equal in size to the consumption tax (see, e.g., Coleman, 2000). One can show that
a similar result obtains in monetary closed economies.
Proposition 10 (Ramsey Allocation in the Closed Economy With Income and
Consumption Taxes) Consider a closed-economy version of the monetary open-economy
model developed in section 3. Assume that the Ramsey planner has access to consumption
and income taxes, then the Ramsey allocation is Pareto optimal. The policy associated with
the Ramsey plan satisfies Rt = 1 and φt = −τt for all t. In addition, φt and τt can be taken
to be constant.
Proof: See Appendix C.
Proposition 10 states that it is optimal in the closed economy for the utilitarian government to tax all goods, that is, consumption and leisure, at a uniform rate.18 This property
of the Ramsey policy in closed economies stands in stark contrast to what is optimal in the
open economy. In section 4 we found that not only is it not optimal for the Ramsey planner
to tax all goods uniformly but instead under the optimal policy some goods are taxed while
18

This result depends on the assumption that φ0 is a choice variable of the Ramsey planner. If one assumes
that the planner must take φ0 as given, then the Ramsey real allocation ceases to be Pareto optimal, and the
associated Ramsey policy features a path for consumption tax rates different from that of labor subsidies.
For a formal treatment of this issue, see proposition 13 in appendix C and the discussion below it.

29

others are subsidized. In the calibrated open economy we study in section 4, consumption
is taxed at an average rate of 9 percent whereas leisure is subsidized at a 55 percent rate.
In addition, the constancy of optimal tax rates over time fails to obtain. For example, in
our calibrated economy the standard deviation of the consumption tax rate is 1.3 percentage
points.
To explain these different characteristics of optimal policy in the closed and open economies,
it is crucial to understand the role played by international financial markets. In the closed
economy, a uniform tax on consumption and a subsidy on labor of equal magnitude represents a tax on initial private wealth. Because initial private wealth is inelastically supplied,
the optimal policy mix just described amounts to a non-distorting or lump-sum levy on initial
wealth. This is the reason why the Ramsey plan can achieve the Pareto optimal allocation.
In the open economy, the Ramsey planner does not regard initial private wealth as
inelastically supplied. This is because the existence of complete contingent claim markets
allows residents of a small open economy to insure against potential policy reform, that is,
domestic residents can buy assets whose pay-off is contingent on future tax policies. As
a result, in any period, including the period in which the Ramsey reform is implemented,
the amount of assets brought into the period by private agents is a function of the tax
regime prevailing in that period. Residents of the small open economy are able to insure
against policy reform because such reform represent a country specific risk that can be
diversified through trade in international asset markets. The Ramsey planner internalizes
the policy-dependence of initial wealth of private agents. Because initial wealth is no longer
an inelastically supplied factor, it is also no longer optimal to devise a tax scheme aimed at
exploiting that fact.
To illustrate how optimal policy in the open economy is affected by the assumed existence
of markets for assets with payoffs contingent of the policy regime, in this section we consider
a particular kind of market incompleteness by making this type of asset unavailable to
domestic residents. This implies that households can no longer insure against potential
policy changes.19 Consequently, asset holdings of the private sector at the beginning of
period 0 are independent of the realization of the tax regime to be put into place in that
period. The central finding of this section is that in this case the results of the closed
economy carry over to the open economy setting. The Ramsey allocation features no wedge
between cash and credit goods consumption (Rt = 1) nor a wedge between consumption
and leisure φt = −τt . That is, the classic public finance theorem of uniform taxation of final
goods reemerges in the open economy when agents cannot insure against policy reforms.
Furthermore, the optimal consumption and income tax rates are constant over time.
The main formal difference between a competitive equilibrium with complete markets
and one with the particular type of market incompleteness considered in this section is that
equilibrium condition (29) tying the domestic (after-tax) marginal utility of wealth to an
exogenous variable is replaced by the intertemporal budget constraint of private households.
Formally, using (22) to eliminate Πt from the household’s intertemporal budget constraint
19

Insurance against domestic government purchases and technology shocks is still available.

30

(15), yields
W0 + E0

∞
X

qt+1 Pt (1 − τt )zt hηt = E0

t=0

∞
X

c
qt+1 [Pt (1 + φt )(cm
t + ct ) + (Rt − 1)Mt ] ,

(47)

t=0

with W0 exogenously given. The equations describing the household, firm, and government
sectors given in sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, respectively, continue to hold. We then can define
a competitive equilibrium for the economy with incomplete markets as follows.
Definition 4 (Competitive Equilibrium Under Incomplete Asset Markets) A competitive equilibrium is a set of stochastic processes {Pt , et , rt+1 , Mt , At+1 , cct , cm
t , ht , qt , wt , yt , λt }
and a positive scalar λ satisfying (10), (11), (14), (16)-(21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (30), and (47), given sequences τt , φt , and Rt ≥ 1, the exogenous stochastic
∗
}, and the initial conditions W0 and A0 .
processes {gt , zt , Pt∗ , rt+1
The following proposition presents the primal form of the competitive equilibrium.
Proposition 11 (Primal Form Under Incomplete Asset Markets) Given initial con∗
}, contingent
ditions A0 , W0 , and e0 , and exogenous stochastic processes for {zt , gt , Pt∗ , rt+1
c
,
c
,
h
}
satisfying
U
(t)/U
(t)
≥
1
and
plans {cm
t
1
2
t
t
X
W0 − A0
η
c
= E0
β t x∗t [cm
t + ct + gt − zt ht ]
e0
t=0
∞

(48)

are the same as those satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10), (11), (14), (16)-(21), (24), (26)
holding with equality, and (27), (28), (30), and (47), where x∗t ≡ Pt∗ qt∗ /(β t Rt∗ ), qt∗ = r1∗ . . . rt∗ ,
∗
.
and Rt∗ = 1/Et rt+1
Proof: See appendix A.
This proposition states that any real allocation satisfying the single intertemporal resource constraint given by equation (48) can be supported as a competitive equilibrium.
Equation (48) states that the initial net foreign asset position of the economy, (W0 − A0 )/e0 ,
must be equal to the present discounted value of current and future expected trade deficits.
It is important to note that equation (48) is the only restriction of the unconstrained Pareto
optimal problem. By unconstrained Pareto optimality we mean the best resource allocation
that can be achieved in this economy in the presence of lump-sum taxes and the absence
of the cash-in-advance constraint. Formally, the unconstrained Pareto problem consists in
c
choosing stochastic processes {cm
t , ct , ht } so as to maximize the utility function (9) subject
to (48), given (W0 − A0 )/e0 and exogenous processes {x∗t , gt , zt }.
c
The Ramsey problem consists in choosing cm
t , ct , and ht so as to maximize the utility
function (9) subject to U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and (48). Consider a modified Ramsey problem that
does not impose the condition U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1. That is, consider the problem of maximizing
(9) subject to (48). This problem is identical to the unconstrained Pareto problem. Let ξ > 0
denote the Lagrange multiplier associated with the implementability constraint (48). Then,
the first-order conditions associated with this problem are (48), U1 (t) = ξx∗t , U1 (t)/U2 (t) = 1,
31

and −U3 (t)/U1 (t) = ηzt htη−1 . Note that the constraint U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 is satisfied. So the
solution to the modified Ramsey problem is indeed the solution to the original Ramsey
problem. Therefore, the Ramsey allocation coincides with the Pareto optimal allocation.
Comparing the optimality conditions of the Ramsey problem with equilibrium conditions
(18) and (19), it follows that the Ramsey policy associated with the Ramsey plan features
Rt = 1 and τt = −φt . That is, the Ramsey plan imposes no wedge between cash and
credit goods consumption or between consumption and leisure. Furthermore, combining the
optimality condition U1 (t) = ξx∗t with (17) yields 1 + φt = ξ/(e0 λ). It follows that the
consumption tax rate and the income subsidy are constant across dates and states.

8

Discussion and Conclusion

To a first approximation, all policy reforms are anticipated. In modern, democratic societies,
policy-regime switches are preceded by lengthy public debate. A case in point is the process
leading to tax harmonization and monetary union in Europe. Therefore, in this paper we
argue that the scenario of greatest practical interest for the study of optimal policy is not
one in which reform comes as a complete surprise to private agents, but one in which the
probability of a policy switch, prior to its implementation, is positive and known to the public.
The issue of the real effects of anticipated policy changes has been studied extensively (see,
for instance, the seminal contribution of Calvo, 1986). The central focus of this paper is on
the consequences of policy anticipation for optimal policy in environments in which agents
can insure against policy reforms.
Most of the existing related literature on optimal monetary and fiscal policy has limited attention to closed-economy, representative-agent environments. In this setup it is not
possible for agents to insure against policy reform. For policy changes represent aggregate
risk, which, even in the presence of complete markets, is undiversifiable. It follows that
the characteristics of anticipated Ramsey policy are independent of the degree of market
completeness. A more suitable environment to study the effect of the degree of market completeness on anticipated Ramsey reforms is the open economy with complete international
financial markets. In this economy, policy changes are country-specific shocks against which
agents can hedge by trading in world asset markets.
In the open economy with complete asset markets, the amount of net foreign assets
private agents will have in their possession in a particular date and state will depend on the
policy regime households expected to be in place at that particular date and state. It follows
that governments can affect the level of private wealth brought into the period in which the
policy reform is implemented. All other things equal, the Ramsey government would like
to announce a policy that induces agents to enter the state in which the Ramsey reform
takes place with the largest possible stock of wealth. Because eventually all private wealth
is allocated to consumption, the Ramsey planner has an incentive to minimize consumption
tax rates. However, at the same time, the benevolent government would like to minimize
distortions in relative prices. This objective calls for taxing all goods at the same rate.
Because the government must raise revenue to finance its budget, there emerges a policy
tradeoff between uniform taxation and low consumption taxation. The resolution of this
conflict is a Ramsey policy that departs from the traditional ideal of uniform taxation of all
32

final goods.
One fiscal instrument that is specific to the government of an open economy is the taxation
of foreign trade in goods and services. In the above analysis, we have ignore taxation of
foreign trade flows. However, it can be shown that all of the results of this paper can be
interpreted as those pertaining to an economy where the government has access to income
and trade balance taxes. Specifically, suppose that in the economy without taxation of
foreign trade τt denotes the optimal income tax rate in period t and φt denotes the optimal
consumption tax rate. Then the real allocation of such an economy is identical to an economy
with an income tax rate equal to (τt + φt )/(1 + φt ) and a tax on imports and a subsidy on
exports at the uniform rate equal to φt .
We close by noting that the recent revival of interest in studying optimal policy in closed
economy environments has been accompanied by the emergence of a rapidly growing literature that focuses on optimal monetary policy in small open economies (see, for instance,
Galı́ and Monacelli, 2000, and the references cited therein). In this literature, fiscal policy considerations are typically ignored by assuming, either explicitly or implicitly, that the
government has access to lump-sum taxation. An additional central element of this body of
work is the assumption that prices are sticky. The basic insight of this line of investigation is
that, as in the closed economy, optimal monetary policy should be geared toward fully stabilizing the price level. Specifically, the monetary authority must seek to smooth out prices
in those sectors of the economy where price adjustment is costly. This result is in stark
contrast with those we obtain in this paper. For we find that under the optimal policy the
price level is highly volatile. Two features of our model account for this difference. First, we
assume that all prices are flexible. So it is costless for the government to use the price level
as a shock absorber by unexpectedly deflating or inflating the real value of its outstanding
nominal liabilities in response to innovations in the fiscal budget. Second, we study the joint
determination of optimal fiscal and monetary policy in environments where the government
fiscal deficits cannot be financed via explicit lump-sum taxes. It is left for future research
the analysis of how the presence of complete markets would affect the characteristics of
anticipated Ramsey reforms in environments with sluggish price adjustment.

33

Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1
c
We first show that plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10) (11), (14), (17), (18),
(19), (20), (21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (29), and (30), also satisfy
U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and (31). To this end divide (30) by Rt /qt and use (11) to obtain,
c
Et qt+1 At+1 = qt At + Et qt+1 {Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )]} .

Take expectations with respect to information available at time 0 and sum for t = 0 to t = T .
This yields:
E0 qT +1 AT +1 = q0 A0 + E0

T
X

c
qt+1 {Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )]} .

t=0

Letting T → ∞ and using (26) holding with equality, we have
A0 = E0

∞
X
t=0

qt+1 Pt



Mt
(Rt − 1) + τt zt hηt + φt (cct + cm
t ) − gt
Pt



By (19) and (24), (1 − τt )zt hηt = −(1 + φt )Rt U3 (t)/U1 (t)ht /η; by (20) (Rt − 1)Mt /Pt =
η
m
c
(Rt − 1)(1 + φt )cm
t ; and by (14) qt+1 = qt rt+1 . Let tbt = zt ht − gt − ct − ct , then we have
A0



U3 (t)Rt (1 + φt )
m
m
c
ht
= E0
qt rt+1 Pt (Rt − 1)(1 + φt )ct + tbt + (1 + φt )(ct + ct ) +
ηU1 (t)
t=0


∞
X
1
1 c
m
tbt + ct + U3 (t)/U1 (t)ht /η
qt rt+1 Pt (1 + φt )Rt ct +
= E0
R
(1
+
φ
)
Rt
t
t
t=0


∞
X
qt Pt (1 + φt )
U1 (t)
m
c
U1 (t)ct +
tbt + U2 (t)ct + U3 (t)ht /η
= E0
U1 (t)
Rt (1 + φt )
t=0
∞
X

= E0

∞
X
e0
t=0

θ

c
∗
β t [U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + U3 (t)/ηht + θxt tbt ].

In the third equality we used (11) and replaced U1 (t)/Rt with (18). For the fourth equality,
we combined (17), (27), (28), and (29) to express pt qt (1 + φt )/U1 (t) as β t e0 /θ and used (17)
and (29) to replace U1 (t)/(Rt (1 + φt )) with θx∗t . Note that the fourth equation is (31), which
is what we wanted to show.
c
Next we show that if contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfy U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and (31), then
they also are consistent with (10), (11), (14), (17), (18), (19), (20), (21), (24), (26) holding
with equality, (27), (28), (29), and (30) . Let Rt be given by (18), yt by (21), wt by (24), λt
by (29), φt by (17), τt by (19), and P0 by (28) evaluated at t = 0. Choose any process for
m
Mt /Pt satisfying Mt /Pt = cm
t (1 + φt ) if Rt > 1, and Mt /Pt ≥ ct (1 + φt ) if Rt = 1. Then,

34

by construction, (10) and (20) are satisfied. Choose sequences for At and Pt sequentially as
follows: Choose A1 so that it satisfies (30) for t = 0. Then choose P1 so that


∞
X
At
Mt+j
η
j λt+j −1
m
c
= Et
β
R
(Rt+j − 1) + τt+j zt+j ht+j + φt+j (ct+j + ct+j ) − gt+j , (49)
Pt
λt t+j Pt+j
j=0
for t = 1. Now use (30) to construct A2 . Continuing in this way, one obtains sequences for
Pt and At . As will become clear shortly, it is useful to show that (49) also holds for t = 0.
Manipulate the term under the sum in equation (31) as follows:
c
∗
[U1 cm
t + U2 ct + U3 /ηht + θxt tbt ]


U1 (t)
Rt (1 + φt ) ∗
m
c
Rt (1 + φt )ct + (1 + φt )ct + (1 + φt )Rt U3 /U1 ht /η +
θxt tbt
Rt (1 + φt )
U1 (t)
η
c
λt Rt−1 [(1 + φt )cm
t Rt + (1 + φt )ct − (1 − τt )zt ht + tbt ]
η
m
c
λt Rt−1 [(1 + φt )cm
t (Rt − 1) + φt (ct + ct ) + τt zt ht − gt ]
η
c
λt Rt−1 [Mt /Pt (Rt − 1) + φt (cm
t + ct ) + τt zt ht − gt ]

=
=
=
=

The first equality uses equations (18); the second uses equations (17), (19), (24), and (29);
and the third uses equations (20) and (24). Divide (31) by λ0 and note that λ0 = θP0 /e0 .
It follows that (49) also holds for t = 0. For t ≥ 1, choose the nominal exchange rate et to
satisfy (28), and let
Pt λt+1
rt+1 = β
.
(50)
Pt+1 λt
This expression, together with (28) and (29) implies (27). Combining (49) evaluated at t
and t + 1 one can write


λt+1
At
η
−1 Mt
m
c
= Rt
(Rt − 1) + τt zt ht + φt (ct + ct ) − gt + βAt+1 Et
.
Pt
Pt
Pt+1 λt
Using (30) to eliminate At yields
Rt−1 = βEt

λt+1 Pt
.
λt Pt+1

Given our definition of rt+1 , this expression implies that (11) holds for all t ≥ 0. Let qt
be given by (14). Finally, we need to show that (26) holds with equality at all dates and
under all contingencies. Multiply (30) by qt+1 , apply the Et operator, and use the fact that
Et qt+1 = qt Et rt+1 = qt /Rt to get
c
Et qt+1 At+1 = qt At + qt Rt−1 {Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )]}.

Summing for j = 0 to J yields
Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 =
qt At + Et

J
X

−1
c
qt+j Rt+j
Pt+j [Mt+j /Pt+j (1 − Rt+j ) + (gt+j − τt+j zt+j hηt+j − φt (cm
t + ct ))].

j=0

35

Now take the limit for J → ∞ and use the fact that, by (14) and (50), qt+j Pt+j =
qt Pt β j λt+j /λt to get

Pt qt Et

(

lim Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 =
)

J→∞

At X j λt+j −1
c
+
β
Rt+j [Mt+j /Pt+j (1 − Rt+j ) + (gt+j − τt+j zt+j hηt+j − φt (cm
t + ct ))] .
Pt
λ
t
j=0
∞

But, since (49) holds for all t ≥ 0, the right hand side equals zero for all t ≥ 0. So
condition (26) holds with equality for all t ≥ 0.

Proof of Proposition 5
c
We first show that plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (11), (14), (18), (21), (24),
(26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (29), (38), (39), (40), (41), and (42) also satisfy
U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (31), and (43). First, note that equations (18), (29), (39) imply condition
(43). Next, divide (42) by Rt /qt and use (11) to obtain,

Et qt+1 At+1 = qt At + Et qt+1 [Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt − τt zt hηt )].
Take expectations with respect to information available at time 0 and sum for t = 0 to t = T .
This yields:
E0 qT +1 AT +1 = q0 A0 + E0

T
X

qt+1 [Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt − τt zt hηt )]

t=0

Letting T → ∞ and using (26) holding with equality, we have
A0 = E0

∞
X
t=0

qt+1 Pt



Mt
(Rt − 1) + τt zt hηt − gt
Pt



By (24) and (40), (1 − τt ) = −U3 (t)/U1 (t)Rt /(ηzt htη−1 ); by (41) (Rt − 1)Mt /Pt = (Rt − 1)cm
t .
We then have
A0 = E0

∞
X

η
−1
qt Et rt+1 Pt [(Rt − 1)cm
t + zt ht − gt + η U3 (t)/U1 (t)Rt ht ]

t=0
∞
X
qt Pt
η
c
−1
m
c
−1
[U1 (t)cm
= E0
t + U2 (t)ct + U1 (t)Rt (zt ht − gt − ct − ct ) + η U3 (t)ht ]
U
(t)
1
t=0

The last equality uses equation (18). Multiply this expression by U1 (0)/P0 . Let qt∗ = r1∗ . . . rt∗
and q0∗ = 1. Then by (27), (29), and (39), Pt qt U1 (0)/(P0 U1 (t)) = β t for any t ≥ 0 and
U1 (0)/P0 = θe0 . This yields
X
A0
η
c
−1
∗
m
c
= E0
β t [U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + η U3 (t)ht + θxt (zt ht − gt − ct − ct )],
e0
t=0
∞

θ

36

c
which is (31). Now we show that if contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfy U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1,
(31), and (43), then they also are consistent with (11), (14), (18), (21), (24), (26) holding
with equality, (27), (28), (29), (38), (39), (40), (41), and (42). Let λt be given by (39), Rt by
(18), yt by (21), wt by (24), τt by (40), and P0 by (28) evaluated at t = 0. Equations (18),
(39), and (43) guarantee that (29) is also satisfied. Choose any process for Mt /Pt satisfying
m
Mt /Pt = cm
t if Rt > 1, and Mt /Pt ≥ ct if Rt = 1. Then, by construction, (38) and (41) are
satisfied. Then choose processes for At and Pt sequentially as follows: Choose A1 so that it
satisfies (42) for t = 0. Then choose P1 so that


∞
X
Mt+j
At
η
j λt+j −1
(51)
= Et
β
Rt+j
(Rt+j − 1) + τt+j zt+j ht+j − gt+j
Pt
λ
P
t
t+j
j=0

for t = 1. Now use (42) to construct A2 . Continuing in this way, one obtains processes for
Pt and At . As will become clear shortly, it is useful to show that (51) also holds for t = 0.
Manipulate the term under the sum in equation (31) as follows:



U3
U2 c
U3
η
m
c
∗
m
c
ct +
ht
U1 ct + U2 ct + ht + θxt (zt ht − gt − ct − ct ) = U1 cm
t +
η
U1
ηU1

U2
η
m
c
+ (zt ht − gt − ct − ct )
U1

1
(zt hηt − gt − cm
= U1 cm
t +
t )
Rt

ht
1
− (1 − τt )wt
Rt
η
U1 m
=
[c (Rt − 1) − gt + τt zt hηt ]
Rt t
λt
[Mt /Pt (Rt − 1) − gt + τt zt hηt ]
=
Rt
The second equality uses equations (18) and (40); the third uses equations (24); and the
fourth uses equations (41). Use the above expression to get rid of the expression in square
brackets on the right of equation (31). Divide the resulting expression by λ0 and note that
by equations (28) evaluated at t = 0 and (29), λ0 = θP0 /e0 . It follows that (51) also holds
for t = 0. Pick the nominal exchange rate et to satisfy (28) and the pricing kernel rt+1 to
satisfy (27). Combining (51) evaluated at dates t and t + 1 one can write


λt+1
At
η
−1 Mt
= Rt
(Rt − 1) + τt zt ht − gt + βAt+1 Et
Pt
Pt
Pt+1 λt
Using (42) to eliminate At yields
Rt−1 = βEt

λt+1 Pt
.
λt Pt+1

This expression together with (27), (28), and (29) implies that (11) holds for all t ≥ 0. Let
qt be given by (14). Finally, we need to show that (26) holds with equality at all dates and
37

under all contingencies. Multiply (42) by qt+1 , apply the Et operator, and use the fact that
Et qt+1 = qt Et rt+1 = qt /Rt to get
Et qt+1 At+1 = qt At + qt Rt−1 [Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt − τt zt hηt )]
Summing for j = 0 to J yields
Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 = qt At + Et

J
X

−1
qt+j Rt+j
Pt+j

j=0



Mt+j
(1 − Rt+j ) + (gt+j − τt+j zt+j hηt+j )
Pt+j



Now take the limit for J → ∞ and use the fact that, by (14), (27), and (28), qt+j Pt+j =
qt Pt β j λt+j /λt to get
(

)
∞
At X j λt+j Mt+j
lim Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 = Pt qt Et
+
β
(1 − Rt+j ) + gt+j − τt+j zt+j hηt+j
J→∞
Pt
λ
R
P
t t+j
t+j
j=0
But, since (51) holds for all t ≥ 0, the right hand side equals zero for all t ≥ 0. So
condition (26) holds with equality for all t ≥ 0.

Proof of Proposition 7
c
We first show that plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10), (11), (14), (17), (18),
(20), (21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (29), (44), and (45) also satisfy
U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (31) and (46). The equilibrium conditions (17), (24), (29), and (44) taken
together imply (46). To show that (31) holds divide (45) by Rt /qt and use (11) to obtain,
c
Et qt+1 At+1 = qt At + Et qt+1 {Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − φt (cm
t + ct )]} .

Take expectations with respect to information available at time 0 and sum for t = 0 to t = T .
This yields:
E0 qT +1 AT +1 = q0 A0 + E0

T
X

c
qt+1 {Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − φt (cm
t + ct )]} .

t=0

38

Letting T → ∞ and using (26) holding with equality, we have




A0 = E0

∞
X

= E0

∞
X

η
η
c
m
m
c
qt+1 Pt [(1 + φt )cm
t (Rt − 1) + (1 + φt )(ct + ct ) − zt ht − gt − ct − ct + zt ht ]

= E0

t=0
∞
X

qt+1 Pt

= E0

∞
X

= E0

∞
X

= E0

t=0
∞
X

qt+1 Pt

t=0

t=0

1 + φt
η
c
[U1 (t)cm
t Rt + U1 (t)ct − U1 (t)/(1 + φt )zt ht + U1 (t)/(1 + φt )tbt ]
U1 (t)

qt+1 Pt Rt

t=0

t=0

Mt
(Rt − 1) + φt (cct + cm
t ) − gt
Pt

qt Pt


1 + φt 
c
−1
−1
U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + η U3 (t)ht + Rt U1 (t)/(1 + φt )tbt
U1 (t)


1 + φt 
c
−1
∗
U1 (t)cm
+
U
(t)c
+
η
U
(t)h
+
θx
tb
2
3
t
t
t
t
t
U1 (t)

e0 t
c
−1
∗
β [U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + η U3 (t)ht + θxt tbt ],
θ

c
where we define tbt = zt hηt − gt − cm
t − ct . In the last equality we combined (17), (27), (28),
and (29) to express pt qt (1 + φt )/U1 (t) as β t e0 /θ and used (17). Note that the last equation
is (31), which is what we wanted to show.
c
Next we show that if, given A0 and e0 , contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfy U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1
and equations (31) and (46), then they also are consistent with (10), (11), (14), (17), (18),
(20), (21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (29), (44), and (45). Let Rt be given
by (18), yt by (21), wt by (24), λt by (29), φt by (17). Combining (17), (24), (29), and
(46), one obtains (44). Let P0 be given by (28) evaluated at t = 0. Choose any process for
m
Mt /Pt satisfying Mt /Pt = cm
t (1 + φt ) if Rt > 1, and Mt /Pt ≥ ct (1 + φt ) if Rt = 1. Then, by
construction, (10) and (20) are satisfied. Now choose sequences for At and Pt sequentially
as follows: Choose A1 so that it satisfies (45) for t = 0. Then choose P1 so that



∞
X
Mt+j
At
j λt+j −1
m
c
= Et
β
R
(Rt+j − 1) + φt+j (ct+j + ct+j ) − gt+j ,
Pt
λt t+j Pt+j
j=0

(52)

for t = 1. Next use (45) to construct A2 . Continuing in this way, one obtains sequences for
Pt and At . As will become clear shortly, it is useful to show that (52) also holds for t = 0.
Manipulate the term under the sum in equation (31) as follows:

 m
U1 ct + U2 cct + η −1 U3 ht + θx∗t tbt =


Rt (1 + φt ) ∗
U1 (t)
m
c
−1
Rt (1 + φt )ct + (1 + φt )ct + η (1 + φt )Rt U3 /U1 ht +
θxt tbt =
Rt (1 + φt )
U1 (t)
η
c
λt Rt−1 [(1 + φt )cm
t Rt + (1 + φt )ct − zt ht + tbt ] =
m
c
λt Rt−1 [(1 + φt )cm
t (Rt − 1) + φt (ct + ct ) − gt ] =
c
λt Rt−1 [Mt /Pt (Rt − 1) + φt (cm
t + ct ) − gt ]
39

The first equality uses equations (18); the second uses equations (17), (24), (29), and (44);
and the third uses equations (20) and (24). Divide (31) by λ0 and note that λ0 = θP0 /e0 .
It follows that (52) also holds for t = 0. For t ≥ 1, choose the nominal exchange rate et to
satisfy (28), and choose rt+1 to satisfy equation (27). Combining (52) evaluated at t and
t + 1 one can write


At
λt+1
−1 Mt
m
c
= Rt
(Rt − 1) + φt (ct + ct ) − gt + βAt+1 Et
.
Pt
Pt
Pt+1 λt
Using (45) to eliminate At yields
Rt−1 = βEt

λt+1 Pt
.
λt Pt+1

This expression together with (27), (28), and (29) implies that (11) holds for all t ≥ 0. Let
qt be given by (14). Finally, we need to show that (26) holds with equality at all dates and
under all contingencies. Multiply (45) by qt+1 , apply the Et operator, and use the fact that
Et qt+1 = qt Et rt+1 = qt /Rt to get
c
Et qt+1 At+1 = qt At + qt Rt−1 [Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt − φt (cm
t + ct ))]

Summing for j = 0 to J yields
Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 = qt At + Et

J
X

−1
c
qt+j Rt+j
Pt+j [Mt+j /Pt+j (1 − Rt+j ) + (gt+j − φt+j (cm
t+j + ct+j ))]

j=0

Now take the limit for J → ∞ and use the fact that, by (14), (27), and (28), qt+j Pt+j =
qt Pt β j λt+j /λt to get
(
)

∞
At X j λt+j Mt+j
m
c
lim Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 = Pt qt Et
+
β
(1 − Rt+j ) + gt+j − φt+j (ct+j + ct+j )
J→∞
Pt
λt Rt+j Pt+j
j=0
But, since (52) holds for all t ≥ 0, the right hand side equals zero for all t ≥ 0. So
condition (26) holds with equality for all t ≥ 0.

Proof of Proposition 11
c
We first show that contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } that satisfy U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10), (11),
(14), (16)-(21), (24), (26) holding with equality, and (27)-(30), for given A0 , W0 , and e0 are
consistent with (48). Divide (30), by Rt /qt and use (11) to obtain,
η
c
Et qt+1 At+1 = qt At + Et qt+1 [Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt − φt (cm
t + ct ) − τt zt ht )]

Take expectations with respect to information available at time 0 and sum for t = 0 to t = T .
This yields:
E0 qT +1 AT +1 = q0 A0 + E0

T
X

c
qt+1 [Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt − φt (cm
t + ct ) − τt wt ht )]

t=0

40

Letting T → ∞ and using (26) holding with equality we have
−A0 = E0

∞
X

c
qt+1 [Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt (gt − φt (cm
t + ct ) − τt wt ht )]

t=0

Now add this expression to (47) to get
W0 − A0 = E0

∞
X

η
c
qt Et rt+1 Pt [cm
t + ct − zt ht + gt ]

t=0

Let qt∗ = r1∗ . . . rt∗ . Then by (11), (27) and (28) Pt qt Et rt+1 = Pt∗ qt∗ e0 /Rt∗ . Using the definition
x∗t = Pt∗ qt∗ /(β t Rt∗ ), equation (48) follows immediately. Next, we show that contingent plans
c
{cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and (48) also satisfy U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10), (11), (14),
c
(16)-(21), (24), (26) holding with equality, and (27)-(30). Given contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht }
construct Rt , yt , and wt , so that respectively, (18), (21), and (24) hold. Choose Mt /Pt so
as to be consistent with (10) and (20). With e0 given, construct P0 from (28) evaluated at
t = 0. Pick φ0 so that the following expression holds for t = 0.


∞
X
At U1 (t)
U1 (0)e0 ∗
U3 (t + j)ht+j
j
m
c
+
xt+j tbt+j ,
= Et
β U1 (t + j)ct+j + U2 (t + j)ct+j +
P t 1 + φt
η
P
(1
+
φ
)
0
0
j=0
(53)
c
−
c
.
Note
that
this
determines
φ
uniquely.
(It
could
be
the
case
where tbt ≡ zt hηt − gt − cm
0
t
t
that φ0 < −1 or that φ0 > 1. ) Find τ0 from (19), then find A1 from (30). Set P1 (1 + φ1 )
so as to satisfy (53) evaluated at t = 1. Now use (17) to find λ0 and λ1 /P1 . Let
rt+1 = β

λt+1 /Pt+1
λt /Pt

(54)

Find e1 by imposing (27). Then find P1 from (28). Thus φ1 and λ1 are also uniquely
determined. Now repeat the above steps and in this way construct contingent plans for
{At+1 , rt+1 , φt , Pt , λt , τt , et+1 } that satisfy (17), (19), (27), (28), and (30) for all dates and
under all contingencies. Let qt be given by (14) and q0 = 1. Set λ = λ0 /(P0 q0 ). Therefore,
(16) holds at t = 0. To see that (16) holds also for all t > 0, assume that it holds for
some arbitrary t0 ≥ 0 and show that then it also holds for t0 + 1. Consider (54) which can
0
be written as λt0 +1 /Pt0 +1 = β −1 rt0 +1 λt0 /Pt0 . By assumption, λt0 /Pt0 = λqt0 /β t . This yields,
0
0
λt0 +1 /Pt0 +1 = β −1 rt0 +1 λqt0 /β t = λqt0 +1 /β t +1 , where the last equality uses (14). Hence, (16)
holds for all t ≥ 0. To show that equation (11) is satisfied, evaluate (53) for some arbitrary
t ≥ 0 and write it as:
U1 (0)e0 ∗
U3 (t)ht
At+1 U1 (t + 1)
At U1 (t)
c
+
xt tbt + βEt
= U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct +
P t 1 + φt
η
P0 (1 + φ0 )
Pt+1 1 + φt+1
Use (17) and (54) to rewrite this expression as
U1 (0)e0 ∗
U3 (t)ht
U1 (t)
U1 (t)
c
At = U1 (t)cm
+
xt tbt +
Et At+1 rt+1
t + U2 (t)ct +
Pt (1 + φt )
η
P0 (1 + φ0 )
Pt (1 + φt )
41

Now use (30) to get
U1 (0)e0 ∗
U1 (t)
U3 (t)ht
c
At+1 (Rt−1 − Et rt+1 ) = U1 (t)cm
+
x tbt
t + U2 (t)ct +
Pt (1 + φt )
η
P0 (1 + φ0 ) t
U1 (t)Rt−1
c
[Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
+
t + ct )]
Pt (1 + φt )
Rearranging we obtain
η
c
(1 − Rt Et rt+1 ) = Pt (1 + φt )Rt cm
t + Pt (1 + φt )ct − Pt (1 − τt )zt ht
Pt (1 + φt )Rt U1 (0)e0 ∗
x tbt
+
U1 (t)
P0 (1 + φ0 ) t
c
+Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )
η
c
m
= Pt (1 + φt )(Rt − 1)cm
t + Pt (1 + φt )(ct + ct ) − Pt (1 − τt )zt ht
Pt (1 + φt )Rt U1 (0)e0 ∗
x tbt
+
U1 (t)
P0 (1 + φ0 ) t
c
+Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )]
c
= −Mt (1 − Rt ) − Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )] − tbt
Pt (1 + φt )Rt U1 (0)e0 ∗
x tbt
+
U1 (t)
P0 (1 + φ0 ) t
c
+Mt (1 − Rt ) + Pt [gt − τt zt hηt − φt (cm
t + ct )]
Pt (1 + φt )Rt U1 (0)e0 ∗
x tbt − Pt tbt
=
U1 (t)
P0 (1 + φ0 ) t
= 0,

where the last equality follows from (16), (17), and (27). Thus, (11) holds. To show that
(26) holds recall from above that by summing (30) one can obtain the following expression
for any t ≥ 0
"

#
∞
X
Pt+j qt+j λt
tb
Pt qt λt At
λ
t+j t+j
− Et
U1 cm + U2 cc + η −1 U3 h +
lim Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 =
J→∞
λt
Pt
Pt qt λt+j
Rt+j
j=0
P

q

λ

t+j t
Now note that by (16) Pt+j
= β j and that by (16) and (27) λt+j /Rt+j = U1 (0)/(P0 (1 +
t qt λt+j
φ0 ))e0 x∗t+j . Then equation (53) implies that the right side of the above expression equals
zero. So limJ→∞ Et qt+J+1 At+J+1 = 0 for all t ≥ 0, which is to say that (26) holds with
equality. Finally to show that (47) holds, sum (30) and use (26) holding with equality to get

A0 = E0

∞
X

c
qt+1 Pt [(Rt − 1)Mt − Pt (1 − τt )zt hηt + (1 + φt )Pt (cm
t + ct ) + tbt ]

t=0

Note that by (27) β t e0 x∗t = Pt qt+1 and rearrange terms to write this expression as
X
A0 X t ∗
Pt
c
−
β xt tbt = E0
qt+1 [(Rt − 1)Mt − Pt (1 − τt )zt hηt + (1 + φt )Pt (cm
t + ct )]
e0
e
0
t=0
t=0
∞

∞

By (48) the left side of this expression equals W0 /e0 . Thus, (47) holds.
42

Appendix B
Calibration: Identification of Structural Parameters
1
We assign the following numerical values: η = 0.8, γ = −2, β = 1.04
, π = 1.042, stb ≡
η
m
c
h −c −c −g
g
1
∗
∗
= 0.02, h = 0.2, sg ≡ y = 0.2, x = 1, R = 1.082, sm = my = 5.8, and
y
a
= s ≡ m+bonds = 0.57 Define total consumption as c = cm + cc. Then, we have
y

a

y

sc ≡ c/y = (y − g − tb)/y = 1 − sg − stb = 0.78. Consumption velocity is then given by
c/m = c/y × y/m = sc /sm = 4.52. By (27), (28), and (29) we have that in steady state
R = π/β = 1.08. In steady state, equation (30) becomes πa = Ra + m(1 − R) + g − τ hη − φc
Divide by output, y = hη to get (π − R)sa = sm (1 − R) + sg − τ − φsc . Impose the assumption
that in the pre-Ramsey competitive equilibrium φ = τ to get τ = φ = [(R − π)sa + sm (1 −
R) + sg ]/(1 + sc) = 0.1176. By equation (18) we have that αm /αc = Rcm /cc . Because in the
steady state of the pre-Ramsey competitive equilibrium the nominal interest rate is positive,
we have that cash-in-advance constraint (10) holds with equality. Therefore, we can write
αm /αc = R/ [(1 + φ)c/m − 1] = 0.2672. By equation (19) we have that
(1 − αm − αc )
1 − h 1 − τ ηy
(we use w = ηy/h)
=
m
α
cm (1 + φ)R h




1 − h y  c  1 − τ
=
η (we use m = (1 + φ)cm )
h
c
m
R
Solving for αc yields




 −1

1 − h y   c  1 − τ
R
c
1+
η
α = 1+
= 0.1885.
(1 + φ)c/m − 1
h
c
m
R
It follows that αm = 0.0504. Solving equations (19) for cm and (18) for cc we obtain
cm =

αm
(1 − τ )(1 − h) y
η = 0.0426,
m
c
1−α −α
R(1 + φ)
h

and

αc m
c R = 0.1727.
αm
U1
Then λ follows directly from (17), λ = 1+φ
= 3.9619. Then θ is identified from equation (29),
λ
θ = Rx∗ = 3.6560. The initial value of the nominal exchange rate determines the initial real
debt of the government. By setting a high value of e0 amounts to imposing a high capital levy
on private agents’ holdings of government liabilities. We choose e0 so that the utility value
of government liabilities in period zero is the same as in the steady-state of the pre-Ramsey
equilibrium. By setting e0 in this way, we ensure that the burden of public liabilities does
not change in the period the Ramsey plan is implemented. This is just one of may possible
strategies of assigning a value to e0 . Alternative values of e0 will affect the level of tax
rates and the real allocation, but will not alter their cyclical properties in fundamental ways.
Specifically, note that A0 /e0 = (A0 /P0 )λ0 /θ. We then impose that (A0 /P0 )λ0 = sa hη λ. This
implies that A0 /e0 = 0.1705.
cc =

43

Appendix C
Ramsey Plans in the Closed Economy With Consumption and Income Taxation
In this appendix, we develop the closed-economy version of the model presented in section 3.
The description of households and the government is as in sections 3.1 and 3.3, respectively.
Without loss of generality and to facilitate comparison with the related closed-economy
literature, we focus on the case in which output is produced with a linear technology, η = 1.
So we have,
yt = zt ht .
(55)
Profits in period t are given by
zt ht Pt − Pt wt ht .
The firm chooses ht so as to maximize expected profits. Firms will find it optimal to produce
a finite and positive quantity of output as long as
wt = zt .

(56)

Equilibrium
In equilibrium, the goods market must clear,
c
zt ht = cm
t + ct + gt .

(57)

This equilibrium condition differentiates the closed economy from the open economy. In
the open economy, output need not equal domestic absorption at all times, since domestic
residents have access to foreign goods markets. All households are assumed to be identical,
so in equilibrium there is no borrowing and lending among them. The only assets in non-zero
net supply are government bonds. Thus, for the financial asset market to clear it must be
the case that
Dt+1 = Rt Bt .
Government bonds are nominally non-state contingent, that is, Rt Bt is in the information
set of time t. This implies that Dt+1 must also be in the information set of time t. In period
0, households are endowed with W0 units of nominal wealth, which must be equal to the
government’s initial level of liabilities, A0 . Thus, in equilibrium equation (15) becomes
A0 + E0

∞
X

qt+1 Pt (1 − τt )wt ht = E0

t=0

∞
X

c
qt+1 [Pt (1 + φt )(cm
t + ct ) + (Rt − 1)Mt ] .

(58)

t=0

For households to have well defined demand functions it must be the case that the nominal
interest be non-negative, that is,
Rt ≥ 1.
We can now define an equilibrium.

44

Definition 5 (Competitive Equilibrium in the Closed Economy) A competitive equilibrium is a positive constant λ and set of stochastic processes {Pt , rt+1 , Mt , At+1 , cct , cm
t , ht , qt ,
∞
wt , yt , λt }t=0 satisfying (10), (11), (14), (16)-(20), (30), and (55)-(58), given the exogenous
stochastic processes {gt , zt }, policy sequences τt , φt , and Rt ≥ 1, and the initial condition
A0 .

Competitive Equilibrium in Primal Form
The following proposition presents the primal form of the competitive equilibrium.
Proposition 12 Given the initial conditions A0 and P0 , and exogenous stochastic processes
c
for {zt , gt }, contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and (57) are the same as
those satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10), (11), (14), (16)-(20), (30), and (55)-(58) .
c
Proof: We need to show that contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 and
(57) also satisfy (10), (11), (14), (16)-(20), (30), and (55)-(58). Choose Rt so that (18)
holds, wt so that (56) holds, and yt such that (55) holds. Construct φ0 so that the following
equation holds for t = 0

X 

At U1 (t)
c
= Et
β j U1 (t + j)cm
t+j + U2 (t + j)ct+j + U3 (t + j)ht+j
P t 1 + φt
j=0
∞

(59)

c
This uniquely determines φ0 for given plans {cm
t , ct , ht } because A0 /P0 is given. Then choose
τ0 so that (19) is satisfied. Pick M0 such that both (10) and (20) are satisfied. Find A1
from (30). Pick Pt (1 + φt ) so as to satisfy (59) for t = 1. Then choose (1 − τt )/(1 + φt ) so
that it satisfies (19). Use (30) and (57) to write A2 = R1 A1 + M1 (1 − R1 ) + P1 (1 + φ1 )[(1 −
c
τ1 )/(1 + φ1)z1 h1 − cm
1 − c1 ]. This expression defines A2 . Note that by construction (30) holds
in period 1. Then, find P2 (1 + φ2 ) from (59). In this way one can construct time paths for
At , Pt (1 + φt ) and (1 − τt )/(1 + φt ). Note that the price level and the consumption tax rate
c
associated with a given path of {cm
t , ct , ht } is not unique. So one can choose, for example, a
constant path for consumption tax rates, that is, φt = φ0 . Let λt = U1 (t)/(1 + φt ) so that
(17) holds. Let rt+1 = β(λt+1 /Pt+1 )/(λt /Pt ). Note that rt+1 is independent of the level of
prices because λt /Pt depends only on Pt (1 + φt ), which is uniquely determined. Use (59)
evaluated at t and t + 1 to get

U1 (t)
c
[Rt At − Pt (1 + φt )(Rt cm
t + ct + U3 /U1 ht ] = βAt+1 Et U1 (t + 1)/(1 + φt+1 )/Pt+1
Rt Pt (1 + φt )
It follows that Rt−1 = Et rt+1 . Now let λ = β t λt /Pt /qt . Note that λ is independent of the
particular value taken by Pt . It again depends only on Pt (1 + φt ), which is unique. We need
to check whether β t+1 λt+1 /Pt+1 qt+1 is also equal to λ. This follows immediately from the

45

definition of rt+1 . It is left to show that (58) holds. Express A0 using (59) as follows:
X
A0
U1 (t)
c
λ0 = E0
βt
[(1 + φt )Rt cm
t + (1 + φt )ct + (1 + φt )U3 (t)/U1 (t)Rt ht ]
P0
(1
+
φ
)R
t
t
t=0
∞

= E0

∞
X

βt

A0 λ = E0

t=0
∞
X

c
β t λqt+1 [(Rt − 1)Mt + (1 + φt )Pt (cm
t + ct ) − (1 − τt )wt Pt ht ]

λt
c
[(Rt − 1)Mt + (1 + φt )Pt (cm
t + ct ) − (1 − τt )wt Pt ht ]
Pt Rt

t=0

Eliminating λ from the left and right hand sides, we obtain (58), which is what we wanted
to show.

Proof of Proposition 10
c
The Ramsey problem consists in choosing cm
t , ct , ht so as to maximize (9) subject to U1 /U2 ≥
1 and (57). Consider a modified Ramsey problem that does not impose the condition
U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1. That is, consider the problem of maximizing (9) subject to (57). The firstorder conditions associated with this problem are (57), U1 (t)/U2 (t) = 1, and −U3 (t)/U1 (t) =
zt . Note that the constraint U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1 is satisfied. So the solution to the modified
Ramsey problem is indeed the solution to the original Ramsey problem. So clearly, the Ramsey allocation is Pareto optimal. (Note that, because it achieves the first best, the Ramsey
plan is time consistent.) Comparing the optimality conditions of the Ramsey problem with
equilibrium conditions (18) and (19), it follows that the Ramsey policy associated with the
Ramsey plan features Rt = 1 and τt = −φt . Moreover, it is clear from the proof of proposition 12 that in decentralizing the Ramsey plan, the government has some margin in choosing
prices and consumption tax rates for t > 0. In particular, the after-tax consumption price
level, Pt (1 + φt ) is uniquely pinned down, but neither Pt nor φt are individually determined
for t > 0. It follows that the Ramsey plan can be supported by a constant tax policy of the
form φt = −τt = φ0 .

The Case of a Predetermined Initial Consumption Tax Rate
Proposition 13 Given initial conditions A0 , P0 , and φ0 , and exogenous stochastic processes
c
for {zt , gt }, contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (57), and
X
A0 U1 (0)
c
= E0
β t [U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + U3 (t)ht ]
P 0 1 + φ0
t=0
∞

(60)

are the same as those satisfying (10), (11), (14), (16)-(21), (24), (26) holding with equality,
(27), (28), (30), and (47).
This primal form is the same as that of an economy with only labor income taxation
(see Chari, et al. 1991). Thus, when P0 and φ0 cannot be chosen optimally by the Ramsey
planner, the Ramsey real allocation is the same in the economy with labor income and
46

consumption taxes as in the economy with labor income taxes only. In particular, the
Ramsey real allocation is no longer Pareto optimal, and the distortion of the (credit good)
consumption/leisure margin, (1 − τt )/(1 + φt ) is no longer nil. However, the optimality of
the Friedman rule continues to hold.
Proof of Proposition 13
c
We first show that contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (10), (11), (14),
(16)-(21), (24), (26) holding with equality, (27), (28), (30), and (47) also satisfy (57) and
(60). Use (19) and (20) to eliminate (1 − τt )wt and Mt /Pt (Rt − 1) from (58). This yields:

A0 = E0

∞
X

= E0

∞
X

= E0

∞
X

= E0

∞
X

qt Pt

= E0

t=0
∞
X

c
qt Pt λt−1 [U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + U3 (t)ht ]

= E0

∞
X

= E0

∞
X

c
m
qt+1 Pt [U3 (t)/U1 (t)(1 + φt )Rt ht + (1 + φt )(cm
t + ct ) + (Rt − 1)(1 + φt )ct ]

t=0

qt Pt rt+1

t=0

1 + φt
[U3 (t)Rt ht + U1 (t)cct + Rt U1 (t)cm
t ]
U1 (t)

qt Pt rt+1 Rt

t=0

1 + φt
[U3 (t)ht + U1 (t)/Rt cct + U1 (t)cm
t ]
U1 (t)

1 + φt
[U3 (t)ht + U2 (t)cct + U1 (t)cm
t ]
U1 (t)

t=0
c
β t /λ [U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + U3 (t)ht ]

t=0

t=0

βt

P0 (1 + φ0 )
c
[U1 (t)cm
t + U2 (t)ct + U3 (t)ht ]
U1 (0)

where the second equality uses (14), the fourth equality uses the law of iterated expectations,
(11), and (18), the fifth equality uses (17), the sixth equality uses (16), and finally, the seventh
equality uses (17) and (16) evaluated at t = 0. Rearranging terms we obtain (60).
c
To show that contingent plans {cm
t , ct , ht } satisfying U1 (t)/U2 (t) ≥ 1, (57), and (60) can
be supported as a competitive equilibrium, proceed as follows. Let λ = U1 (0)/[(1 + φ0 )P0 ],
thus (16) is satisfied for t = 0. Choose Rt such that (18) holds, wt such that (56) holds,
yt such that (55) holds. For t = 0, construct τ0 from (19). Pick M0 such that both (10)
and (20) are satisfied. Given these values, find A1 from (30). Now, there are many options
on how to set P1 pointing to the fact that there are multiple price levels and consumption
tax rates that support the Ramsey allocation as a competitive equilibrium. Specifically, any
price level path and consumption tax rate path satisfying
∞
X


At
c
U1 (t) = Et
β j U1 (t + j)cm
+
U
(t
+
j)c
+
U
(t
+
j)h
(61)
2
3
t+j
t+j
t+j
Pt (1 + φt )
j=0
can support the Ramsey allocation as a competitive equilibrium. That is, only the after tax
price of consumption is uniquely pinned down by the Ramsey allocation. One possible price
47

path is one in which Pt = P0 for all t. That is, in this case there is no front-loading via surprise
inflation. (There may still be front-loading via surprise consumption taxes.) Another possible
competitive equilibrium is one in which φt = 0 for all t > 0. That is, the consumption tax is
not a necessary fiscal instrument to ‘implement’ the Ramsey allocation. Or put differently,
the Ramsey allocation is the same regardless of whether the Ramsey planner has access to
a consumption tax or not. Construct a time series for Pt (1 + φt ) and At for t ≥ 1 as follows.
Pick Pt (1 + φt ) so as to satisfy (61) for t = 1, then choose (1 − τt )/(1 + φt ) so that it satisfies
m
c
(19). Choose A2 = R1 A1 + P1 (1 + φ1 )cm
1 (1 − R1 ) + P1 (1 + φ1 )[(1 − τ1 )/(1 + φ1 )z1 h1 − c1 − c1 ].
Note that by construction A2 satisfies (30). Then, find P2 (1 + φ2) from (61). In this way one
can construct time paths for At , Pt (1+φt ) and (1−τt )/(1+φt ). Let λt /Pt = U1 (t)/[Pt (1+φt )]
and let qt = β t λt /Pt /λ. Thus, (16) and (17) hold for all t and q0 = 1 as required. Then
let rt+1 = qt+1 /qt so that (14) is satisfied. It remains to be shown that (11) and (58) hold.
The latter follows straightforward from (60). To show that (11) holds use (61). Note that
by (60), equation (61) also holds for t = 0. Combining (61) evaluated at t and t + 1 one can
write


At
λt+1
−1 Mt
m
c
= Rt
(Rt − 1) + τt wt ht + φt (ct + ct ) − gt + βAt+1 Et
.
Pt
Pt
Pt+1 λt
Using (30) to eliminate At yields
Rt−1 = βEt

λt+1 Pt
.
λt Pt+1

Given our definition of rt+1 , this expression implies that (11) holds for all t ≥ 0.

48

References
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Temporary Stabilization: Predetermined Exchange Rates,” Journal
of Political Economy 94, 1986, 1319-1329.
Chari, V. V.; Christiano, Lawrence; and Kehoe, Patrick J., “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary
Policy: Some Recent Results,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 23, August 1991,
519-539.
Coleman, Wilbur John II, “Welfare and Optimum Dynamic Taxation of Consumption and
Income,” Journal of Public Economics, 76, 2000, 1-39.
Correia, Isabel and Teles, Pedro, “Is the Friedman Rule Optimal When Money is an Intermediate Good?,” Journal of Monetary Economics 38, 1996, 223-244.
Cunha, Alexandre B., “Optimal Exchange Rate Policy, Optimal Incomplete Taxation and
Business Cycles,” Manuscript, Faculdades Ibmec, Brazil, March 30, 2002.
Galı́, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli, “Optimal Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open Economy,” mimeo Universitat Pompeu Fabra, May 2000.
Guidotti, Pablo E. and Végh, Carlos A., “The Optimal Inflation Tax When Money Reduces
Transactions Costs: A Reconsideration,” Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 1993,
189-205.
Helpman, Elhanan, “An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange-Rate Regimes,” Journal of
Political Economy 89, October 1981, 865-890.
Helpman, Elhanan and Assaf Razin, “The Role of Saving and Investment in Exchange Rate
Determination under Alternative Monetary Mechanisms,” Journal of Monetary Economics 13, 1984, 307-325.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and Stokey, Nancy L., “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an
Economy Without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics 12, 1983, 55-93.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martı́n Uribe, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy Under
Imperfect Competition,” manuscript, The University of Pennsylvania, 2001.
Stockman, Alan C, “A Theory of Exchange Rate Determination,” Journal of Political
Economy 88, 1980, 673-697.
Woodford, Michael, “Monetary policy and price level determinacy in a cash-in-advance economy,” Economic Theory 4, 1994, 345-380.

49

Figure 1: Impulse response of the Ramsey economy to a 1-standard-deviation positive innovation in government purchases
τ

φ

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

−0.5

−0.5

−1

0

5

10
R

15

−1

20

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

−0.5

−0.5

−1

0

5

10
h

15

−1

20

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

−0.5

−0.5

−1

0

5

10
π and ε

15

−1

20

20

0

5

10
y

15

20

0

5

10
c

15

20

0

5

10
tb/y

15

20

0

5

10
g

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

0

15

−2

10
−4

5
0

0

5

10
a

15

−6

20

0

8

−5

6

−10

4

−15

2

−20

0

5

10

15

0

20

The impulse response of a variable xt+j to a 1-standard-deviation positive innovation
in gt is computed as E{xt+j |gt = g H and a0 } − E{xt+j |a0 }. Variables τ , φ, R, , and
tb/y are expressed in percentage points. All other variables are expressed in percent
deviations from their long-run mean. The impulse response of the devaluation rate, ,
is shown in a dashed line.

50

Figure 2: Impulse response of the Ramsey economy to a 1-standard-deviation positive innovation in labor productivity
τ

φ

0.4

0

0.3

−0.5

0.2
−1

0.1
0

0

5

10
R

15

−1.5

20

1

0

5

10
y

15

20

0

5

10
c

15

20

0

5

10
tb/y

15

20

0

5

10
z

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

15

0.5

10

0
5

−0.5
−1

0

5

10
h

15

0

20

15

1.5

10

1

5

0.5

0

0

5

10
π and ε

15

0

20

0

40
30

−5

20
−10
−15

10
0

5

10
a

15

0

20

15

6

10

4

5

2

0

0

5

10

15

0

20

The impulse response of a variable xt+j to a 1-standard-deviation positive innovation
in zt is computed as E{xt+j |zt = z H and a0 } − E{xt+j |a0 }. Variables τ , φ, R, and
tb/y are expressed in percentage points. All other variables are expressed in percent
deviations from their long-run mean. The impulse response of the devaluation rate, ,
is shown in a dashed line.

51

