NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLAINING SUDDEN STOPS,
GROWTH COLLAPSE AND BOP CRISES:
THE CASE OF DISTORTIONARY OUTPUT TAXES
Guillermo A. Calvo
Working Paper 9864
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9864
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

I am grateful to Fernando Broner, Kevin Cowan, Alejandro Izquierdo, Michael Kumhof, Eduardo LevyYeyati, Luis Fernando Mejía, Enrique Mendoza, Ned Phelps, Ernesto Talvi, and seminars participants at
IADB, Di Tella University and the University of Maryland for valuable comments. This paper was prepared
for the Mundell-Fleming Lecture at the IMF Annual Research Conference, November 7, 2002. I would like
to dedicate it to the memory of Rudi Dornbusch, whose insight, wit and whip inspired generations of scholars
and policymakers in International Finance and Development Economics. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Guillermo A. Calvo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

Explaining Sudden Stops, Growth Collapse and BOP Crises:
The Case of Distortionary Output Taxes
Guillermo A. Calvo
NBER Working Paper No. 9864
July 2003
JEL No. F3, F4
ABSTRACT
The paper discusses a model in which growth is a negative function of fiscal burden. Moreover,
growth discontinuously switches from high to low as fiscal burden reaches a critical level. Growth
collapse is associated with a Sudden Stop of capital inflows, real depreciation and a drop in output
(driven by a fall in the output of nontradables)-all of which have occurred during recent financial
crises in Emerging Markets. The monetary version of the model is employed to show that BOP
crises could be a result of fiscal distortions. In particular, it is further argued that BOP crisis could
be a justifiable central bank response to growth collapse, although realistic circumstances may make
this response highly ineffective. An important policy implication of the model is that in order to
avoid Sudden Stop crises, policymakers should aim at improving fiscal institutions. Lowering the
fiscal deficit is highly effective in the medium term, but could be counterproductive in the short run
if it relies on higher taxes.
Guillermo A. Calvo
Chief Economist
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue
Washington, DC 20005
and NBER
calvo@econ.umd.edu

I. Introduction
Since Mexico’s Tequila Crisis of 1994/5, Emerging Market Economies, EM, have
entered a period of recurrent crises that go far beyond currency crises as experienced in
Advanced Economies. EM crises are characterized by sharp recession, high
unemployment, and
(Insert Table 1 here)
an alarming rise in the number of people living below the poverty line. A common
feature of these episodes is a Sudden Stop, SS, namely, a large reduction in the flow of
international capital.1 This is illustrated in Table 1 which, incidentally, shows that the
phenomenon predates the Tequila. Moreover, Calvo and Reinhart (2001) show that, on
the whole, SS is absent in Advanced Countries. This leads me to the conjecture that SS is
perhaps the central feature of EM crises from which all the others follow. Developing a
theory that rationalizes the conjecture is a challenging task, because EM crises have not
been preceded by sharply deteriorating fundamentals (see Calvo and Mendoza (1996 a
and b) for the case of Mexico). Thus, to model this fact the theory should ideally be able
to display market equilibrium discontinuity as a function of market fundamentals.
The basic model presented at the outset exhibits equilibrium discontinuity. A key
assumption is that government expenditure has to be partly financed by output taxes
which, by their nature, lower the after-tax marginal value productivity of capital. Thus,
the larger is government expenditure, the lower will be the rate of growth. There is a
region, however, where high and low growth equilibria coexist. The intuition for this is
1

The expression Sudden Stop was first suggested, and the phenomenon highlighted, in
Dornbusch et al (1995).
1

straightforward: high (low) growth implies low (high) tax rates, sustaining high (low)
growth. The model assumes that International Financial Institutions, IFIs, will realize
that equilibrium indeterminacy is all a matter of expectations, and will help to coordinate
the high-growth equilibrium. Thus, equilibrium is unique.2 However, a discontinuity will
take place at the point where multiplicity disappears, and only low growth can be
sustained. This happens in the model when government expenditure (summarized by the
stock of public debt) which has to be serviced by output taxes reaches a critical level. If
the economy is near that critical level, seemingly minor accidents, like a deterioration of
the terms of trade or an increase in country risk, could throw the economy into the region
where only low growth is sustainable. Moreover, since investment collapses, a SS will
take place. The model is then extended to account for nontradable or home goods. In
that context, it is shown that if the crisis contains an unanticipated component, then the
SS will be accompanied by an increase in the real exchange rate (i.e., real devaluation).3
Finally, the model is extended to incorporate money in a cash-in-advance fashion.
Since money demand is positively correlated with aggregate demand, a collapse of the
latter (discussed at the end of last paragraph) would bring about a drop in the demand for
money. Thus, if the exchange rate is fixed, international reserves will fall precipitously,
resembling a BOP crisis. The monetary economy is then employed to study optimal
exchange rate policy in response to SS. Since SS is, after all, a cut in total credit, it may

2

For an earlier attempt to rationalize SS on the basis of multiplicity of equilibria and in
an essentially static non-monetary framework, see Calvo (1998 b).
3

Real depreciation also takes place if the crisis is fully anticipated and it entails a higher
consumption tax, for example.
2

be optimal for the central bank to release some of its international reserves (e.g., through
credit subsidy) to relieve the impact of SS on the private sector, especially when the new
credit conditions contain an important surprise element. Under the usual rules that dictate
the operation of a central bank, the latter can release reserves by expanding domestic
credit and pegging the exchange rate (pure floating would not do because in that case
international reserves will remain intact). This reaction to SS has been quite common in
EM. Therefore, the central bank may end up precipitating the BOP crisis. This policy,
incidentally, is criticized in the paper by indicating that the recipients of central bank
largesse may not be the intended target. The paper argues that if policymakers
understand this difficulty, they may be driven to experiment with heterodox policies (like
directing credit to specific sectors).
II. Basic Model
The basic structure of this model is taken from Calvo (1998 c) which, in turn, is a
dynamic extension of Eaton (1987). I will start by examining the case of an economy
that produces tradable output by means of tradable capital, K. The production function is
linear homogeneous: one unit of output is produced by means of 1/α units of capital. The
net cash-flow, S, for a firm that accumulates capital at the rate K& is given by (assuming
away capital depreciation):

S t = α (1 − τ )K t − K& t ,

(1)

where τ, 0 ≤ τ ≤ 1, denotes the constant output tax rate. Thus, denoting the constant
international real interest rate (i.e., the own-rate of return on output) by r, the value of the
firm at time zero, V, is given by

3

∞

V = ∫ S t e − rt dt.

(2)

0

Hence, assuming that K0 = 1, and setting z ≡ K& K yields
V = ∫ [α (1 − τ ) − z t ]e
∞

− ∫0t ( r − z s )ds

0

(3)

dt.

Notice, incidentally, that given linear technology z equals the rate of output growth.
The firm is assumed to maximize V by choosing the growth path z, taking as
given the international interest rate r, the tax rate τ, and the technological constraints. A
quick inspection of this problem shows that the optimum can be found among the
constant-z paths, in which case equation (3) can be expressed as:
V =

α (1 − τ ) − z
r−z

.

(4)

Differentiating the right-hand side of equation (4) with respect to z, yields
sgn

∂V
= sgn[α (1 − τ ) − r ].
∂z

(5)

Therefore, as expected, the firm will grow as fast (slow) as possible if the net-of-tax
marginal productivity of capital exceeds (falls short of) the rate of interest. Thus, in order
to obtain well-defined solutions, one must constraint z to a finite interval, and z < r.
Concretely, I will assume that there exists some z > 0 such that 0 ≤ z ≤ z < r. Setting 0
as the lower bound implies that capital cannot by unbolted; thus, the model belongs to the
putty-clay family.
The next step is to endogenize the tax rate τ. I will assume that the government
inherits a stock of debt D, a share θ of which has to be serviced by means of output taxes.
Again, assuming that the government has full access to capital markets, the tax rate τ

4

must be such that
∞

θD = ατ ∫ K t e − rt dt =
0

ατ
r−z

.

(6)

Thus, using equation (6) in expression (5), we get the following fundamental relationship:
sgn

∂V
= sgn[α − θD(r − z ) − r ].
∂z

(7)

Notice that the bracketed expression in equation (7) increases with z. Thus, the Low
Growth Equilibrium, LGE, i.e., z = 0, is possible if

α − θDr − r < 0.

(8)

In other words, LGE exists if as firms set z = 0, they have no incentive, by expression (8),
to revise their choice. It is worth noting, however, that this does not rule out the
existence of other equilibria.
On the other hand, by a similar reasoning, the High Growth Equilibrium, HGE,
i.e., z = z , exists if

α − θD(r − z ) − r > 0.

(9)

The left-hand-side functions in expressions (8) and (9) are drawn in Figure 1.4
Clearly, LGE exists if θD > δ1 = (α - r)/r, while HGE exists if θD < δ2 = (α - r)/(r - z ).

Thus, indeterminacy exists in the interval (δ1,δ2). However, coordination among
investors could drive the economy to the HGE. Success of this policy could be greatly
aided by strong support from IFIs, requiring, in principle, no public sector resources.
For, eliminating the bad LGE in the indeterminacy region is, in principle, a costless
4

The borderline cases in which (8) or (9) hold with equality are of no interest and will
not be discussed here.
5

operation. Thus, I will assume that if LGE and HGE coexist, the economy will always
settle at the HGE.5
(Insert Figure 1 here)
Consequently, the model implies high growth if θD ≤ δ2, and low growth
(actually, zero growth) otherwise. Equilibrium discontinuity (see Figure 2) is a key result
because it helps to rationalize situations in which, all of a sudden, a roaring tiger becomes
a whining pussycat. This feature is, unfortunately, somewhat clouded in the present
model, given that linear production functions generate, as a general rule, corner solutions.
Thus, the equilibrium discontinuity highlighted here may appear as a trivial and
uninteresting proposition. To dispel that view the Appendix will “smooth the edges” of
this model by assuming adjustment costs to investment. As shown there, under
uniqueness, growth is a continuous and negative function of D. It takes equilibrium
multiplicity as depicted in the above model (prior to the equilibrium selection criterion
adopted here, which in case of indeterminacy picks the one yielding the highest growth)
to generate discontinuity. Growth discontinuity takes place as the systems loses a good
equilibrium and plunges to an equilibrium exhibiting lower growth. Notice that, although
equilibrium multiplicity is a necessary condition to obtain growth collapse, it is not
sufficient. For example, it is easy to construct examples exhibiting two equilibria in
which equilibrium solutions converge to each other as debt goes up. Thus, growth
5

In my view the IFI’s coordination role was successfully carried out in Mexico 1995,
Korea 1997 and Brazil 1999, and helps to explain the rapid (V-shaped) recovery of those
economies.

6

collapse as depicted in the above model never takes place. Instead, what one would have
is a situation in which, except for a borderline case, the model yields two equilibria or
none at all. Therefore, the set of models that yield growth collapse are strictly included in
those yielding equilibrium multiplicity (before imposing the equilibrium-selection
criterion). Thus, the existence of realistic examples yielding growth collapse cannot be
taken for granted, which opens up an interesting research agenda.
(Insert Figure 2 here)
In what follows, I will continue the discussion in terms of the present model
because SS and other interesting implications are the same as in the more complex model
presented in the Appendix (except in the few instances in which it will be explicitly
noted).
The model or simple extensions provide interesting insights. For example:
•

Variable D represents all-encompassing public debt. Therefore, it should include
state-contingent public debt, like the one that surfaces during crises (see DiazAlejandro (1985) for a detailed recount of how contingent public debt became
apparent during Chile’s 1982/3 crisis, and Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002) for
recent estimates). State-contingent debt has proven to be large and to contain a
sizable unanticipated component. Thus, a SS could take place even though to the
naked eye the economy appears safely ensconced within the high-growth region
(i.e., far to the left of critical point δ2).

•

The critical debt level δ2 is a function of the production parameter α. Recalling
Figure 1, it is clear that δ2 declines as α falls. A negative terms-of-trade shock

7

could be captured by a lower α. Thus, a deterioration in the terms of trade could
plunge the economy into the LGE, causing, as will be argued in the next section, a
SS. This observation, incidentally, shows that for economies that are near their
critical debt levels, a relatively minor terms-of-trade deterioration can bring about
a substantial decline in output growth.
•

The model assumes that the government and the private sector have access to
capital markets. However, D could also stand for country-risk-adjusted public
debt, in which case an increase in country risk implies a larger D. Thus, even in
the benign case in which the private sector is immune to country risk, θD could
jump to the low growth region as a result of an increase in country risk. This is
relevant for rationalizing the effects of events like the Russian 1998 crisis (see
Calvo (1998 a, and 1999), Calvo and Mendoza (2000)), which resulted in an
increase in country risk all across EM, and appears to have left in its wake a
noticeable growth slowdown in Latin America (see Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi
(2002)).

•

Debt levels that can be sustained without inducing low growth, decline with the
share of debt that has to be serviced on the basis of distortionary taxes (i.e., as θ
increases). Thus, if labor supply were inelastic, for example, it would be optimal
to raise labor taxes and set θ = 0. However, tax evasion may make this impossible
or at least impractical. This suggests the key role of tax reform and adequate
fiscal institutions for growth and stability.

8

III. Sudden Stop and Home Goods

So far our discussion did not require any reference to utility functions, because in
the model there is complete separation between production and consumption decisions.
The latter is, in general, essential information to compute current accounts (and, hence,
address the issue of SS) or model the behavior of the real exchange rate (which requires
bringing to the picture home or nontradable goods).
Suppose that there exists a representative individual whose utility function is
time-separable, the subjective rate of discount is constant and (for simplicity) equal to the
international rate of interest r.6 The instant utility function will be denoted u(c,h), where c
and h stand for consumption of tradable and home goods, respectively. Output of home
goods is described by a concave production function f(x), where x stands for input of
tradables. Functions u and f satisfy the standard regularity conditions. The analysis will
be centered on interior solutions.
The above assumptions guarantee that optimal consumption of tradables and
nontradables, and production of nontradables will be constant over time. The budget
constraint under these conditions boils down to
r [V − (1 − θ )D ] = c + x,

(10)

where time subscripts are dropped because all paths are constant over time. The squarebracketed expression is net wealth after taking into account distortionary taxes (netted out
from V) and non-distortionary taxes, (1 - θ)D. Thus, the optimal (market equilibrium)
6

For a discussion of this model in the more general case in which the rate of discount is
different from the international interest rate, see Calvo (1998 c). The latter also addresses
welfare issues and the impact of controls on capital outflows that will be skipped in the
present paper.
9

consumption and production plan is obtained by solving the following problem:
max u (c, f (r [V − (1 − θ )D ] − c )).

(11)

c

Solving (11) yields the following familiar first-order condition, equating the marginal rate
of substitution between tradables and nontradables and the respective marginal rate of
transformation:
u h (c, f (r [V − (1 − θ )D ] − c ))
1
=
= p,
u c (c, f (r [V − (1 − θ )D ] − c )) f ' (r [V − (1 − θ )D ] − c )

(12)

where p is the relative price of home goods with respect to tradables (i.e., the inverse of
the real exchange rate). By (12), equilibrium c and p are functions of net wealth.
Moreover, by equations (4) and (6)
V − (1 − θ )D =

α−z
r−z

− D.

(13)

Recalling that z < r , condition (9) for the existence of a HGE requires, that α > r. Thus,
by (13), V is an increasing function of z. This can be employed to show, incidentally,
that, if HGE and LGE coexist, then HGE Pareto dominates LGE, as expected.
By equations (10) and (13), the Current Account (Surplus) at time 0, CA0,
satisfies, assuming that K0 = 1 and is entirely owned by domestic residents,
CA0 ≡ α − z − rD − c − x = −

α−z
r−z

z.

(14)

Hence, CA0 < 0 on HGE and CA0 = 0 on LGE. Consequently, as the economy switches
from high to low growth, the current account deficit exhibits a discontinuous collapse to
zero. Thus, SS takes place, since a non-monetary economy like the present one, -CA0 =
Capital Inflows at time 0. Moreover, assuming that consumption of nontradables is a

10

“normal” good, it follows that, given p, consumption of nontradables falls as net wealth
(i.e., V - (1 - θ)D) declines. Therefore, by equation (12), as growth collapses, x falls and
f’(x) rises, implying that the SS would be accompanied by real depreciation (i.e., p falls).
Clearly, in this case GDP will also collapse because the output of nontradables falls. All
of these results are fully in line with empirical observations (see Calvo and Reinhart
(2000), and Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002)).
1. Money. The model can easily be extended to a monetary economy. For example,
suppose the demand for money is subject to a cash-in-advance constraint, such that
demand for nominal money ≡ M d = E (c + ph ),

(15)

where E is the nominal exchange rate (i.e., the price of foreign exchange in terms of
domestic currency). Thus, first-order conditions (12) remain intact and, if the
representative individual internalizes the government budget constraint, one can show
that money is superneutral, in the sense that, along steady states, the real side of the
economy is invariant to the presence of money.
Thus, recalling that under the crisis scenario highlighted above (i.e., D
unexpectedly moves from the high to the low growth region) c + ph declines, it follows
that, given E, the demand for money will exhibit a discontinuous fall. Consider the case
in which E is fixed. Therefore, the SS will be associated with an unexpected drop in
international reserves. If the latter is high enough, a BOP crisis would ensue. Notice that
the model gives an anti-Krugman rationale for the BOP crisis (Krugman (1979)). The
crisis in the present model is entirely rooted in real factors: SS comes first, BOP follows.
Policy implications are also very different. For example, Krugman crises can be

11

prevented by following a tighter fiscal policy, whereas in the present model tighter fiscal
policy (if based on higher tax rates) could actually trigger the crisis. Not because fiscal
balance is undesirable, but because the instruments to achieve it are distorting! Once
again, what the present model highlights is the importance of improving fiscal
institutions.

2. Anticipated Crises. Although I believe SSs contain a significant unanticipated
component, the present model can also rationalize the case in which a SS is fully
anticipated. In the first place, notice that, in general, investment decisions are predicated
on
∞
sgn  ∫ α (1 − τ s )e − r ( s −t ) ds − 1.
 t


(16)

The integral in expression (16) equals the present discounted value of net-of-taxes return
on a unit of investment. Thus, investment will take place when the latter exceeds its cost
(= 1), i.e., when the sign in expression (16) is positive; moreover, if (16) is negative, no
investment will occur. As expected, when τ is constant expression (16) boils down to (5).
Consider now the situation in which from time 0 to T debt is zero, but everyone knows
that at time T the public sector will be loaded with debt θD = δ2 + ε (where, it should be
recalled, δ2 is the critical level of distortionary debt beyond which low growth is the only
equilibrium solution, recall Figures 1 and 2, and ε is a positive number). Moreover,
suppose that on the interval (0,T] the tax rate τ = 0; afterwards, τ is set at a constant level
necessary to service debt D. One can easily show that as ε converges to 0, investment
will be set at its maximum level in the interval (0,T], and zt = 0, for t > T. Thus, a fully
anticipated growth collapse at time T would take place. Will this result in a SS? Since the
12

growth crisis is fully anticipated and consumers have access to the capital market (and are
not subject to taxes that distort the consumption time profile), consumption will remain
undisturbed. However, investment will go from z K t to zero. Therefore, at the onset of
the growth crisis, a SS will take place.7
In what follows I will show how to construct a monetary example which would be
a polar opposite to Krugman’s (1979). Suppose that the economy starts with zero debt, a
positive fiscal deficit, and zero distorting taxes, τ. Clearly, debt will be increasing
throughout time and, if policy remains the same, it will eventually reach the critical level
δ2. At this juncture, the government eliminates fiscal deficit by resorting to the inflation
tax to cover the primary deficit (as in Krugman (1979), and services the outstanding debt
as in Section II (i.e., employing distorting taxes). Obviously, the economy will display
high growth until net output-distorting debt reaches the critical level δ2, and then switch
to low growth forever.8 The monetary economy under fixed rates will again display a
sudden loss of international reserves at crisis, reflecting the effect of anticipated inflation
(as in Calvo (1987)). One could even generate a BOP crisis a la Krugman (1979) if
public debt includes (with a negative sign) international reserves. If, for example, the
critical minimum level of reserves is zero, it can be shown that the crisis coincides with
full depletion of international reserves, in conjunction with a run against the domestic

7

This does not hold true in the Appendix model because in the latter investment is a
continuous function of time. However, even though investment does not display a
discontinuous fall, it will show a declining trend.
8

Again, this does not follow in the Appendix model, in which a lower growth is attained
in a continuous manner.
13

currency. Once again, however, the BOP crisis is inherently real.9
The following points are worth making:
•

As explained, real depreciation follows from an unanticipated SS, not the other
way around. However, given the tendency to focus on exchange rates, a casual
observer might conclude that the main culprit was currency over-appreciation.
As “proof” she will likely point out that the real exchange rate shows no sign to
return to its prior-to-crisis level.

•

Suppose the utility function u is homothetic in tradables and nontradables. Hence,
given p, the demand for nontradables, h, is proportional to the demand for
tradables, c. In particular, during a SS and, given p, the demand for nontradables
falls in the same proportion as the demand for tradables. Let us focus on the case
in which the current account deficit, CAD, becomes zero. Then, given CAD, the
smaller is the domestic supply of tradables (net of international debt and
precommitted transfers) in terms of tradables’ consumption, ω, the larger will be
the proportional drop in c at SS. Consequently, the smaller is ω, the larger will be
the fall in c and h (given p) caused by the SS. Variable ω measures the
economy’s ability to supply domestic absorption of tradables. In Calvo, Izquierdo
and Talvi (2002), variable ω is called “un-leveraged absorption of tradable

9

Contrary to this scenario, however, most recent BOP crises seem to have been driven
more by an expansion of domestic credit from the central bank than by a fall in the
demand for monetary aggregates (see Flood, Garber and Kramer (1996), Kumhof (2000),
Calvo (2001)). This issue will be taken up in the next section.

14

goods;” ω is shown to vary widely across countries (Argentina and Brazil are
shown to have one of the lowest ω). Therefore, the same CAD adjustment could
have significant differences across countries depending on ω.
•

In this model, crises are very tame. There is no room for default, for example.
However, this can be easily rectified assuming, for instance, that the government
repays only if the default alternative would be more costly. One can show that,
abstracting from direct default costs, on the low-growth region the default
alternative dominates low growth plus full debt repayment. Thus, (1) even if
government is not intent on driving debt beyond the critical level, a bit of
uncertainty will generate country risk premia, and (2) in the anti-Krugman
example, in which sooner or later the critical threshold is crossed, the critical
threshold will be zero. To see this, note that if it was positive and equal to D , for
example, then investors will stop lending before D reaches D . Otherwise, the
“last” loan before reaching D will immediately be declared in default, a hardly
attractive investment proposition. However, a positive D could be generated if
there are direct default costs (a realistic assumption).

•

The model assumes that output of home goods falls as the cost of raw materials
rises or, equivalently, as the real exchange rate rises (i.e., as the relative price of
home goods with respect to tradables p falls). In actuality, however, another
important factor in nontradables’ output contraction during a crisis is Liability
Dollarization, i.e., the existence of debt denominated in terms of tradables (dollar

15

debt, for short).10 Under these conditions, for example, an unanticipated SS could
give rise to bankruptcies in the home goods sector, resulting in momentarily lower
output. How deep and persistent is the output collapse will depend on bankruptcy
legislation and the efficiency of the judicial system, and, of course, it will also
depend on how much dollar-indebted is the home goods sector. The latter,
incidentally, could be especially large after a capital inflow episode like the one
that occurred in EM during the first half of the 1990s.
•

The weaker the enforceability of financial contracts, the more likely will be that
loans impose collateral constraints, by which the value of attachable assets
cannot fall short of a predetermined proportion of the loan. Thus, it has become
popular to assume that the loans a firm/individual can take depend on some
measure of net worth.11 Thus, if the collateral constraint is binding, a depreciation
of the real exchange rate, i.e., a fall in p, may call for liquidation of productive
assets. If we further assume, following Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), that the
liquidated assets will go to less efficient hands, then output will suffer a
contraction. Thus, a crisis could display a fall in output of nontradables even
though, in principle, output would be perfectly price inelastic in absence of the
financial shock. Output contraction by this channel does not even require
bankruptcy to take place. At any rate, however, these extensions show that the

10

This is one of the key new topics in the EM literature. See, for example, Calvo (2001),
Jeane (2001).
11

This line of research has been pioneered by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) for the closed
economy, and extended to the open economy by Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001 a, b
and 2003), Izquierdo (2000), and others.
16

financial channel could add to the depth and persistence of the crisis (see DiazAlejandro (1985)). Whereas raw materials are flows, financial obligations are
stocks. A stock reversal could actually cause much more damage than a flow cost
increase, particularly if the latter is deemed to be temporary.
IV. Sudden Stop and Monetary Policy

I will conduct the discussion taking as background the previous section’s model,
focusing on the case in which the SS is largely unanticipated, and causes a credit crunch
in the home-goods sector (due to, for instance, collateral constraints or margin calls).12
The analysis will center on policies taken after SS, and also policies that can be
implemented before SS to cushion its deleterious effects. Clearly, in this model credit is
cut because outstanding credit is too large relative to the economy’s capacity to repay.
Thus, only policies that have an impact on the latter will have a chance of becoming
effective. Monetary policy can influence the ability to repay in at least two different
ways: (1) managing international reserves, and (2) changing relative prices in the face of
price/wage stickiness.
1. Management of International Reserves. A common feature in recent crises is a large
expansion of domestic credit from the central bank. As pointed out by Flood, Garber and
Kramer (1996) and Kumhof (2000), this feature is not captured by the first-generation
Krugman-Flood Garber models (see Krugman (1979), Flood and Garber (1994)). In the
latter the crisis is triggered by a sudden decline in the demand for domestic money.
Actually, as illustrated by the Tequila crisis (see Calvo and Mendoza (1996 b)), in most
12

Thus, this section departs from the basic model in Section II, and is more speculative
than earlier sections.
17

cases (Argentina and Hong Kong are exceptions) the loss of international reserves is
almost entirely driven by domestic credit. The demand for domestic money shows no
atypical decline. Can one find a rationale for that?
The following accounting identity is worth recalling:
KI = CAD + ∆R,

(17)

where “errors and omissions” are ignored, and KI, CAD, and ∆R stand for, respectively,
capital inflows, current account deficit and accumulation of international reserves, R. A
SS is reflected in a sharp drop in KI. If the central bank lets the exchange rate float, then
no reserves will be lost, and the entire adjustment will fall on the current account, calling
for a sharp real depreciation (a sharp fall in p, in the model’s notation). This, in turn,
might provoke sizable income redistribution, including bankruptcies in the nontradable
sector. Thus, the central bank will have incentives to follow an expansionary policy that
places some of its international reserves in private hands (the nontradable sector’s, if the
main objective is bankruptcy prevention). Pure floating cannot work, because the central
bank would not be able to release its reserves (unless they are directly transferred to the
fiscal authority). Therefore, under standard practices the central bank will be forced to
adopt some kind of pegging accompanied by domestic credit expansion (hopefully before
domestic money holders wise up to the impending crisis). This rationalizes the fact
(observed in Mexico 1994/5 and Brazil 1998/9) that the SS occurs first, and it is later
followed by a currency crisis provoked by the central bank (not only by panicky domestic
money holders).13 Thus, devaluation follows the SS. Since the latter is contractionary,
13

This requires changing the anti-Krugman example in Section III to allow for the central
bank to issue domestic credit in response to a SS. Central bank hyperactivity during BOP
18

this analysis also provides a rationale for contractionary devaluation, a well-known
phenomenon in developing countries (see Diaz-Alejandro (1963), Sebastian Edwards
(1989)). Notice, however, that under this interpretation, output contraction is not the
result of devaluation: SS would be.
This discussion highlights the possible desirability of pegging the exchange rate
once a SS is detected. Exchange rate pegging allows the central bank transfer to the
private sector its international reserves.14 Is pegging responsible for the crisis in a deeper
sense? I would not deny the possibility, but the present model shows that the roots of a
SS may rest on fiscal dysfunction and be totally divorced from exchange rate policy.
Is central bank credit the best way to help the private sector during a SS? I have
some serious doubts, because the new domestic credit will likely go to the public sector
(slowing down desirable adjustment in government expenditure), and firms that have
access to international credit markets (multinationals). The latter, in particular, are likely
to use additional domestic credit to unwind their dollar debts, an attractive proposition in
view of impending devaluation, and that central bank credit expansion may momentarily
push domestic interest rates for prime borrowers below market equilibrium. Thus, it is
crises, incidentally, is a widely observed fact, as noted by Flood, Garber, and Kramer
(1996) and Kumhof (2000).
14

Once again, this policy would be especially relevant if the private sector suffers a credit
crunch. Brazil offers a recent example of this kind of central bank policy, see Financial
Times (2002).

19

conceivable that domestic credit expansion drains international reserves from the central
bank without substantially relieving the pressure on the current account. This bleak
scenario, which unfortunately appears not to be uncommon, helps to explain why during
a SS, governments might be driven to adopt heterodox policies. For example, controls on
capital outflows (e.g., Malaysia 1998), socialization of private debts (e.g., Chile 1982/3,
see Diaz-Alejandro (1985)), or controls on the direction of bank credit (Brazil 2002).
A serious difficulty with heterodox policies is that, as a general rule, they imply
breaking established rules or implicit contracts, opening up the door for time
inconsistency and political economy maneuvers, specifically Wars of Attrition where
different groups vie to benefit from central bank credit (see Sturzenegger and Tommasi
(1998)). Wars of Attrition result in policymaking paralysis, becoming very hard to know
which side will win. The policy impasse, in turn, increases the option value of waiting,
which results in further investment and credit contraction−and declining growth (see
Calvo (2002)).
One way to get a better outcome might be for the government to offer (or support)
exchange rate hedge contracts that will be activated the moment a large devaluation
takes place. In this fashion, the loss of reserves would be automatic, helping to
ameliorate the after-crisis tug-of-war. It should be noted, however, that government
hedges may end up being underpriced, because their price reflects, in part, the
government’s assessment of the likelihood of crisis. Thus, in order to show the
authorities’ high confidence in current policies, unrealistically cheap hedges may be
offered, increasing the fiscal cost of a crisis and, in terms of the above model, also the

20

likelihood of crisis (because contingent net public debt goes up).
2. Wage/Price Stickiness. This phenomenon lies at the heart of the literature on optimal
exchange rate regimes and Optimal Currency Areas (e.g., Flood and Marion (1982);
Calvo (2001) for a critical assessment). A standard result is that if the economy is hit by
a real shock, it is optimal to let the exchange rate free to float. Thus, since a SS is
essentially a real shock, one might reason that floating would be optimal−at least, until
the dust settles.15
Let me first note that, in practice, the choice between fixed and floating exchange
rate regimes in the aftermath of a SS often turns out to be just an academic exercise.
Many economies are swept away by events and end up devaluing their currencies before
the exchange rate issue is even raised! However, Argentina and Hong Kong in 1995 are
interesting counterexamples. These economies were able to maintain their Currency
Board regimes despite massive loss of international reserves. At any rate, the issue that I
would like to raise is whether, subject to having enough international reserves, it may be
socially desirable to keep a peg a little longer after a SS, in order to slowdown the relative
price adjustment.
As noted, SSs call for sharp changes in relative prices (often involving a real
currency depreciation, a fall in p). Thus, firms saddled with dollar debts, may be forced
into costly asset liquidation or outright bankruptcy. Quick convergence to the new set of
equilibrium relative prices will bring this situation into the open, and financial chaos
15

In actuality, however, as shown in the earlier discussion of the monetary economy, a
SS gives rise to both real and nominal shocks. Thus, if anything, the standard literature
would call for dirty float.
21

might ensue. Could a temporary peg make a difference? The instinctive answer is
probably “no” because, otherwise, sectors that should see their equilibrium relative price
fall, would instead see their quantities contract−resulting in a wash at best. However, this
intuition misses and important point, namely, the microeconomics of price setting. To
illustrate, suppose that prices are set in a highly competitive environment, such that,
under normal circumstances, profits are near zero. Thus, a shock that set initial home
good prices above their new full equilibrium level, is observationally equivalent to firms
colluding and setting their prices at a higher-than-competitive-equilibrium level. Output
will fall but firms’ profits may rise. This is not always the case but, in the present
context, it is a definite possibility. Therefore, relative price stickiness (brought about by
price stickiness plus an exchange rate peg) may help to relieve financial stress.16
Consequently, the existence of price-stickiness may be another reason in favor of pegging
in response to a SS.
V. Final Remarks

•

The central message of the paper is that currency crises in EM may just be a
sideshow, and that the key factors behind the collapse of economic activity and
growth may stem from dysfunctional domestic policies and serious financial
vulnerabilities. The latter give rise to sharp changes in market equilibrium in
response to relatively minor real shocks. Thus, BOP crises could just be one of
the many deleterious effects of a SS.

•
16

The model is silent about the factors that trigger a SS. Any shock that pushes the
For an example in terms of a micro-founded staggered-prices model, see Calvo (2000).
22

economy beyond the critical debt level would trigger a SS. It could be an external
factor, as Calvo, Izquierdo and Talvi (2002) claimed it was the case recently in
Argentina, but it could also be an internal factor, like a domestic political or
corporate governance scandal.

•

The main policy lesson from the model is that EM should strive to improving
fiscal and financial institutions. But, perhaps equally important, policymakers
should get ready for the possibility of a SS. They should go through SS drills,
much as well-run buildings go through fire drills. Under normal circumstances,
fires are low probability events. However, if not well managed, the resulting
stampede may dramatically increase the number of casualties.

•

As noted, IFIs have a big role to play in coordinating high growth when both high
and low growth coexist. Actually, if the model is not misleading, before reaching
a SS, there is always a region of indeterminacy in which IFIs could play that role.
Outside that region, however, the situation becomes more complicated, because
most EM do not qualify for grants (as opposed to loans) from IFIs in response to
debt crises (HIPCs are the exception). Moreover, the G 7 have expressed serious
concern about Moral Hazard implications of bailout packages.17

•

Still, IFIs could play a useful role as coordinators of private sector bail-ins, and
enforcers of fiscal reform. The former would lower the level of public debt, thus
pushing the economy into the high-growth region. Fiscal reform could also be

17

For a critical assessment of the Moral Hazard view in connection with recent EM
crises, see Calvo (2002).

23

very effective if it helps to lower tax distortions (e.g., θ in the present model). If
countries are left on their own, these reforms may be hard to implement, because
of political reasons. In the Basic Model in Section II, for example, fiscal
tightening would be effective if it relies on lowering government expenditure in a
credible and sustainable manner, which is usually tangled with serious political
economy problems. IFIs could help to break the stalemate by offering “Loans for
Reform.” If successful, the loans will be fully repaid because fiscal reform would
place the economy on the high-growth path.

•

However, the model suggests that outside the high-growth region, simple-minded
belt-tightening fiscal programs, relying on higher taxes, could be
counterproductive in the short run.

•

Thus, a literal reading of the model shows that a tax hike will have no effect,
given that, in principle, it does nothing about total public debt, D, or its
distortionary impact, θ. However, higher taxes may help to bring the
economy back to high growth. The hard question in this respect is whether a
belt-tightening policy will enjoy political support during the transition in
which pain is not immediately rewarded by high growth.

•

Often during crises tax hikes rely on taxes that are non-distortionary in the
short run (i.e., wealth taxes, and, in general, taxes on “sitting ducks”), but
which would be highly distortionary if agents anticipated their continuation in
the future. Therefore, these taxes are effective if policymakers can credibly
ensure the private sector that they will be eliminated as soon as the emergency

24

situation blows over. Conceivably, IFIs could help to reinforce credibility in
this context, although I am highly skeptical: in the future there will likely be a
new set of policymakers both in the world at large, and the country in
question−making enforceability extremely difficult.

•

Finally, a technical note. The paper shows that SSs can be both anticipated or
unanticipated. My conjecture, though, is that SSs contain a large element of
surprise, and that the recent episodes have a lot to do with the Russian 1998 crisis,
and resulting perception that EM securities constitute a much more risky asset
class than previously thought. However, this should not be read as belittling the
relevance of domestic factors. On the contrary, as the model shows, the critical
debt level is intimately related to domestic institutions. Moreover, given the
strong non-linearities implied by the model, domestic factors could be powerful
multipliers of external shocks. The problem for the econometrician is that nonlinearities imply that, faced with the same external shock, some economies enter
into deep crisis, while others escape totally unscathed. Moreover, those that are
drawn into crisis will likely trigger additional domestic factors that contribute to
the depth of the crisis (like political instability). Thus, the econometrician could
wrongly infer that domestic factors are the sole determinants of these crises.
Furthermore, if the number of crisis countries is small (e.g., at the time of writing,
Argentina was the only large Latin American country that went into deep crisis
after the Russian shock), empirical estimates will suffer from well-known smallsample problems.

25

Appendix

The main purpose of this section is to show that the SS follows from the existence
of tax distortions and not from the knife-edge feature of the model in the text. With that
in mind, I will modify the previous model and assume that investment is subject to
adjustment costs. More concretely, I will assume that the output cost per unit of capital
associated with capital growth z is portrayed by φ(z), where function φ is strictly convex
and twice-continuously differentiable (implying φ″ > 0). Notice, incidentally, that in the
text I assume φ(z) = z. Thus, to stay close to that model in a neighborhood of 0, I will
further assume φ(0) = 0, and φ′(0) = 1; moreover, I will assume that there exists z and z
such that z < 0 < z < r , such that φ is defined on that open interval, and lim φ′(z) = ∞ as z
converges to z from the left, while lim φ′(z) = -∞ as z converges to z from the right.
Moreover, to simplify the analysis, I make the realistic assumption that lim φ(z) as z
converges to z from the right is finite (specifically, it does not converge to ∞).
Therefore, the value of the firm at time 0, V, satisfies (cf. equation (4)):
V =

α (1 − τ ) − ϕ ( z )
r−z

.

(18)

Hence,
sgn

∂V
= sgn[− ϕ ' ( z )(r − z ) + α (1 − τ ) − ϕ ( z )],
∂z

(19)

and, if ∂V/∂ z = 0, then
sgn

∂ 2V
= −ϕ ' ' ( z )(r − z ) < 0.
∂z 2

(20)

Thus, first-order conditions are sufficient for a maximum of V with respect to z, because
26

V does not contain a local minimum.
Plugging budget constraint (6) to substitute for τ in (19), we get

α − θD (r − z ) − [ϕ (z ) + ϕ ' (z )(r − z )] ≡ J (z, D ).

(21)

Previous assumptions ensure that J(z,D) converges to ∞ as z goes to z from the right, and
to -∞ as z goes to z from the left. Hence, equilibrium existence is ensured for all D. It
can further be shown, by (21), that Jz(z,0) < 0 for all z ∈ (z, z ). Thus, equilibrium is
unique for D = 0. This result should not surprise us because if D = 0, there is no
distortionary taxation. Moreover, as a general rule, under uniqueness, equilibrium is a
continuous function of D. This shows that in order to get the SS discontinuities discussed
in the text, it is, as a general rule, necessary for the model to exhibit multiple equilibria
(before imposing the equilibrium-selection principle according to which the economy
settles on the highest-growth equilibrium).
I will now show an example where equilibrium is not unique (in absence of the
equilibrium-selection principle). By (21), and recalling that φ(0) = 0 and φ′ (0) = 1, we
have
J (0, D ) = α − θDr − r.

(22)

Let Dc be such that J(0,Dc) = 0. This implies that if D = Dc, then z = 0 maximizes the
value of the firm V with respect to z. Clearly, by (22),

θD c =

α −r
r

> 0.

(23)

Moreover, by (21) and (22), at D = Dc,
J z (0, Dc ) =

α −r
r

− ϕ ' ' (0)r.
27

(24)

Hence, given r, for α sufficiently large or ϕ ' ' (0 ) sufficiently small, we can ensure that
Jz(0, Dc) > 0. Thus, drawing the J function, given D, under these conditions readily
shows that, if D = Dc, the economy will exhibit at least three equilibrium solutions
(illustrated by the solid line in Figure 3). Moreover, by (21), the J function shifts down
as D increases. Hence, there exists some D > D c such that J(z, D ) < 0 for all z ∈ [0, z ).
However, the “bad” negative growth equilibrium is never lost (illustrated by the dashed
line in Figure 3). This implies that there will be some critical D (equivalent to δ2/θ in the
main text’s model) such that a growth collapse, SS, etc., will take place even if D suffers
a slight increase. Moreover, since the richer model could depict any number of
equilibria, there could be succession of SSs as D increases.
In closing, notice that the share of distorting debt in output at time zero, θDc/α,
satisfies, by (23),

θD c α =

1−
r

r

α.

(25)

Thus, distorting debt in the multiple-equilibria example can be made as small a share of
output as desired by selecting α sufficiently close to r, and α > r. This shows that the
example does not require unrealistically high debt ratios.
(Insert Figure 3 here)

28

REFERENCES

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001 a, “International and Domestic
Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 48, 3, pp. 513-548.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2001 b, “A Vertical Analysis of Crises
and Central Bank Interventions,” manuscript, MIT, October.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Debt:
Financial Development and Underinsurance,” Journal of Finance, 58, 2, 867-94.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1987, “Balance of Payments Crises in a Cash-in-Advance
Economy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 19, 1, February, pp. 19-32.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1998 a, “Understanding the Russian Virus: with special reference to
Latin America,” manuscript, October. <www.bsos.umd.edu/econ/ciecalvo.htm>
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1998 b, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
Economics of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics (CEMA), 1, 1,
November, pp. 35-54.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1998 c, “Growth, Debt, and Economic Transformation: The Capital
Flight Problem,” in F. Coricelli, Di Matteo, F. Hahn (eds.) New Theories in
Growth and Development, Palgrave Macmillan. Working Paper No. 5, Center for
International Economics, University of Maryland, October 1994.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1999, “Contagion in Emerging Market: When Wall Street is the
Carrier,” manuscript, February. <www.bsos.umd.edu/econ/ciecalvo.htm>
Calvo, Guillermo A., 2000, “Notes on Price Stickiness: With Special Reference to
Liability Dollarization and Credibility,” manuscript, December.

29

<www.bsos.umd.edu/econ/ciecalvo.htm>
Calvo, Guillermo A., 2001, “Capital Markets and the Exchange Rate, with special
reference to the Dollarization Debate in Latin America,” Journal of Money Credit
and Banking, 33, Part 2, May, pp. 312-334.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 2002, “Globalization Hazard and Delayed Reform in Emerging
Markets,” Economia, 2, 2, Spring, pp. 1-29.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, 2002, “Sudden Stop, the
Real Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” manuscript,
Inter-American Development Bank, IADB, Washington, D.C., July.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Enrique G. Mendoza, 1996 a, “Petty Crime and Cruel
Punishment: Lessons from the Mexican Debacle” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings, 86, 2, May, pp. 170-175.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Enrique G. Mendoza, 1996 b, “Mexico’s Balance-of-Payments
Crisis: A Chronicle of a Death Foretold,” Journal of International Economics, 41,
pp. 235-264.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Enrique G. Mendoza, 2000, “Capital Market Crises and
Economic Collapse in Emerging Markets: An Informational-Frictions Approach,”
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 90, 2, May, pp. 59-64.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2000, “When Capital Flows Come to a
Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy,” in Peter B. Kenen and Alexander K.
Swoboda (eds.) Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System,
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2001, “Fixing for Your Life,” in Susan

30

M. Collins and Dani Rodrik (eds.) Brookings Trade Forum, Brookings Institution
Press, pp. 1-58.
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F., 1963, “A Note on the Impact of Devaluation and the
Redistribution Effect,” Journal of Political Economy, 71, 6, pp. 577-80.
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F., 1985, “Good-bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial
Crash,” Journal of Development Economics, 19, 1, pp. 1-24.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn, and Rodrigo O. Valdés, 1995, “Currency Crises and
Collapses,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 219-293.
Eaton, Jonathan, 1987, “Public Debt Guarantees and Private Capital Flight,” World Bank
Economic Review, January, pp. 337-95.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1989, Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and Adjustment,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Financial Times (2002), “Brazil Pledges Loans to Companies,” August 13, pp. 1.
Flood, Robert P., and Nancy P. Marion, 1982, “The Transmission of Disturbances under
Alternative Exchange-Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 97, 1, February, pp. 43-66.
Flood, Robert P., and Peter M. Garber, 1994, Speculative Bubbles, Speculative Attacks
and Policy Switching, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flood, Robert P., Peter M. Garber, and Charles Kramer (1996). “Collapsing Exchange
Rate Regimes: Another Linear Example,” Journal of International Economics,
41, pp. 223-234.
Izquierdo, Alejandro, 2000, “Credit Constraints and the Asymmetric Behavior of Asset
Prices and Output under External Shocks,” manuscript, Washington, DC: Inter-

31

American Development Bank.
Jeanne, Olivier, 2001, “Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?”
presented at the 2001 meeting of LACEA, Montevideo, Uruguay, October 18-20.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political
Economy, 105, 2, April, pp. 211-248.
Krugman, Paul R., 1979, “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises,” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, 11, August, pp. 311-325.
Kumhof, Michael, 2000, “A Quantitative Exploration of the Role of Short-Term
Domestic Debt in Balance of Payment Crises,” Journal of International
Economics, 51, pp. 195-215.
Sturzenegger, Federico, and Mariano Tommasi, 1998, The Political Economy of Reform,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

32

Table 1. Sudden Stop
Country/Episode

SS (% of GDP)

Argentina, 1982-83

20

Argentina, 1994-95

4

Chile, 1981-83

7

Chile 1, 1990-91

8

Ecuador, 1995-96

19

Hungary, 1995-96

7

Indonesia, 1996-97

5

Malaysia 1, 1993-94

15

Mexico, 1981-83

12

Mexico, 1993-95

6

Philippines, 1996-97

7

Venezuela, 1992-94

9

South Korea, 1996-97

11

Thailand, 1996-97

26

Turkey, 1993-94

10

Sources: Calvo and Reinhart (2000), from World Bank, World Debt Tables, various issues and Institute for
International Economics, Comparative Statistics for Emerging market Economies, 1998.
1
Sudden Stop owing to the introduction of controls on capital inflows.

33

Figure 1. Equilibrium Determination

α-r

HGE

δ2

δ1

LGE

θD
- r
α - θ D (r - z)-

α - θDr - r

Figure 2. Equilibrium Growth
growth

zGrowth Collapse

0
δ1

δ2

34

θD

Figure 3. Discontinuous Equilibrium Mapping

c
J(z,D )

z

0

z-

_
J(z,D)

35

z

