A NEW MEASURE OF MONETARY SHOCKS:
    DERIVATION AND IMPLICATIONS

          Christina D. Romer
           David H. Romer

         Working Paper 9866
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         A NEW MEASURE OF MONETARY SHOCKS:
                             DERIVATION AND IMPLICATIONS

                                          Christina D. Romer
                                           David H. Romer

                                         Working Paper 9866
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9866


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




We are grateful to Normand Bernard for providing data and Federal Reserve records, to Jeffrey Fuhrer,
Charles Jones, and Janet Yellen for helpful comments and suggestions, and to the National Science
Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications
Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 9866
July 2003
JEL No. E52, E58, E32, E31

                                            ABSTRACT

       Conventional measures of monetary policy, such as the federal funds rate, are surely
influenced by forces other than monetary policy. More importantly, central banks adjust policy in
response to a wide range of information about future economic developments. As a result, estimates
of the effects of monetary policy derived using conventional measures will tend to be biased. To
address this problem, we develop a new measure of monetary policy shocks in the United States for
the period 1969 to 1996 that is relatively free of endogenous and anticipatory movements.
       The derivation of the new measure has two key elements. First, to address the problem of
forward-looking behavior, we control for the Federal Reserve’s forecasts of output and inflation
prepared for scheduled FOMC meetings. We remove from our measure policy actions that are a
systematic response to the Federal Reserve’s anticipations of future developments. Second, to
address the problem of endogeneity and to ensure that the forecasts capture the main information
the Federal Reserve had at the times decisions were made, we consider only changes in the Federal
Reserve’s intentions for the federal funds rate around scheduled FOMC meetings. This series on
intended changes is derived using information on the expected funds rate from the records of the
Open Market Manager and information on intentions from the narrative records of FOMC meetings.
The series covers the entire period for which forecasts are available, including times when the
Federal Reserve was not exclusively targeting the funds rate.
       Estimates of the effects of monetary policy obtained using the new measure indicate that
policy has large, relatively rapid, and statistically significant effects on both output and inflation.
We find that the effects using the new measure are substantially stronger and quicker than those
using prior measures. This suggests that previous measures of policy shocks are significantly
contaminated by forward-looking Federal Reserve behavior and endogeneity.
Christina D. Romer                                     David H. Romer
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley                     University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                               and NBER
cromer@econ.berkeley.edu                               dromer@econ.berkeley.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        The accuracy of estimates of the effects of monetary policy depends crucially on the validity of the

measure of monetary policy that is used. Use of an inappropriate measure may obscure a relationship

between monetary policy and other economic variables that actually exists, or create the appearance of a

relationship where there is no true causal link. For this reason, this paper derives a new measure of

monetary policy shocks that is free from some key deficiencies of previous measures. The new measure

yields estimates of the impact of monetary policy on both real and nominal variables that are stronger and

faster than those obtained using conventional indicators.



A. Problems with Conventional Measures

        The change in the federal funds rate has become the standard indicator of monetary actions in

studies of the effects of monetary policy. This is especially true of the vector autoregression literature,

where this particular short-term interest rate has replaced monetary aggregates, measures of reserves, and

other interest rates as the key policy variable.

        While the funds rate has many virtues as an indicator of policy, it also has some obvious flaws.

First, it is exceedingly noisy. The series moves a great deal from day to day for reasons unrelated to

monetary policy. Second, and more importantly, in eras when the Federal Reserve was targeting the funds

rate less closely than it has in the Greenspan era, the funds rate often moved endogenously because of

changes in economic conditions. Because such endogenous movements create a positive relationship

between the funds rate and economic activity, they may lead researchers to underestimate the negative

relationship between monetary policy actions and real economic variables.

        An alternative indicator that eliminates some of these defects is the change in the Federal Reserve's

target for the federal funds rate. The target funds rate abstracts from short-run noise and short-run

endogeneity. However, even the change in the target funds rate is an imperfect input to studies of the effects

of monetary policy. One obvious problem is that existing studies have only derived a target series for the
                                                                                                                 2

years 1974-1979 and 1984-present. As a result, empirical studies using the target miss some key episodes of

postwar monetary action, such as the Nixon-Burns expansion of the early 1970s and the Volcker disinflation

of the early 1980s.

        A more fundamental problem is that the Federal Reserve often moves the target funds rate in

anticipation of future economic developments. For example, the Federal Reserve is likely to cut rates if it is

forecasting a recession. In such a situation, output is unlikely to rise in the wake of the interest rate cut, even

if the monetary policy action is having a substantial stimulative effect. If such anticipatory countercyclical

actions are common, a regression may fail to find a positive relationship between reductions in the target

and output growth even if it is actually present.



B. A New Measure of Monetary Shocks

        In this paper we derive a new indicator of monetary policy shocks that avoids the problems inherent

in both the change in the actual funds rate and the change in the funds rate target. We begin by deriving a

series on intended funds rate changes around meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) for

the entire period 1969-1996. To do this we combine information on the Federal Reserve's expected funds

rate derived from the Weekly Report of the Manager of Open Market Operations with detailed readings of

the Federal Reserve's narrative accounts of each FOMC meeting. We find that even for periods when the

FOMC did not set an explicit funds rate target, the discussion of policy intentions gives a good indication of

the desired changes in the funds rate. The resulting series on intended funds rate movements around FOMC

meetings eliminates much of the endogenous relationship between interest rates and economic conditions

and covers the crucial episodes missed by existing series for the funds rate target.

        While the new intended funds rate series is an improvement over existing target measures, it is

possible to go further. In particular, we use the Federal Reserve's internal forecasts of inflation and real

activity to purge this measure of monetary policy actions taken in anticipation of developments in the

economy. The "Greenbook" forecasts prepared by the Federal Reserve staff before each meeting of the

FOMC contain information about what the staff anticipates will happen to output, prices, and
                                                                                                                  3

unemployment. We regress the change in the intended funds rate around forecast dates on these forecasts.

The residuals from this regression show changes in the intended funds rate not taken in response to

anticipated developments. The resulting series for monetary shocks, when used in a study of the effects of

policy, should neither obscure a relationship with output and prices that is there, nor create one that is not.



C. Implications of the New Measure

        Once we derive our new measure of monetary shocks, we use the series to analyze the responses of

output and inflation to monetary developments. We estimate straightforward regressions of the growth rate

of industrial production and the producer price index for finished goods on the new measure of monetary

shocks. We also estimate similar regressions using the change in the actual funds rate and our series on the

change in the intended funds rate around FOMC meetings as the indicator of monetary policy. Such

comparisons can show whether using the new measure yields results that differ in important ways from

those based on more conventional measures.

        The cumulative response of industrial production to our measure of monetary shocks indicates a

strong relationship. Industrial production begins to fall five months after a contractionary shock and reaches

its minimum after 22 months. The effects of monetary shocks on real output are both large and statistically

significant. A 100-basis-point shock to the funds rate is associated with a reduction in industrial production

of 4.8% after 22 months.

        The response of output to either the change in the actual funds rate or the change in the intended

funds rate around FOMC meetings indicates a substantially weaker correlation between monetary

developments and real activity. The estimated impact of either of these measures is smaller, slower, and less

significant than the impact of our new indicator. This suggests that the endogenous behavior of the funds

rate and the anticipatory component of Federal Reserve actions may be substantial, and may obscure some

of the true relationship between monetary policy and the real economy.

        Our estimates derived using the new measure of monetary shocks also show a strong, if somewhat

delayed, negative response of inflation to monetary contraction. We find that in response to a 100-basis-
                                                                                                             4

point shock, the price level is virtually unchanged for the first 18 months and then falls steadily relative to

what it otherwise would have been. After 48 months the price level is 6% lower. The effect is highly

statistically significant.

         The same regressions run using the change in the actual funds rate or our series on the change in the

intended funds rate around FOMC meetings as the indicator of monetary policy yield very different results.

In our baseline specification, using either alternative indicator, the cumulative impact of a rise in the funds

rate is positive for all 48 months that we consider. That is, there is a strong “price puzzle,” similar to the

positive correlation between monetary tightening and increases in the price level found in the VAR literature

(see, for example, Sims, 1992). Thus, again, it appears that endogenous movements in interest rates and

anticipatory policy moves are obscuring the true effects of monetary policy.

         Previous work has found that controlling for commodity prices eliminates the prize puzzle when

broad measures of policy are used (see, for example, Sims, 1992; Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1996;

and Bernanke and Mihov, 1998). Nonetheless, commodity prices may fail to capture important parts of the

Federal Reserve’s information about future developments. To investigate this issue, we examine the effects

of controlling for commodity prices both in regressions estimated using our new measure of monetary

shocks and in ones estimated using the alternatives. Controlling for commodity prices has no consistent

effect on the impact of policy estimated using our new measure, suggesting that our measure does capture

anticipatory policy actions motivated by supply shocks. With the alternative measures, controlling for

commodity prices largely eliminates the price puzzle. However, the effects of monetary policy actions are

still much smaller and slower than when our new measure is used. This suggests that using conventional

policy measures but controlling for commodity prices is not enough to deal with forward-looking Federal

Reserve behavior.

         Most of the recent literature on the effects of monetary policy has used vector autoregressions. To

facilitate comparisons with this literature, we run VARs using both our new measure of monetary shocks

and broader measures of monetary policy. We find that the VAR results using our new measure show a

substantially stronger effect of monetary policy on output and a stronger and more rapid effect on prices
                                                                                                           5

than found in the literature or in our VARs using broader indicators. This again suggests that endogenous

and anticipatory movements in previous monetary indicators may have led to underestimates of the effects

of monetary policy.

        Several recent investigations of the effects of monetary policy also control for central bank

forecasts. Barth and Ramey (2001) and Boivin (2001) add information from the Federal Reserve's forecasts

to largely conventional models of monetary policy and its effects. Jansson and Vredin (2001) consider

Swedish monetary policy over the period 1992-1998. They include forecast information in their monetary

policy reaction function to attempt to isolate policy shocks, and compare the central bank's forecasts with

alternatives to attempt to determine the impact of judgmental forecasting on policy.

        Our paper differs from these studies in two critical respects. First, we derive a genuine measure of

policy intentions, rather than use the actual interest rate. Furthermore, our measure of policy intentions is

derived so that the policy actions occur at the same time as the forecasts. This ensures that the forecasts

capture policymakers' anticipations at the time the policy decisions are made. Second, our focus is

explicitly on the usefulness of the new measure of monetary shocks that we derive. By comparing the

results using the new measure with those using conventional measures, we can see if using a consistent

measure of policy intentions and controlling for anticipatory actions affects the estimates of the impact of

monetary policy.




II. DERIVATION OF A NEW MEASURE OF MONETARY POLICY SHOCKS

        The derivation of our new measure of monetary policy shocks has two key steps. The first is to

derive a series for Federal Reserve intentions for the federal funds rate around FOMC meetings. The second

is to control for Federal Reserve forecasts, and so create a measure of intended monetary policy actions not

driven by expectations of future economic developments. This section discusses both steps in detail. It also

discusses the main features of the new series and compares it with other indicators.
                                                                                                            6

A. Changes in the Intended Funds Rate Around FOMC Meetings

1. Motivation

        The Greenbook forecasts are only done before FOMC meetings. Therefore, the only policy actions

for which we can use the forecasts as a proxy for policymakers’ information are those around FOMC

meetings. For this reason, we derive a series for Federal Reserve intentions around FOMC meetings. The

focus on FOMC meetings is likely to be quite important. Policy actions taken between meetings are often

substantial and are virtually always based on the arrival of new information. As a result, the Greenbook

forecast for the previous meeting would likely be a poor indicator of the information that led to the

intermeeting action.

        The particular variable for which we analyze the Federal Reserve’s intentions around FOMC

meetings is the nominal federal funds rate. We focus on the intentions for the funds rate, instead of

intentions for reserves or other variables, for several reasons. Most obviously, for much of the period for

which we have detailed forecast data (1969-1996), the Federal Reserve explicitly targeted the funds rate.

This was the case between 1974 and September 1979 and for the entire period since the mid-1980s.

Therefore, the change in the intended funds rate is the single indicator that best captures what the Federal

Reserve was aiming to do over this period.

        Even in periods when the Federal Reserve was not explicitly targeting the federal funds rate, it was

concerned about this key interest rate and typically made predictions about its behavior. Therefore, as a

practical matter, the change in the intended funds rate is the easiest indicator of Federal Reserve intentions

to deduce accurately over a long period of time.

        The final reason for focusing on the change in the intended funds rate around forecasts as the

indicator of Federal Reserve intentions is that an interest rate measure is more likely to be consistent over

time than other candidates. The same Federal Reserve objectives for quantity variables such as reserves or

monetary aggregates may reflect very different intentions even in nearby periods because of regulatory or

definitional changes. This is much less likely to be true of the federal funds rate.
                                                                                                          7

2. Sources

        To identify changes in the intended funds rate decided upon around FOMC meetings, we use two

types of sources. One is the narrative record of Federal Open Market Committee meetings. We use both

the published summaries of FOMC discussions contained in the Record of Policy Actions of the Federal

Open Market Committee and the more complete accounts contained in the Minutes of the Federal Open

Market Committee and, later, the Transcripts of Federal Open Market Committee.1 The Minutes cover the

period through March 1976, and the Transcripts cover the period beginning in February 1981; no detailed

accounts are currently available for the intervening period. A final narrative source that we employ is the

FOMC document Monetary Policy Alternatives, or the "Bluebook," that is prepared for each FOMC

meeting. The Bluebook typically includes a summary of the implementation of policy since the previous

meeting and a presentation of some possible decisions for the FOMC.

        For times when the FOMC was using the funds rate as its main policy instrument, the narrative

sources typically contain detailed information on what the FOMC decided to do to the target. For periods

when the FOMC was emphasizing another variable more, these sources still almost always include

discussions of the likely implications of the FOMC's actions for the funds rate. Hence we can use the

narrative record to deduce changes in the intended funds rate in a variety of monetary regimes.

        Our other type of sources is more quantitative. Specifically, we employ a pair of internal memos

from the Federal Reserve showing the "expected federal funds rate." One covers the period from January

1971 to December 1984 and the other covers the period from December 1983 to September 1992.2 These

memos are based on the Weekly Report of the Manager of Open Market Operations. In addition to

numerical values, the memos contain brief narrative remarks about the timing of moves and where, within a

given range, the open market desk was aiming. These remarks make it clear that the series reflects Federal

Reserve intentions rather than passive expectations or forecasts. And indeed, the reported expected federal

funds rates are very similar to the target values given in Rudebusch (1995) for the periods where the series

overlap (1974-1979 and 1984-1992). The obvious benefit of the internal memos for our purposes is that

they also include expected funds rate changes in the early 1970s and the Volcker period.
                                                                                                               8

        While the expected funds rate series is a useful input to our identification of Federal Reserve

intentions, it is important to note that we do not use it in a mechanical fashion. For example, we do not take

the change in the expected rate between the day before the forecast and some arbitrary number of days after

the corresponding FOMC meeting. The reason for this is that we only want changes in the expected funds

rate for which the forecasts are a reasonable summary of the available information. Some funds rate

changes even very soon after FOMC meetings are based on new information. Similarly, some changes in

the expected federal funds rate two or more weeks after an FOMC meeting are explicitly decided upon at

the meeting. For this reason, it is crucial to combine the narrative and quantitative evidence.3

3. Method

        Our analysis requires both the level of the federal funds rate that the FOMC intended to prevail at

the time of the forecast and the level it intended on the basis of its decision at its meeting. For each meeting,

we therefore begin by reading the Record of Policy Actions for information on the current or prevailing

level of the intended funds rate. The Record of Policy Actions almost always reports the actual level of the

funds rate before the meeting and indicates if it was temporarily deviating from what the Federal Reserve

was intending. Thus, it is usually straightforward to deduce the level the FOMC was intending before the

meeting. The Record of Policy Actions also typically reports any actions taken in the days just before the

meeting that may have affected the funds rate, so it is possible to back out the intended funds rate at the time

of the forecast.

        We then check our deduced level of the intended funds rate at the time of the forecast against the

expected funds rate from the internal memos. If there is a discrepancy or ambiguity, we examine the more

detailed accounts of the meetings in the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee or Transcripts and

the descriptions of how policy was implemented in the Bluebooks.           If there are discrepancies on these

relatively factual issues, we typically resolve them in favor of the expected rate, unless the narrative sources

are very explicit. This is especially true of changes between the forecast and the meeting, for which the

narrative accounts are often not particularly quantitative.

        We then read the Record of Policy Actions to see what the FOMC decided to do at the meeting.
                                                                                                            9

That is, we determine as well as possible from the narrative description what the FOMC intended to happen

to the funds rate as a result of the actions agreed upon at the meeting. This post-meeting level for the

intended funds rate will incorporate any changes in the series taken between the forecast and the meeting

that are confirmed by the FOMC. In deducing the new intended level we make no adjustment for timing:

changes that are scheduled to be implemented gradually are treated as an immediate change in intentions.

        The Record of Policy Actions is often very clear about the change in the intended funds rate. This

is especially true for the mid-1970s when a very narrow range for the new intended funds rate is usually

given, and since 1987 when the Federal Reserve has targeted the funds rate very closely. For other episodes

the FOMC's intentions for the funds rate are more opaque. While this is especially true in the early Volcker

era of non-borrowed reserve targeting, it also occurs periodically in eras of quite obvious funds rate

targeting. A decision for no change is usually very explicit and the direction of change, if there is one, is

usually obvious. But the magnitude of the change is often much less explicit.

        For all meetings, we also consider the evidence from the expected funds rate series. Whenever the

Record of Policy Actions and the expected rate do not yield a clear and consistent view of what the FOMC

intended, we examine the more detailed narrative sources. In these cases, the Minutes and Transcripts

usually provide more explicit information than the Record of Policy Actions about the FOMC's intentions.

The narrative sources from the subsequent meeting are also often very useful: the Record of Policy Actions,

Minutes, and Bluebooks almost always contain descriptions of what was decided at the previous meeting.

We assume that when the FOMC says it decided to tighten a certain amount at the last meeting it is not

rewriting history.

        In the vast majority of cases, either the different sources provide a clear picture of what monetary

policymakers intended for the federal funds rate prior to the meeting and how they anticipated their decision

at the meeting would affect the funds rate, or they leave room for only very minor disagreement. In a few

cases, however, there is more ambiguity. Sometimes, the narrative sources provide evidence about the

direction but not the magnitude of the intended move in the funds rate. In these cases, we rely mainly on the

quantitative evidence from the expected funds rate series to deduce the magnitude of the intended action.
                                                                                                             10

        Another type of ambiguity concerns asymmetry in the FOMC's decisions. Periodically, when the

FOMC decides not to change rates immediately, it makes it clear that any future rate changes will most

likely be in a particular direction. When such asymmetry is strong and explicit, we feel it is reasonable to

say that the intended funds rate has in fact moved. The likely rate change times the probability of a change

is surely not zero. As a starting point, we scale strong asymmetry as one-half of the usual rate change in a

given era. For example, for the mid-1970s, when quarter-point moves in the intended funds rate were

typical, strong asymmetry is recorded as a change of 1/8 of a point in the intended direction. In the early

Burns era, when larger movements were common, strong asymmetry may get a value of 1/4 point or more.

We then adjust this preliminary estimate of the expected change in the intended funds rate due to asymmetry

using the narrative accounts of the meeting. For example, in some cases the narrative accounts make it clear

that the asymmetry was being included in the Record of Policy Actions mainly for signaling purposes and

that it was unlikely to be acted on. In other cases, the narrative accounts include fairly clear discussions of

the magnitude or likelihood of a move in the funds rate.

        A final case where the evidence is less than fully clear involves the beginning of the period of non-

borrowed reserve targeting under Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker. The FOMC was sufficiently

focused on non-borrowed reserve targeting that for many meetings the Record of Policy Actions provides

only a vague description of the likely implications of the FOMC's decisions for the funds rate. Furthermore,

the Federal Reserve’s series on the expected funds rate is so volatile from week to week that it is difficult to

discern the FOMC's intentions from this source. Finally, neither the Minutes nor the Transcripts are

currently available for late 1979 and 1980. Because of this ambiguity, in our empirical work we check that

our results are robust to omitting the early Volcker period.

        The appendix contains a meeting-by-meeting description of our application of these general

procedures for deducing Federal Reserve intentions. Table A-1 of the appendix shows the resulting series

on the change in the intended federal funds rate decided at or just before FOMC meetings.

        A comparison of the new intended series around FOMC meetings and the target series given in

Rudebusch (1995) shows both some clear differences and some key similarities. The most obvious
                                                                                                               11

difference is that the target series is only available for the mid-1970s and the post-1984 period, when the

Federal Reserve was targeting the funds rate closely, whereas we have derived the intended series for the

entire period 1969-1996. More fundamentally, the target series includes many actions taken between

meetings in response to new information, whereas our intended series only shows actions taken at FOMC

meetings for which Greenbook forecasts are available.

        For changes in the funds rate around FOMC meetings, the new intended series and the conventional

target series are fundamentally similar. The directions of the moves in the two series are almost always the

same, and often the sum of changes in the target in the week to ten days following the FOMC meeting is

quite close to our measure of the intended change decided at the meeting. However, the two series are

certainly not identical even around FOMC meetings. One reason for the differences is that our series for

intended movements series treats strong asymmetry as a policy action, while the target series measures only

actual moves. Another source of differences is that some changes that were not implemented for a

substantial time after a meeting are included in the intended series because they were decided at the meeting.

Finally, the arrival of new information also causes the two series to differ. For example, there are a few

changes in the target very soon after FOMC meetings that we find were based on the arrival of new

information, and so do not include in the intended series. Likewise, there are some changes that were

decided at a meeting but were never implemented because the arrival of new information led to rapid policy

reversals.



B. Controlling for the Federal Reserve's Forecasts

        We can now use the series on changes in the intended funds rate around FOMC meetings to derive

a new measure of monetary policy shocks. As described above, the central idea behind the new measure is

to control for the Federal Reserve's forecasts of future changes in prices and output. By eliminating the

component of changes in the intended funds rate made in response to forecasts, we can derive a measure of

policy shocks that will not be biased toward or against having a relationship with future output and prices.
                                                                                                            12

1. Federal Reserve Forecast Data

        The Federal Reserve's internal forecasts are contained in the document Current Economic and

Financial Conditions, or the "Greenbook," that is issued roughly six days before each FOMC meeting. The

fact that the Greenbook is issued so soon before the corresponding FOMC meeting suggests that it is likely

to contain most of the information about future economic developments available to policymakers at the

time of the meeting. More fundamentally, the Greenbook forecasts are very good. The Federal Reserve

devotes a vast amount of resources to the forecasts. Romer and Romer (2000) show that contemporaneous

private-sector forecasts contain no important information not already contained in the Greenbook forecasts.

Thus, it is unlikely that members of the FOMC have significant useful additional information.

        The Greenbooks contain forecasts for a wide variety of variables. The particular forecasts that we

use are those for the growth rate of real GNP/GDP and the GNP/GDP deflator, and for the unemployment

rate. These are three key macroeconomic indicators that the FOMC is likely to consider in setting policy.

These Greenbook forecasts begin in late 1965, but the forecast horizon is very short (typically just one

quarter ahead) until 1969. In addition, the forecasts are only released with a five-year lag. As a result, our

analysis is restricted to the period 1969-1996.

        Both the intended funds rate series that we derive and the forecast data correspond to FOMC

meetings. Therefore, at this stage in the analysis, we use FOMC meetings rather than months as our unit of

observation. In the early part of our sample, the FOMC met at least once a month and sometimes twice.

Since 1979, the FOMC has typically met eight times a year.

2. Specification

        To derive our new measure of monetary shocks, we first estimate the usual relationship between the

Federal Reserve’s intentions for the funds rate around FOMC meetings and the Greenbook forecasts for

inflation, real growth, and unemployment. We estimate the following regression:


                            2          2                        2         2
                                 ~             ~      ~
(1)      Δffm = α + βffbm + Σ γiΔymi + Σ λi ( Δymi – Δym-1,i) + Σ φi~
                                                                    πmi + Σ θi ( ~
                                                                                 πmi – ~
                                                                                       πm-1,i) + ρu~m0 + εt .
                              i = -1      i = -1                  i = -1     i = -1



Δffm is the change in the intended funds rate around FOMC meeting m. ffbm is the level of the intended
                                                                                                               13

funds rate before any changes associated with meeting m. It is included to capture any tendency toward
                                 ~ ~        ~
mean reversion in FOMC behavior. π, Δy, and u refer to Federal Reserve forecasts of inflation, real

GNP/GDP growth, and the unemployment rate. Both the forecasts for the contemporaneous meeting and

the change in the forecast since the previous meeting are included because it is plausible that both the levels

and the changes in the forecasts may be important determinants of Federal Reserve behavior. The i

subscripts refer to the horizon of the forecast: -1 is the previous quarter; 0 is the current quarter; and 1 and 2

are one and two quarters ahead, respectively.4 The forecast for the previous quarter is often actual data

rather than a forecast. We include it because lagged conditions could obviously play a substantial role in

FOMC decisions. Using lagged data from the Greenbook is desirable because it reflects what the FOMC

believed recent history was at the time of the meeting, rather than what our current revised estimates suggest

was the case.

        We only include forecasts up to two quarters ahead for two reasons. The more prosaic one is that

the Greenbooks for the late 1960s and early 1970s rarely forecast more than two quarters out. As a result,

we lose many observations if we try to incorporate longer-term forecasts. The more fundamental reason has

to do with policy assumptions. All forecasters, including the Federal Reserve staff, must incorporate

assumptions about future policy into their forecasts. The Federal Reserve's Greenbook forecast is almost

always predicated on the assumption of no change in monetary policy in the very short run, where the very

short run means at least until the FOMC meeting after the one for which the forecast is being made. This

characteristic, along with the usual assumption of some lag in the effects of monetary policy, makes it

unlikely that forecasts zero, one, and two quarters ahead are contaminated by assumptions or inside

information about the course of monetary policy. As a result, these near-term forecasts provide information

about what the Federal Reserve expected to happen to the economy in the absence of changes in monetary

policy. At the same time, both output growth and inflation are serially correlated enough that forecasts one

and two quarters ahead provide a good indication of the likely forecasted path of the economy over longer

horizons.

        Because the Okun's Law relationship between output growth and unemployment is so strong, we do
                                                                                                              14

not include all horizons of the forecasts of both variables. We focus primarily on forecasts of output growth

because it has greater prominence in the Greenbooks, suggesting a more central role in FOMC decision-

making. We do, however, include the contemporaneous unemployment forecast so that we control for the

current level of the economy as well as forecasted changes.

3. Results

        Using the series for changes in the intended funds rate around FOMC meetings that we have

derived and the forecast data described above, we estimate equation (1) using data from the beginning of

1969 through the end of 1996. The regression shows how the Federal Reserve has typically responded to

forecasts of real growth and inflation over this period. The results are reported in Table 1.

        The coefficient estimates show that the FOMC tends to behave countercyclically. The sum of the

coefficients on the real growth forecasts is 0.04 with a t-statistic of 2.5, and the sum of the coefficients on

the changes in the real growth forecasts since the previous meeting is 0.24 with a t-statistic of 4.0. An

increase from one meeting to the next in forecasted real growth at all horizons of 1 percentage point leads to

a rise in the intended funds rate of 29 basis points. Although all the estimated coefficients on the growth

variables are positive, the strongest estimated effect is for the change in the forecast of real growth for the
                                               ~      ~
current quarter. The estimated coefficient on Δym0 – Δym-1,0 is 0.15, with a t-statistic of 5.1. The significant

negative coefficient on the forecast of the unemployment rate for the current quarter also confirms the

countercyclical tendency in FOMC behavior.

        The regression suggests that the Federal Reserve also tends to resist forecasted inflation. The sum

of the coefficients on the inflation forecasts is 0.04 with a t-statistic of 2.3. The sum of the coefficients on

the changes in the inflation forecasts is 0.03, but is estimated quite imprecisely (t = 0.3). Thus, an increase

from one meeting to the next in forecasted inflation at all horizons of 1 percentage point is associated with a

rise in the intended funds rate of 7 basis points. All but two of the coefficients on the inflation variables are

positive. The largest are for the level of forecasted inflation two quarters ahead and the change in forecasted

inflation for the previous quarter.

        The R2 of the regression is 0.28. This suggests that a substantial fraction of Federal Reserve actions
                                                                                                             15

over the last three decades have been taken in response to their forecasts of future growth and inflation. As

a result, it is certainly possible that not controlling for these responsive actions could bias estimates of the

effects of policy. At the same time, the relatively low R2 indicates that many Federal Reserve actions were

taken for reasons unrelated to anticipations of output growth and inflation.



C. New Measure of Monetary Shocks

1. Construction and Behavior of the New Series

        We construct our new measure of monetary shocks by taking the residuals of equation (1). The

resulting series shows changes in the intended federal funds rate around FOMC meetings not made in

response to forecasts of inflation and real growth.

        This new measure of monetary policy shocks may reflect a variety of developments. Changes in

policymakers’ views about the acceptable levels of inflation and unemployment would certainly show up in

this measure. Similarly, changes in policymakers’ understanding of how the economy worked, and thus in

what they thought monetary policy could accomplish, could lead to residuals in equation (1). Political

pressures and changes in operating procedures could also cause movements in the new series. In short, the

new measure should capture any changes in Federal Reserve intentions for the funds rate around FOMC

meetings that are not systematic responses to the internal forecasts.

        Because the base data used in equation (1) correspond to FOMC meetings, the residuals also

correspond to FOMC meetings. Therefore, before the shocks series can be used in further analysis, it must

be converted to a monthly series. To do this, we assign each shock to the month in which the corresponding

FOMC meeting occurred. If there are two meetings in a month, we sum the shocks.5                If there are no

meetings in a month, we record the shock as zero for that month.6         Table 2 reports our monthly shock

series. The top panel of Figure 1 presents a graph of the series, where the monthly values have been

averaged into quarterly observations to improve legibility.

        Several episodes of monetary contraction stand out in the new series. There are obvious upward

spikes in the new series in 1969, 1973-1974, 1979-1982, and 1994-1995. The first three of these episodes
                                                                                                           16

correspond to the dates of Federal Reserve decisions to restrict aggregate demand in order to reduce

inflation that we identified from the narrative record in two earlier papers (Romer and Romer, 1989, 1994).

The 1994-1995 episode corresponds to a period of unusual tightening following the prolonged period of

loose policy associated with the 1990-1991 recession and the subsequent credit crunch.

         The new series also shows some obvious periods of monetary expansion. One that stands out very

clearly occurred in late 1971 and early 1972. This corresponds to the period when the Federal Reserve

under chairman Arthur Burns embarked on a deliberate program of aggressive monetary expansion.

Whether this expansion was motivated by a misguided model of the economy (Romer and Romer, 2002) or

political considerations (Tufte, 1978, and De Long, 1997) remains an open question. Another obvious

extreme expansion occurred in April 1980, when the credit crunch was in full swing. A less extreme, but

quite persistent, expansion extended from late 1975 through early 1978. This expansion corresponds to the

end of the Burns era and the beginning of the widely criticized tenure of G. William Miller as Federal

Reserve chairman.

         The largest values in the new series, both positive and negative, occur between October 1979 and

May 1981. This corresponds to the early period of non-borrowed reserve targeting under Federal Reserve

chairman Paul Volcker. Some of the volatility of the shock series during this period could be due to the fact

that it is particularly difficult to derive the input series on the intended funds rate around FOMC meetings

for these months. However, it is also the case that monetary policy is generally considered to have been

quite volatile in this period.

2. Robustness of the New Series

         The new series is derived by regressing the intended funds rate on the Federal Reserve’s internal

forecasts and taking the residuals.    There are obviously many possible ways of specifying the key

regression. One permutation that we consider is to include a quadratic trend in the regression to take into

account possible long-run changes in inflation and the level of the intended funds rate. Another is to include

the lagged, contemporaneous, and one- and two-quarter-ahead forecasts and forecast innovations for the

change in the index of industrial production. Including industrial production could be useful because it is a
                                                                                                             17

cyclically sensitive series and one that the Federal Reserve is likely to forecast particularly well (since it

constructs the index). A third permutation adds the full complement of unemployment forecasts to the basic

specification. Finally, a fourth permutation we consider estimates the regression separately for the pre- and

post-1983 periods. If Federal Reserve behavior changed substantially during the Volcker era, splitting the

sample will allow for tighter estimates of the reaction function in the two periods.7

        The various permutations certainly have some effect on the individual coefficient estimates.

However, the sums of the coefficients on the different forecasts and forecast innovations are qualitatively

very similar. More importantly, the shock series derived as the residuals of the alternative regressions are all

very similar to the basic series. The correlation between the permutations and the basic series is over 0.97 in

each case. Given that the series being compared do not have a noticeable trend, this degree of correlation is

indicative of genuinely similar movements Thus, our new shock series is robust to a wide array of sensible

permutations in the specification of the underlying regression.

3. Comparison with Broader Measures of Monetary Policy

        The lower panel of Figure 1 shows two broader measures of monetary policy that we consider

throughout the paper.8 One is the change in the intended funds rate around FOMC meetings that we use in

constructing our measure. This measure differs from our shock series in not controlling for the FOMC's

forecasts of output and inflation. It differs from conventional target series in covering a longer time span

and excluding actions taken between FOMC meetings. The second is the change in the actual federal funds

rate, measured using the monthly average.9 This measure includes not only the changes in the intended

funds rate as a result of FOMC meetings, but changes between meetings coming from both deliberate policy

and other sources.

        Because the R2 of the regression used to derive the new measure is not particularly large, there is

some similarity between our new shock series and the change in the intended funds rate around FOMC

meetings that we use as the dependent variable of the regression. Indeed, the contemporaneous correlation

between our new shock series and the change in the intended funds rate is 0.78. However, the series do

differ noticeably in some key periods. For example, the Burns expansion of late 1971 and early 1972 is
                                                                                                           18

much more obvious in our new series than in the intended series: between October 1971 and June 1972 the

sum of our new monthly series is -1.92 percentage points, while that of the intended series is only -0.56

percentage points. The same is true of the expansion of the early Carter administration: between January

1977 and May 1978, the sum of monthly values of the new series is -1.33 percentage points while that of the

intended series is +1.00 percentage points.

         The two series differ just as noticeably during some key contractionary episodes. For example, the

monetary contraction during the 1973-1975 recession is more noticeable in the new shock series than in the

intended series: between November 1973 and August 1974 the new series rises 1.51 percentage points,

while the intended series declines 0.06 percentage points. Likewise, the new series suggests that monetary

policy was substantially more contractionary before the 1990 recession than the intended series suggests:

between December 1988 and August 1990 the sum of monthly values of the new series is 1.20 percentage

points while that of the intended series is 0.13 percentage points. In general, the two series are most

different when the Federal Reserve acts at a time when economic conditions (and hence forecasts) are

extreme.

         The new series also differs from the change in the actual funds rate. The correlation between the

new series and the change in the actual funds rate is 0.43. Many of the differences are similar to those

between the new series and the intended series around FOMC meetings, and reflect the impact of

controlling for forecasts. For example, policy in 1971-1972 and 1977-1978 is again more expansionary in

the new series than in the actual funds rate series. Similarly, policy in 1974 and 1988-1990 is more

contractionary in the new series than in the actual funds rate series. However, the differences between the

new series and the actual funds rate are even more widespread than those between the new series and the

intended series around FOMC meetings. This is due largely to the fact that intermeeting changes in the

funds rate are included in the actual series but not in the new series. Such intermeeting changes were largest

and most prevalent in periods when the Federal Reserve was not targeting the funds rate closely, such as the

early 1970s and the early 1980s. As a result, the new series differs particularly strongly from the actual

series in those eras.
                                                                                                              19

III. IMPLICATIONS

        The next step in our analysis is to use the new measure of monetary policy shocks to estimate the

effects of policy. We start with the impact on output, and then consider prices.



A. Output

1. Methodology

        We want to determine how output behaves in the wake of monetary shocks.                    In our basic

specification, we therefore regress output growth on a constant, its own lagged values, and lagged values of

the new policy measure. Thus, our baseline regression takes the form


                                                       I           J
(2)                                      Δyt = a + Σ biΔy t-i + Σ cjS t-j + e t ,
                                                     i=1          j=1



where y is a measure of log output and S is our new measure of monetary policy shocks. The lagged values

of the shock series are included to capture the direct impact of shocks on output growth, and the lagged

values of output growth are included to control for the normal dynamics of output.

        We summarize the results by examining the response of the level of log output to a one-time

realization of our monetary policy variable (S) of 100 basis points. The estimated response of log output

after one month is just c1, the coefficient on the first lag of S; the estimated response of log output after two

months is c1 + (c2 + b1c1); and so on.

        A natural variation on our approach is to control for other variables that may affect output. Since

we control for the Federal Reserve's expectations of output growth in constructing the measure of policy

changes, there is no reason to expect the measure to be correlated with other variables that influence output.

Our basic specification therefore does not include any controls. We show below that controlling for a

measure of supply shocks has little impact on the results. Similarly, an obvious alternative to our one-

equation approach is to run a vector autoregression with output growth and the policy measure (and perhaps

other variables). We show below that using our new policy measure in a VAR yields results similar to those

in our basic specification.
                                                                                                             20

        Because our measure of monetary policy is monthly, we use industrial production as our output

series.10 To avoid the complications introduced by the government's seasonal adjustment algorithm, we use

data that have not been seasonally adjusted and include monthly dummies in the regression. In our baseline

regression, we include 24 lags of output growth and 36 lags of the monetary policy measure. Thus the

baseline regression is


                                              11           24            36
(3)                             Δy t = a 0 + Σ a kD kt + Σ b iΔy t-i + Σ cjS t-j + e t ,
                                             k=1          i=1           j=1



where the Dk's are monthly dummies. Our sample period is 1970:1-1996:12, with the values of St before

1969:3 set to zero. The end date is the last month for which our policy measure is available. The start date

is chosen so that a reasonable number of lagged values of the policy measure are available at the beginning

of the sample.

2. Results

        The estimates of equation (3) are given in Table 3. The coefficients on the first two lags of our

shock variable are positive, and the first is significantly larger than zero. The coefficients then turn sharply

negative: all but two of the estimated coefficients on lags 3 through 22 are negative, although most of them

are not individually significant. Starting with lag 23, the coefficients are almost all positive, though again

few of them are significant.

        Figure 2 shows the implied response of log output to a realization of the policy measure of 100

basis points, together with one-standard-error bands.11 The estimated cumulative impact is slightly positive

for the first four months, small and negative in months 5 through 7, and then declines essentially linearly

through month 22. The estimated maximum effect is -4.8%. This means that a one-percentage-point rise in

the Federal Reserve’s intentions for the funds rate, not taken in response to anticipated developments, results

in a reduction in industrial production relative to its initial value of nearly 5 percent. The impact then

weakens gradually, reaching -1.2% at month 48. The estimated cumulative impact in the middle months is

highly significant: the t-statistic for the estimated cumulative effect in each of months 12 through 29

exceeds 2.5. The two-standard-error confidence interval for the impact in month 22 is (-7.6%, -2.0%). The
                                                                                                           21

later effect, on the other hand, is not precisely estimated. The two-standard-error confidence interval in

month 48 is (-5.7%, +3.3%). Thus it encompasses both no effect and the estimated maximum impact.12

        Closer inspection of the data shows that the significant positive coefficient on the first lag of our

shock variable is due to the April 1980 observation. Our shock measure for April 1980 is -3.2 percentage

points and industrial production fell 2.9% from April to May. Setting the April shock to zero lowers the

coefficient on the first lag from 0.0044 to 0.0027, and the t-statistic from 2.4 to 1.3. The extreme loosening

in April 1980 came just one month after the imposition of credit controls. However, examination of the

Record of Policy Actions for the April 1980 meeting yields no evidence that the FOMC's decision to ease

aggressively was based on information about unfavorable economic prospects beyond the information

contained in the Greenbook forecast. Indeed, if anything the members' outlook may have been less

pessimistic than the forecasts.    Thus, the most likely possibility is that the small estimated positive

coefficient on the first lags of our shock variable simply reflects sampling error, not mismeasurement in the

shock series or a genuine response.13

3. Robustness

        We investigate the robustness of these results along four dimensions. First, as described in Section

II, our estimated policy changes are largest and least certain during the early part of the period of non-

borrowed reserve targeting under Paul Volcker. It is therefore natural to ask whether including the values of

the policy measure from this period are crucial to our results.

        To address this question, we reestimate equation (3) treating the policy measure as missing from

October 1979 through May 1981. Omitting these observations weakens the results only slightly. The

estimated peak effect is now -3.5% after 28 months rather than -4.8% after 22 months, and the estimated

effect after 48 months is +0.5% rather than -1.2%. The omission of the information from the early Volcker

era raises the standard errors of the estimated output effects only by about 10 percent.

        Second, we investigate the effects of including 48 rather than 36 lags of the policy measure. This

change has virtually no impact on the point estimates or standard errors through month 36. Thereafter the

inclusion of the additional lags increases the estimate of the extent of mean reversion. With the additional
                                                                                                          22

lags, the estimated impact at month 48 is -0.6% rather than -1.2%.

        Third, we investigate the robustness of our findings to alternative specifications of the regression

used to derive the new shock series. Using any of the alternative shock series described in Section II.C.2

leads to very similar estimates of the effect of monetary shocks on output. For example, using as the shock

series the residuals from the regression of the intended funds rate on Federal Reserve forecasts estimated

separately before and after 1983 leads to an estimated peak effect of monetary policy on output of –4.4%

(after 22 months) with t-statistic of –2.7.

        Fourth, we examine the effects of controlling for a measure of supply shocks. We describe this

experiment in Section C below.

4. Broader Measures of Policy

        The main motive for developing our measure of policy is that broader measures may include

endogenous movements and policy changes that the FOMC makes in response to information it has about

likely future economic developments. It is therefore important to compare the results using our measure

with those using broader measures. A finding that the estimated effects of policy on output are similar using

both our new measure and broader measures would suggest that the broader measures are not severely

contaminated, and thus would allow researchers to use those measures with more confidence. A finding that

the estimated effects are very different, on the other hand, would suggest that using a narrower measure such

as ours is important.

        As described above, the two broader measures of policy that we consider are the change in the

intended funds rate around FOMC meetings and the actual federal funds rate. We reestimate equation (3)

using both of these alternative measures.

        Figure 3 displays the cumulative responses of output to a 100-basis-point change in the intended

funds rate and in the actual funds rate. With both broader measures, the output effects of policy are slower

than with our measure. The estimated cumulative impact of policy on output does not turn consistently

negative until month 11 when we use the change in the FOMC's intended funds rate. For comparison, it

turns negative in month 5 with our measure. When we use the change in the funds rate, the estimated effect
                                                                                                            23

becomes consistently negative beginning in month 6. Over months 8 through 16, however, the effect is only

about a third as large as it is using our measure. This difference between the results based on our new

measure and on more conventional ones suggests that using broad measures leads one to overstate the lag

with which monetary policy affects the economy.

        The effects of monetary policy on industrial production using the broader measures are also

substantially smaller than those estimated using the new measure. The estimated maximum effect is -2.9%

(with a standard error of 1.3%) in month 32 using the change in the intended funds rate. With the change in

the actual funds rate, the effect reaches -3.0% (1.8%) in month 32 and is essentially flat thereafter. With our

measure, in contrast, the estimated effect peaks at -4.8% (1.4%) in month 22 and then declines toward zero.

The contrast between the results using the broader measures and those using our measure strongly suggests

that there is an important forward-looking component of policy, and that not accounting for it biases

estimates of the effects of policy substantially.



B. Prices

1. Methodology and Results

        We now turn to the impact of monetary policy on inflation and the price level. Because we want a

monthly measure and because interest rates enter the CPI for much of our sample period, we use the PPI for

finished goods as our basic price measure.14 Our approach parallels the one we use to examine the impact

of policy on output. The one change is that because there appear to be longer lags in the impact of policy on

prices, our basic specification includes 48 rather than 36 lags of the policy measure. Thus our baseline

regression is


                                                11           24            48
(4)                              Δp t = a 0 + Σ a kD kt + Σ b iΔp t-i + Σ c jS t-j + e t ,
                                              k=1           i=1           j=1



where p is the log of the PPI for finished goods. The estimates are reported in Table 4.

        Figure 4 shows the estimated cumulative impact on the price level of a realization of our policy

measure of 100 basis points, together with one-standard-error confidence bands. The estimated impact is
                                                                                                             24

virtually zero for the first 20 months after the shock. The price level rises for the first 8 months, but the

maximum impact is just 0.3% and is not close to statistically significant. Twenty months after the

contractionary policy shock, prices begin to fall substantially. The estimated impact is -1.9% after 30

months and -5.9% after 48 months. The effect becomes progressively more statistically significant. The t-

statistic reaches 2 (in absolute value) in month 29, 4 in month 37, and 5 in month 43. The two-standard-

error confidence interval for the effect after 48 months is (-7.9%, -3.8%).

        Figure 5 summarizes the same information in terms of inflation instead of the price level. The

effects on inflation in individual months are choppy and not estimated very precisely. They fluctuate around

zero for the first 19 months and are never significant. Beginning in month 20, however, almost all the

estimated effects are negative. They average -2.4%, and about half of them are significant. Thus, our

estimates suggest that a contractionary monetary policy shock results in a sharp reduction in inflation after a

substantial delay.

2. Robustness

        These results do not depend on the large swings in our policy measure in the early Volcker period.

Treating the measure as missing from October 1979 through May 1981 does not change the basic pattern of

the results. The most noteworthy change is that the estimated time of the sharp fall in inflation is about three

months later than when the full sample is used.

        Using the shock series derived from the alternative specifications of the regression on Federal

Reserve forecasts has little impact on the estimated effect of monetary policy on the price level. For

example, a 100-basis-point innovation in the shock series derived using separate regressions on Federal

Reserve forecasts before and after 1983 has a cumulative impact on the price level of –6.6% after 48

months. At the same time, using these alternative shock series typically increases the standard errors,

though never by enough to render the estimated impact insignificantly different from zero.

        The finding that inflation slows only after a substantial delay in all specifications, like the earlier

finding of a positive point estimate for the very short-run output effect, has two candidate interpretations.

Our policy measure could still have a component that reflects responses to information about the economy,
                                                                                                               25

so that the true effect of policy is faster and larger than our estimates imply. Or there could genuinely be

long delays in the impact of monetary policy on inflation, with the point estimates over the first 18 months

representing sampling error around a true effect of roughly zero.

        Two considerations suggest that the second explanation is probably the more important one. First,

the possibility that the FOMC has important information about inflation beyond what is in its forecasts

seems most plausible for very short horizons. If the FOMC were setting policy on the basis of additional

information about the very near term, one would expect to see a clear positive estimated impact of policy on

inflation at short horizons followed by a negative impact. But instead, we find no clear effect on inflation or

the price level for a year and a half. Second, as described below, when we add commodity prices -- which is

the series most often thought to provide additional information about future inflation -- to the inflation

regression, the estimated effects of policy on prices are no faster or stronger than before. Indeed, if

anything, the estimated effects are weaker.15

3. Broader Measures of Policy

        We again compare the results using our new policy measure with those obtained using broader

measures. Figure 6 shows the estimated cumulated responses of the price level to 100-basis-point changes

in the intended funds rate and in the actual funds rate. The results provide strong evidence that important

parts of the movements in these broader measures represent either endogenous changes or Federal Reserve

responses to information about anticipated economic developments. With both broader measures, the price

level rises after a contractionary move. In the case of the intended funds rate, the price level rises irregularly

for two years after the change, reaching a peak of +1.4% at month 23, and then falls slightly and

inconsistently. The estimated effects are statistically significant in months 5, 7-8, and 15-23. For the actual

funds rate, the price level rises by about 1% over the first two years and is then essentially constant. The

response is statistically significant in months 1, 4-7, 12, and 14-23.

        This finding that prices typically rise rather than fall after Federal Reserve tightenings when broad

measures of policy are used is representative of the “price puzzle” found by many previous studies. The fact

that there is a strong price puzzle when broad measures are used, but not when our new measure is used,
                                                                                                            26

suggests that broad measures of monetary policy are indeed contaminated by anticipatory movements. As a

result, they yield inaccurate estimates of the effects of policy, at least in the simple specifications that we

consider. The next two sections address the question of whether the broad measures can nevertheless yield

accurate estimates in more complicated specifications.



C. Supply Shocks

1. Motivation

        We have attempted to remove anticipatory movements from our measure of monetary policy shocks

by controlling for the Federal Reserve’s internal forecasts. However, it is obviously possible that some such

movements are still present in our measure and could be affecting our estimates of the effects of policy.

Remaining anticipatory policy moves could be the result of the Federal Reserve having additional

information about either supply shocks or demand shocks that is not included in the forecasts.

        The literature on the effects of monetary policy has tended to emphasize the consequences of

uncaptured responses to supply shocks. If some of the changes that an econometrician interprets as policy

shocks are in fact responses to supply shocks that will lower output in the future, this would lead to an

overestimate of the strength of the negative relationship between contractionary policy shocks and real

output. Likewise, because a supply shock will raise inflation in the future, uncaptured responses to supply

shocks would lead to an underestimate of the negative effect of contractionary policy on prices and, in

extreme cases, to a finding of a positive correlation between prices and monetary contraction.

        This literature has suggested than an index of world commodity prices is a particularly timely

indicator of supply shocks. Adding world commodity prices to our basic regression therefore provides a test

of whether our new measure still includes some policy moves taken in response to supply shocks. If adding

a measure of supply shocks makes the estimated impact of policy on prices stronger (that is, more negative)

and its estimated impact on output weaker (less negative), this would indicate that our new measure is

positively correlated with supply shocks.       This would suggest that our measure is still somewhat

contaminated by unmeasured anticipatory movements. But if controlling for a broad measure of supply
                                                                                                           27

shocks has no important effect on the estimates, this would strongly suggest that our measure largely reflects

independent changes in policy.

2. Including Commodity Prices in Our Basic Specification

        To investigate the effects of controlling for commodity prices, we add twelve lags of the percentage

change in world commodity prices to our basic output and price regressions.16 The results are shown in the

top panels of Figures 7 and 8. They give no hint that unmeasured responses to supply shocks are affecting

our results. The idea that the Federal Reserve has important additional information about supply shocks is

most plausible for short horizons. Yet the estimated short-run effects of policy are virtually unaffected by

controlling for commodity prices. For output, there is no discernible change in the impact of policy for the

first five months. For prices, this is true for the first 20 months.

        Controlling for commodity prices does change the estimated impacts moderately thereafter. For

output, the estimated impacts are slightly smaller than before. The estimated cumulative effect is -2.0%

rather than -2.3% after 12 months, and -3.9% rather than -4.8% at the maximum in month 22. These

differences, though small and delayed, are in the direction one would expect if a portion of what we identify

as policy shocks are actually responses to supply shocks.

        For prices, however, the estimated impact of policy after the first year in fact falls moderately when

we control for commodity prices. It is -0.2% rather than -0.5% after 24 months, -2.3% rather than -3.3%

after 36, and -4.4% rather than -5.9% after 48. This is the opposite of what one would expect if our measure

were contaminated by responses to supply shocks. In short, the impact of controlling for commodity prices

is small and does not fit the pattern one would expect if our new measure still included important responses

to supply shocks.

3. Including Commodity Prices in Regressions Using Broader Measures of Policy

        As described above, the previous literature has suggested that an index of commodity prices

captures the most important additional information to which the Federal Reserve responds. It therefore

argues that including this measure of supply shocks in regressions estimating the effects of monetary policy

using broad policy indicators is enough to deal with the problem of anticipatory movements. And, indeed,
                                                                                                           28

previous work has found that including world commodity prices does largely eliminate the price puzzle.

        But, the fact that the estimates have the anticipated sign does not mean they are free of bias. There

are clearly other possible sources of uncaptured anticipatory policy movements. Most obviously, the

Federal Reserve surely responds to anticipated inflation caused by demand shocks as well as by supply

shocks. In addition, there could be indicators of supply shocks other than commodity prices that the Federal

Reserve responds to. As a result, the estimates of the effect of monetary policy derived using broad

measures of policy controlling for world commodity prices may still yield inaccurate results. To address

this issue, we add commodity prices to our regressions that use the broader measures of policy. As before,

we include twelve lags of the change in commodity prices.

        The results of this exercise are presented in the second and third panels of Figures 7 and 8. They

provide strong evidence that controlling for commodity prices is not enough to solve the difficulties with the

broader measures. The estimates of the impact of monetary policy move in the direction one would expect:

both the estimated declines in industrial production and the estimated rises in producer prices in response to

contractionary monetary policy become slightly weaker when commodity prices are controlled for. This

supports the standard view that broad policy measures include a component that represents responses to

supply shocks rather than independent changes in policy.

        Crucially, however, the estimated effects of policy when commodity prices are included in the

regressions continue to be very different with the broader measures than with our new measure. For output,

the estimated impact of policy remains about two to three times stronger when our measure is used than

when the broader measures are used. For prices, for our particular specification and sample, controlling for

commodity prices does not even eliminate the price puzzle from the results that use the broader measures:

the estimated impact of policy on prices remains positive (though it is no longer significantly different from

zero). With our measure, in contrast, the estimated effects of policy are negative, large, and statistically

significant either with or without controlling for commodity prices. We take this as strong evidence that

conventional measures are contaminated by anticipatory movements even when commodity prices are

controlled for.
                                                                                                          29

D. Vector Autoregressions

1. Motivation

        VARs are often used to estimate the effects of policy. It is therefore useful to embed our new

measure in a VAR so that we can compare our results more directly with those from earlier studies. VARs

also have the advantage of controlling for the past behavior of all the variables in the system.

        The interpretation of the impulse response functions from a VAR is complicated, however

(Cochrane, 1998). An impulse response function for output or prices to a monetary policy innovation

reflects both the effect of the initial innovation and the effect of the predictable subsequent moves in the

policy measure. In the case where only unanticipated changes affect output or prices, the impulse response

function simply shows the impact of the innovation. But anticipated movements in interest rates almost

surely affect output and prices. For example, the response of output to a surprise change in our measure

would surely be different if a surprise change were typically followed quickly by additional shifts in policy

in the same direction than if it were typically followed by large offsetting policy moves. Similarly, no

reasonable model implies that prices do not respond to forecastable policy changes.

        Thus, what the VAR impulse response functions actually capture are the combined effects of the

initial innovation and the later policy moves that are forecastable based on the innovation. In our VARs, we

find that an innovation in our policy measure is normally followed by gradual offsetting moves. This

implies that compared with our earlier approach, which considers a one-time permanent change in policy,

the impulse response functions of a VAR will tend to yield smaller and shorter-lived effects of policy.

2. VARs Using Our New Measure of Monetary Policy Shocks

        The specific VAR we consider is a variant of the one examined by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and

Evans (1996). Our basic VAR has three variables: the log of industrial production, the log of the PPI for

finished goods, and a measure of monetary policy. Following Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, we also

consider a VAR that adds commodity prices. Throughout, we use Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans's

recursive identification strategy: monetary policy is assumed to respond to, but not to affect, the other

variables contemporaneously. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans's VAR includes only a year of lags.
                                                                                                           30

Thus, monetary policy is not allowed to have any direct impact on the economy at horizons beyond a year.

Since this assumption is very strong and highly questionable, we do not impose it. Instead, we include three

years of lags in our baseline specification.

        Our key difference from Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans is our measure of monetary policy.

Our basic specification employs our measure of policy shocks, whereas Christian, Eichenbaum, and Evans

use the actual funds rate. Since standard VARs enter the federal funds rate in levels, we cumulate our shock

to produce a comparable series.

        Figure 9 shows the response of the cumulated shock, output, and the price level to a 100-basis-point

monetary policy shock, together with the one-standard-error bands. The top panel shows that the cumulated

shock falls to about half its initial level after about a year and is then fairly flat. Thus the experiment

considered here involves a less persistent change than the permanent, one-time shock considered above.

        The other two panels of the figure show that the responses of output and prices implied by the VAR

are broadly similar to those we found in the simple regressions reported above. Output rises by a small

amount for the first two months, then falls sharply through month 22, and then returns toward its initial

level. The maximum t-statistic is roughly 3. For output, the main difference from our earlier findings is that

the estimated effect is smaller here. For example, the peak effect is 3.2% here, as opposed to 4.8% in the

single-equation regressions above. Presumably this reflects the fact that in the experiment considered here,

a substantial part of the interest rate movement is undone quickly. Also, output returns essentially all the

way to its initial level here, as opposed to three-quarters of the way in the earlier results.

        The response of prices implied by the VAR is small, irregular, and insignificant for eight months,

and then negative. The monetary policy innovation lowers the price level by 0.7% after 18 months, 2.5%

after 30, and 4.8% after 48. The t-statistic reaches 2 in month 19, 3 in month 25, and 4 in month 27. This

response is somewhat faster than what we found in our simple regression, where the price level was

essentially unaffected until 20 months had passed.

        Adding commodity prices to the system has little impact on the patterns or magnitudes of the

responses of output and the price level to an innovation in the policy measure. Once again, this suggests
                                                                                                            31

that our policy measure controls adequately for the Federal Reserve's information about supply shocks.17

3. VARs Using Broader Measures of Monetary Policy

        We also estimate the same VAR specification discussed above using both the change in the

intended funds rate around FOMC meetings (cumulated) and the actual funds rate as the indicator of

monetary policy. Figure 10 shows the results derived using these broader measures of policy. With either

the intended or the actual funds rate, the estimated impact of policy on output is much slower and smaller

than with our measure. And with either broader measure, the price puzzle reemerges strongly: in both

cases, the price level does not fall below its initial level until about two years after the shock. All of this

supports our earlier conclusion that the broader measures are contaminated by responses to anticipated

economic developments.

        As in other VARs, adding commodity prices to the systems that use the broader policy measures

largely eliminates the price puzzle. With both broader measures, there is now never any noticeable rise in

the price level following an interest rate innovation. When the intended funds rate is used, the effect

becomes consistently negative starting in month 9; when the actual rate is used, this does not occur until

month 23. Crucially, however, with either broader measure the fall is dramatically weaker than with the

new measure. For example, the effect of a monetary shock on the price level after 48 months in the VAR

controlling for commodity prices is -3.7% using our new measure, -2.0% using the intended funds rate, and

-0.7% using the actual funds rate. Similarly, the output effects remain much smaller with the broader

measures than with our measure even when commodity prices are controlled for. The maximum effect of a

shock on industrial production in the VAR controlling for commodity prices is -2.2% using our measure,

-1.6% using the intended funds rate, and -1.0% using the actual funds rate. This suggests once again that

including commodity prices is only a partial solution to the problem of forward-looking policymaking.

        The magnitude of the output response we find using the funds rate is similar to those estimated in

previous VAR studies.18 Since we obtain considerably larger estimates using a measure of policy shocks

that is largely purged of endogenous and anticipatory movements, this suggests that policy has a larger

impact on output than traditionally believed.
                                                                                                            32

        In terms of timing, however, our VARs using the funds rate yield a somewhat slower response of

output than those estimated in previous VAR studies. Sims (1992), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans

(1996), and Bernanke and Mihov (1998) all find that output begins falling three to six months after a

shock, which is similar to what we find using our new measure. Thus, our results do not suggest

appreciably shorter lags in the real effects of monetary policy than those estimated in earlier studies.

        For prices, our results suggest both a larger and a faster response than current estimates imply.

Sims, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, and Bernanke and Mihov find that when commodity prices are

controlled for, a 100-basis-point innovation in the funds rate has little effect on prices for about a year and

a half, and then causes a decline of one to two percent over the next few years. This is similar to what we

obtain in our VAR using the funds rate. But the VARs with our new measure suggest a much stronger

response: regardless of whether commodity prices are controlled for, the price effect is consistently

negative after 9 months, and the price level is roughly four percent lower after four years.




IV. CONCLUSION

        Determining how monetary policy affects the economy is critically important both for

distinguishing between competing theories of fluctuations and for conducting policy. Unfortunately for

economists interested in estimating the effects of policy, monetary policy is not conducted as a

randomized experiment. There is no unique instrument of policy, such as the federal funds rate, that the

Federal Reserve always focuses on. As a result, any candidate measure of policy sometimes moves in

response to outside economic developments rather than to decisions by the Federal Reserve. More

importantly, in deciding how to move its instruments, the Federal Reserve considers a tremendous

amount of information about likely future movements in macroeconomic variables. Because of these

features of policy, estimating the effects of policy is extremely difficult.

        To address these difficulties, this paper proposes and implements a new method for isolating

monetary policy shocks. Our approach considers only changes in the federal funds rate that are the result
                                                                                                            33

of deliberate decisions by the Federal Reserve made at meetings for which there is a forecast prepared by

the staff. We then remove the portions of these moves in the intended funds rate that represent the

Federal Reserve’s usual response to the forecasts. Our resulting series should be largely free of interest

rate movements that are either endogenous responses to economic developments or attempts by

policymakers to counteract expected future developments. The movements in output and inflation in the

wake of our new measure of monetary shocks should therefore reflect the impact of monetary policy, and

not other factors.

        Estimates of the effects of policy using the new shock series indicate that monetary policy has

large and statistically significant effects on real output. In our baseline specification, a shock of 100 basis

points starts to reduce industrial production after 5 months, with a maximum fall of 4.8% after 22 months.

The peak effect is highly statistically significant. For prices, we find that the 100-basis-point shock has

little effect for about a year and a half, but then lowers the inflation rate by 2 to 3 percentage points. As a

result, the price level is about 6% lower after 4 years. This estimate is overwhelmingly significant. The

results are quite robust to variations in how we control for forecasts, sample periods, control variables,

and specifications. The most important uncertainty concerns the lag in the impact of policy on prices: in

some specifications, the price level begins falling less than a year after the policy shock.

        Qualitatively, our findings are very consistent with textbook views of the effects of monetary

policy. Contractionary monetary policy reduces both output and inflation. Both effects occur with a lag,

with output moving before inflation. Quantitatively, the results suggest that the lags in the output effects

are fairly short, while the lags in the inflation effects are harder to determine. More importantly, the

results indicate that the impacts of monetary policy on both output and inflation are large.
                                                                              34

                                     TABLE 1

         Determinants of the Intended Change in the Federal Funds Rate



                                          Coefficient       Standard Error

    Constant                                   0.171             0.141

    Initial Level of Intended
    Funds Rate                                 -0.021            0.012

    Forecasted Output Growth,
        Lag:
        -1                                     0.007             0.010
         0                                     0.003             0.019
         1                                     0.010             0.032
         2                                     0.022             0.032

    Change in Forecasted Output
    Growth since Previous Meeting,
        Lag:
        -1                                     0.050             0.030
         0                                     0.152             0.030
         1                                     0.021             0.046
         2                                     0.021             0.051

    Forecasted Inflation,
        Lag:
        -1                                      0.021            0.024
         0                                     -0.044            0.029
         1                                      0.010            0.044
         2                                      0.052            0.047

    Change in Forecasted Inflation
    since Previous Meeting,
         Lag:
         -1                                     0.057            0.045
          0                                     0.003            0.064
          1                                     0.031            0.074
          2                                    -0.062            0.081

    Forecasted Unemployment
    Rate (Current Quarter)                     -0.048            0.021


R2 = 0.28, D.W. = 1.84, s.e.e. = 0.39, N = 263. The sample is FOMC meetings
over the period 1969:3-1996:12.
                                                                                                              35

                                                 TABLE 2

                              New Measure of Monetary Policy Shocks

                                           (In Percentage Points)



        Jan.    Feb.     March    April      May      June     July    Aug.     Sept.    Oct.      Nov.    Dec.

1969    0.0      0.0     -0.245    0.405     0.204   -0.020    0.181    0.309    0.029    0.088   -0.005    0.065
1970   -0.160   -0.360   -0.140   -0.145     0.300   -0.180   -0.243   -0.483   -0.272   -0.009   -0.346   -0.229
1971   -0.682   -0.025   -0.065    0.461     0.003    0.343   -0.117    0.0      0.0     -0.322   -0.342   -0.920
1972   -0.234   -0.086    0.252   -0.104    -0.115   -0.050    0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.036   -0.027
1973    0.279    0.225    0.064   -0.063     0.317    0.409    0.115    0.318   -0.571   -0.848   -0.095   -0.165
1974   -0.206    0.201    0.733    0.387     0.392    0.280   -0.091   -0.022   -0.430   -0.284    0.336   -0.229
1975   -0.354    0.243   -0.499   -0.637     0.136    0.170    0.070   -0.136   -0.114   -0.200   -0.281    0.280
1976   -0.091   -0.469   -0.239    0.139    -0.298   -0.038   -0.139   -0.044    0.019   -0.041    0.030   -0.131
1977   -0.097   -0.085   -0.228   -0.049    -0.051   -0.146   -0.240    0.030    0.073   -0.026   -0.048   -0.122
1978   -0.205    0.106    0.042   -0.069    -0.216    0.243   -0.142   -0.064   -0.156    0.133    0.168   -0.042
1979    0.0     -0.152    0.133   -0.064     0.105    0.0      0.761    0.322   -0.224    0.0      0.045    0.0
1980   -0.011    0.197    1.422   -3.221    -0.764    0.0      0.403   -0.198    0.771    1.218    1.871   -0.634
1981    0.0     -0.783    0.307    0.0       1.515    0.0     -0.611   -0.041    0.0     -0.574   -0.356    0.100
1982    0.0      1.021   -0.435    0.0      -0.056    0.0     -0.196   -0.211    0.0     -0.242    0.125    0.651
1983    0.0      0.185    0.145    0.0      -0.019    0.0     -0.008   -0.234    0.0      0.282   -0.172    0.217
1984    0.257    0.0     -0.101    0.0       0.173    0.0      0.327   -0.061    0.0      0.035   -0.546   -0.144
1985    0.0     -0.158    0.201    0.0      -0.104    0.0      0.060    0.186    0.0      0.104    0.021   -0.069
1986    0.0     -0.110    0.0      0.207     0.076    0.0     -0.168   -0.234    0.001    0.0      0.021   -0.082
1987    0.0      0.176    0.191    0.0       0.238    0.0     -0.041   -0.021   -0.147    0.0     -0.085   -0.180
1988    0.0     -0.224    0.018    0.0       0.188    0.308    0.0     -0.182   -0.067    0.0     -0.009    0.446
1989    0.0      0.297    0.061    0.0       0.153    0.0      0.075   -0.139    0.0     -0.087    0.108   -0.067
1990    0.0      0.313   -0.094    0.0       0.044    0.0     -0.066    0.150    0.0     -0.119   -0.018   -0.159
1991    0.0     -0.251    0.227    0.0       0.262    0.0     -0.077    0.140    0.0     -0.035   -0.121    0.113
1992    0.0     -0.004   -0.126    0.0       0.148    0.0     -0.088   -0.003    0.0     -0.175   -0.029   -0.237
1993    0.0      0.094   -0.063    0.0       0.335    0.0      0.009    0.044    0.159    0.0     -0.087   -0.163
1994    0.0      0.224    0.313    0.0       0.287    0.0      0.070    0.417    0.041    0.0      0.549   -0.248
1995    0.0      0.501    0.241    0.0       0.209    0.0     -0.006   -0.091    0.025    0.0      0.052   -0.171
1996    0.073    0.0      0.056    0.0      -0.027    0.0     -0.040   -0.065   -0.042    0.0      0.048   -0.029
                                                                                                 36

                                            TABLE 3

                The Impact of Monetary Policy Shocks on Industrial Production



          Monetary Policy Shock                             Change in Industrial Production

   Lag       Coefficient   Standard Error             Lag         Coefficient   Standard Error

    1           0.0044         0.0018                  1             0.070           0.063
    2           0.0013         0.0018                  2             0.038           0.063
    3          -0.0049         0.0018                  3             0.126           0.062
    4          -0.0011         0.0018                  4             0.047           0.062
    5          -0.0038         0.0018                  5             0.053           0.062
    6           0.0012         0.0019                  6            -0.133           0.062
    7          -0.0002         0.0019                  7            -0.014           0.063
    8          -0.0035         0.0019                  8             0.022           0.062
    9          -0.0028         0.0019                  9             0.014           0.061
   10          -0.0057         0.0019                 10            -0.039           0.061
   11          -0.0021         0.0019                 11             0.096           0.058
   12          -0.0023         0.0019                 12             0.330           0.059
   13          -0.0026         0.0019                 13            -0.007           0.060
   14          -0.0016         0.0019                 14            -0.208           0.060
   15          -0.0005         0.0019                 15            -0.091           0.060
   16           0.0004         0.0019                 16            -0.170           0.061
   17          -0.0007         0.0019                 17             0.175           0.062
   18          -0.0027         0.0019                 18             0.113           0.063
   19          -0.0025         0.0019                 19             0.072           0.062
   20          -0.0006         0.0019                 20            -0.027           0.062
   21          -0.0024         0.0019                 21            -0.030           0.062
   22          -0.0016         0.0019                 22            -0.125           0.062
   23           0.0040         0.0019                 23            -0.045           0.062
   24           0.0006         0.0019                 24             0.114           0.062
   25          -0.0002         0.0019
   26           0.0008         0.0019
   27          -0.0016         0.0019
   28           0.0033         0.0019
   29           0.0023         0.0019
   30           0.0030         0.0019
   31           0.0016         0.0019
   32           0.0003         0.0018
   33           0.0015         0.0018
   34           0.0051         0.0018
   35           0.0020         0.0018
   36           0.0036         0.0018


R2 = 0.89, D.W. = 2.02, s.e.e. = 0.009, N = 324. The sample period is 1970:1-1996:12.
Coefficients and standard errors for the constant term and monthly dummies are not reported.
                                                                                                37

                                           TABLE 4

                      The Impact of Monetary Policy Shocks on Prices



      Monetary Policy Shock                               Change in Producer Price Index

Lag       Coefficient     Standard Error             Lag         Coefficient   Standard Error

 1           0.0006           0.0009                  1             0.192          0.065
 2           0.0001           0.0009                  2             0.002          0.065
 3          -0.0005           0.0009                  3            -0.038          0.065
 4           0.0010           0.0009                  4            -0.098          0.065
 5           0.0014           0.0009                  5             0.009          0.065
 6          -0.0006           0.0009                  6             0.107          0.065
 7           0.0001           0.0009                  7            -0.056          0.065
 8           0.0005           0.0009                  8             0.050          0.065
 9          -0.0013           0.0009                  9             0.074          0.065
10           0.0009           0.0009                 10            -0.049          0.065
11          -0.0016           0.0009                 11             0.087          0.065
12          -0.0003           0.0009                 12             0.127          0.065
13           0.0001           0.0009                 13            -0.071          0.065
14          -0.0002           0.0009                 14            -0.020          0.064
15           0.0010           0.0009                 15            -0.019          0.064
16          -0.0004           0.0009                 16            -0.018          0.063
17           0.0003           0.0009                 17             0.056          0.063
18          -0.0012           0.0009                 18             0.029          0.063
19           0.0005           0.0009                 19             0.009          0.062
20          -0.0020           0.0009                 20             0.093          0.063
21           0.0002           0.0009                 21             0.004          0.063
22          -0.0001           0.0009                 22            -0.004          0.063
23          -0.0013           0.0009                 23            -0.057          0.062
24          -0.0019           0.0009                 24             0.045          0.061
25          -0.0024           0.0009
26          -0.0025           0.0010
27          -0.0017           0.0010
28          -0.0002           0.0010
29          -0.0022           0.0010
30          -0.0033           0.0010
31          -0.0031           0.0010
32          -0.0006           0.0010
33          -0.0013           0.0010
34          -0.0010           0.0010
35          -0.0015           0.0010
36          -0.0033           0.0010
37          -0.0019           0.0010
38          -0.0016           0.0010
39           0.0001           0.0010
40          -0.0017           0.0010
                                                                                               38


                                   TABLE 4 (continued)



         Monetary Policy Shock

  Lag        Coefficient   Standard Error

   41          -0.0007         0.0010
   42          -0.0029         0.0010
   43          -0.0013         0.0010
   44          -0.0003         0.0009
   45          -0.0014         0.0009
   46           0.0001         0.0009
   47          -0.0015         0.0009
   48          -0.0008         0.0009


R2 = 0.57, D.W. = 2.00, s.e.e. = 0.005, N = 324. The sample period is 1970:1-1996:12.
Coefficients and standard errors for the constant term and monthly dummies are not reported.
                                                                            Figure 1
                                                               Measures of Monetary Policy Shocks

                                                      a. New Measure of Monetary Policy Shocks

                    1.0



                    0.5
Percentage Points




                    0.0



                    -0.5



                    -1.0



                    -1.5
                           1969Q1

                                    1971Q1

                                             1973Q1

                                                      1975Q1

                                                                 1977Q1

                                                                          1979Q1

                                                                                   1981Q1

                                                                                             1983Q1

                                                                                                        1985Q1

                                                                                                                 1987Q1

                                                                                                                          1989Q1

                                                                                                                                   1991Q1

                                                                                                                                            1993Q1

                                                                                                                                                     1995Q1
                                                         b. Broader Measures of Monetary Policy

                    3.0

                                                                                            Change in the Actual Funds Rate
                    2.0


                    1.0
Percentage Points




                                                                                                      Change in the Intended Funds Rate

                    0.0


                    -1.0


                    -2.0


                    -3.0
                           1969Q1

                                    1971Q1

                                             1973Q1

                                                      1975Q1

                                                                 1977Q1

                                                                          1979Q1

                                                                                   1981Q1

                                                                                             1983Q1

                                                                                                        1985Q1

                                                                                                                 1987Q1

                                                                                                                          1989Q1

                                                                                                                                   1991Q1

                                                                                                                                            1993Q1

                                                                                                                                                     1995Q1
                                                     Figure 2

                               The Effect of Monetary Policy on Industrial Production


          2.0

          1.0

          0.0

          -1.0

          -2.0
Percent




          -3.0

          -4.0

          -5.0

          -6.0

          -7.0
                 10 32   45   76   89 11
                                      10 12 14 16
                                         13 15 17 18
                                                  19 20 22 25
                                                     21 23 24 27
                                                              26 29
                                                                 28 31
                                                                    30 33
                                                                       32 35
                                                                          34 37
                                                                             36 39
                                                                                38 41
                                                                                   40 42 44 46
                                                                                      43 45    48
                                                                                            47 49

                                                           Months
                                                       Figure 3

                               The Effect of Monetary Policy on Industrial Production
                                    Using Broader Measures of Monetary Policy


          2.0

          1.0

          0.0

          -1.0                                              Using the Change in the Intended Funds Rate

          -2.0
Percent




          -3.0
                              Using the Change in the Actual Funds Rate
          -4.0

          -5.0

          -6.0

          -7.0
                 10   23 45   67 89 10
                                    11 12
                                       13 14
                                          15 16
                                             17 18 20 22
                                                19 21    24 27
                                                      23 25 26 29
                                                               28 31
                                                                  30 33
                                                                     32 35
                                                                        34 37
                                                                           36 38 40 42
                                                                              39 41    44 47
                                                                                    43 45 46 49
                                                                                             48

                                                             Months
                                                    Figure 4

                                 The Effect of Monetary Policy on the Price Level


          2.0

          1.0

          0.0

          -1.0

          -2.0
Percent




          -3.0

          -4.0

          -5.0

          -6.0

          -7.0

          -8.0
                 10   23 45   67 89 10
                                    11 12
                                       13 14
                                          15 16
                                             17 18
                                                 19 20
                                                    21 22
                                                       23 24
                                                          25 26
                                                             27 28 30 32
                                                                29 31    34 36
                                                                      33 35    38 40
                                                                            37 39    42 44
                                                                                  41 43    46 48
                                                                                        45 47 49

                                                          Months
                                                             Figure 5

                                             The Effect of Monetary Policy on Inflation


                    4.0



                    2.0



                    0.0
Percentage Points




                    -2.0



                    -4.0



                    -6.0



                    -8.0
                           10   23 45   67 89 10 12 15
                                              11 13 14 17
                                                       16 18 20 23
                                                          19 21 22 25
                                                                   24 27
                                                                      26 29
                                                                         28 31
                                                                            30 32 34 36
                                                                               33 35    38 40
                                                                                     37 39    42 44
                                                                                           41 43    46 48
                                                                                                 45 47 49

                                                                   Months
                                                        Figure 6

                                  The Effect of Monetary Policy on the Price Level
                                    Using Broader Measures of Monetary Policy


          2.0

          1.0

          0.0
                      Using the Change in the Intended Funds Rate
          -1.0
                                                        Using the Change in the Actual Funds Rate
          -2.0
Percent




          -3.0

          -4.0

          -5.0

          -6.0

          -7.0

          -8.0
                 10    32 54   76 98 10 12 14
                                     11 13    16 18
                                           15 17    20 22
                                                 19 21    24 26
                                                       23 25    28 31
                                                             27 29 30 33
                                                                      32 35
                                                                         34 36 38 40
                                                                            37 39    42 44
                                                                                  41 43    46 48
                                                                                        45 47 49

                                                              Months
                                                                     Figure 7

                                     The Effect of Monetary Policy on Industrial Production
                                             With and Without Commodity Prices

                                           a. Using the New Measure of Monetary Shocks
          1.0

          0.0

          -1.0

          -2.0
Percent




                                                                With Commodity Prices
          -3.0

          -4.0
                                                                                                   Without Commodity Prices
          -5.0

          -6.0
                 1

                     3

                         5

                                 7

                                      9

                                            11

                                                 13

                                                      15

                                                           17

                                                                19

                                                                     21

                                                                          23

                                                                               25

                                                                                    27

                                                                                         29

                                                                                              31

                                                                                                   33

                                                                                                        35

                                                                                                             37

                                                                                                                  39

                                                                                                                       41

                                                                                                                            43

                                                                                                                                 45

                                                                                                                                      47

                                                                                                                                           49
                 0   2       4   6     8    10 12 14       16 18 20        22 24 26       28 30 32 34        36 38 40       42 44 46 48
                                                                            Months



                                           b. Using the Change in the Intended Funds Rate
          1.0

          0.0

          -1.0                                                                      With Commodity Prices

          -2.0
Percent




          -3.0
                                                                                                     Without Commodity Prices
          -4.0

          -5.0

          -6.0
                 0   2       4   6     8    10 12 14        16 18 20       22 24 26       28 30 32 34        36 38 40       42 44 46 48
                 1

                         4

                                 7

                                       10

                                                 13

                                                       16

                                                                19

                                                                      22

                                                                               25

                                                                                     28

                                                                                              31

                                                                                                     34

                                                                                                             37

                                                                                                                   40

                                                                                                                            43

                                                                                                                                  46


                                                                            Months                                                         49



                                            c. Using the Change in the Actual Funds Rate
          1.0

          0.0

          -1.0                                                                                          With Commodity Prices

          -2.0
Percent




          -3.0
                                                                               Without Commodity Prices
          -4.0

          -5.0

          -6.0
                 0   2       4   6     8    10 12 14        16 18 20       22 24 26       28 30 32 34        36 38 40 42 44 46 48
                 1

                         4

                                 7

                                       10

                                                 13

                                                       16

                                                                19

                                                                      22

                                                                               25

                                                                                     28

                                                                                              31

                                                                                                     34

                                                                                                             37

                                                                                                                   40

                                                                                                                            43

                                                                                                                                  46

                                                                                                                                           49




                                                                            Months
                                                                       Figure 8

                                           The Effect of Monetary Policy on the Price Level
                                                With and Without Commodity Prices

                                           a. Using the New Measure of Monetary Shocks

            2.0
            1.0
            0.0
            -1.0                                                                                              With Commodity Prices
Percent




            -2.0
            -3.0
            -4.0
                                                                                              Without Commodity Prices
            -5.0
            -6.0
            -7.0
                   0   2   4       6   8    10    12 14 16 18          20 22 24 26            28 30 32        34 36 38       40 42 44 46 48
                   1

                       3

                           5

                                   7

                                       9

                                            11

                                                  13

                                                       15

                                                             17

                                                                  19

                                                                       21

                                                                             23

                                                                                   25

                                                                                        27

                                                                                              29

                                                                                                    31

                                                                                                         33

                                                                                                              35

                                                                                                                   37

                                                                                                                        39

                                                                                                                             41

                                                                                                                                  43

                                                                                                                                       45

                                                                                                                                            47

                                                                                                                                                 49
                                                                                 Months



                                           b. Using the Change in the Intended Funds Rate
             2.0
             1.0       Without Commodity Prices
             0.0
            -1.0                                                                 With Commodity Prices
  Percent




            -2.0
            -3.0
            -4.0
            -5.0
            -6.0
            -7.0
                   0   2       4   6   8     10    12 14 16 18 20                22 24 26         28 30 32 34 36        38 40 42 44 46 48
                   1

                           4

                                   7

                                           10

                                                  13

                                                            16

                                                                  19

                                                                            22

                                                                                   25

                                                                                             28

                                                                                                    31

                                                                                                          34

                                                                                                                   37

                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                                  43

                                                                                                                                        46


                                                                                  Months                                                         49



                                            c. Using the Change in the Actual Funds Rate
             2.0
             1.0       Without Commodity Prices
             0.0
                                                                                        With Commodity Prices
            -1.0
  Percent




            -2.0
            -3.0
            -4.0
            -5.0
            -6.0
            -7.0
                   0   2       4   6   8        10 12 14 16 18         20        22 24 26 28 30          32 34 36 38 40 42             44 46 48
                   1

                           4

                                   7

                                           10

                                                  13

                                                            16

                                                                  19

                                                                            22

                                                                                   25

                                                                                             28

                                                                                                    31

                                                                                                          34

                                                                                                                   37

                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                                  43

                                                                                                                                        46

                                                                                                                                                 49




                                                                                  Months
                                                                      Figure 9

                                                       The Effect of Monetary Policy in a VAR
                                                      Using the New Measure of Monetary Policy

                                                       a. Effect on Measure of Monetary Policy
                     1.2

                     1.0
 Percentage Points




                     0.8

                     0.6

                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0
                            10   32 54     76   98 11
                                                    10 13
                                                       12 15
                                                          14 17
                                                              16 19
                                                                 18 21
                                                                    20 23
                                                                        22 25
                                                                           24 27
                                                                              26 29
                                                                                  28 31
                                                                                     30 33 35 37
                                                                                        32 34 36 39 41 43
                                                                                                 38 40 42 45 47 48
                                                                                                          44 46 49
                                                                           Months



                                                          b. Effect on Industrial Production
                     2.0

                     1.0

                     0.0
Percent




                     -1.0

                     -2.0

                     -3.0

                     -4.0

                     -5.0
                            10   32   54   76   89 10
                                                   11 13 15 17
                                                      12 14 16 19 21 23
                                                               18 20 22 25 27 29
                                                                        24 26 28 31 33 34
                                                                                 30 32 35 36
                                                                                          37 38
                                                                                             39 40
                                                                                                41 43 45 46
                                                                                                   42 44 47 48
                                                                                                            49
                                                                           Months



                                                             c. Effect on the Price Level
                      1.0
                      0.0
                     -1.0
                     -2.0
Percent




                     -3.0
                     -4.0
                     -5.0
                     -6.0
                     -7.0
                            10   32   54   76   98   10 12 15
                                                     11 13 14 16 18 21
                                                              17 19 20 22 24 27
                                                                       23 25 26 29
                                                                                28 31
                                                                                   30 33
                                                                                      32 34 36 39
                                                                                         35 37 38 40
                                                                                                  41 42 44 46
                                                                                                     43 45 47 48
                                                                                                              49
                                                                           Months
                                                                              Figure 10

                                                             The Effect of Monetary Policy in a VAR
                                                            Using Broader Measures of Monetary Policy

                                                            a. Effect on Measures of Monetary Policy

                      1.4
                      1.2
                      1.0
 Percentage Points




                      0.8
                                                                                      Change in the Intended Funds Rate
                      0.6
                      0.4
                      0.2
                                        Change in the Actual Funds Rate
                      0.0
                     -0.2
                     -0.4
                             10     32     54    76   89 10
                                                         11 13 15 16
                                                            12 14 17 18
                                                                     19 21 23 24
                                                                        20 22 25 27 29 30
                                                                                 26 28 31 32
                                                                                          33 34
                                                                                             35 36
                                                                                                37 38
                                                                                                   39 41
                                                                                                      40 43 45 47
                                                                                                         42 44 46 49
                                                                                                                  48
                                                                                     Months



                                                                 b. Effect on Industrial Production
                     3.0
                     2.0
                     1.0
                     0.0
                                                                                 Using the Change in the Actual Funds Rate
Percent




                     -1.0
                     -2.0
                     -3.0                                                 Using the Change in the Intended Funds Rate
                     -4.0
                     -5.0
                     -6.0
                            10     32     54    76    89 10 12 14
                                                         11 13 15 16 18 20
                                                                  17 19    22 24
                                                                        21 23 25 26 28 30
                                                                                 27 29 31 32
                                                                                          33 34
                                                                                             35 36
                                                                                                37 38
                                                                                                   39 40
                                                                                                      41 42
                                                                                                         43 44 46 49
                                                                                                            45 47 48

                                                                                    Months



                                                                   c. Effect on the Price Level
                     1.0
                     0.0
                     -1.0         Using the Change in the Intended Funds Rate
                     -2.0                                                         Using the Change in the Actual Funds Rate
Percent




                     -3.0
                     -4.0
                     -5.0
                     -6.0
                     -7.0
                     -8.0
                            10     32     45    67    98   11 13 15
                                                           10 12 14 17 19 21
                                                                    16 18 20 23
                                                                             22 25 27 28
                                                                                24 26 29 31 33 34
                                                                                         30 32 35 37
                                                                                                  36 39 41 43
                                                                                                     38 40 42 45
                                                                                                              44 47 49
                                                                                                                 46 48
                                                                                    Months
                                                                                                           49

                                                APPENDIX

         This appendix documents the derivation of our measure of the intended funds rate around FOMC
meetings for the period 1969 to 1996. The date refers to the date of the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee.19 The first number is the level of the federal funds rate that the FOMC intended to prevail at the
time of the forecast. The second number is the level of the funds rate that the FOMC intended on the basis
of its decision at that meeting. For each observation we give a brief summary of the reasoning behind our
identification of the intended level. Section II.A of the paper describes the sources and general criteria we
use in making these decisions.

                                                    1969

1/14/69      6.4375, no change. The FOMC agrees that open-market operations should attempt to maintain
             current credit market conditions.
2/4/69       6.4375, no change. The FOMC again agrees that open-market operations should attempt to
             maintain current credit market conditions. There is a suggestion of a slight asymmetry toward
             easing, but not enough to point to a noticeable expected fall in the funds rate.
3/4/69       6.75 to 6.625. The FOMC again agrees to attempt to maintain current monetary conditions.
             But there is an explicit asymmetry toward easing: conditions should be eased if bank credit
             appears to be contracting any more rapidly than projected, but tightened only if bank credit
             appears to be growing substantially faster than projected. The asymmetry suggests an
             expected reduction of roughly 1/8 point (since a typical move is 1/4 point and the asymmetry
             does not guarantee a move).
4/1/69       6.75 to 7.25. The FOMC agrees that it wants the funds rate to rise by roughly the same amount
             as the pending increase in the discount rate, which is 1/2 point.
4/29/69      7.6875 to 7.9375. The meeting summary states that open-market operations were modified in
             the direction of greater firmness during the intermeeting period, and that one consequence was
             a rise in the funds rate late in the month. Thus there was a rise in the desired rate between the
             time of the forecast and the time of the meeting. Although the magnitude is difficult to gauge,
             a rise of 1/8 point seems roughly correct. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to maintain at
             least the current degree of restraint, but with a clear asymmetry toward tightening. Thus there
             is an additional expected increase in the funds rate of roughly 1/8 point.
5/27/69      8.5 to 8.625. The FOMC agrees to attempt to maintain current conditions in money and credit
             markets, but with a clear asymmetry toward tightening.
6/24/69      9, no change. The FOMC again agrees to attempt to maintain current conditions in money and
             credit markets. There is some discussion of continued asymmetry toward tightening, but the
             summary of the meeting states that the consensus is against asymmetry.
7/15/69      9 to 9.125. The FOMC agrees to attempt to maintain current conditions in money and credit
             markets, but with a clear asymmetry toward tightening.
8/12/69      9.5 to 9.75. The meeting summary states that the funds rate has risen by more than a point
             over the two weeks prior to the meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to attempt to
             maintain current conditions in money and credit markets, with no clear asymmetry in either
             direction. Thus policy is clearly aiming for a higher funds rate than prior to the forecast. The
             exact magnitude is difficult to gauge. Given how much the actual rate rose prior to the
             meeting, a rise of 1/8 point in the desired rate appears too small. But there is nothing dramatic
             enough in the meeting summary to warrant an inference of a rise of 1/2 point or more.
9/9/69       9, no change. The FOMC decides to make no change in policy.
10/7/69      9.125, no change. The FOMC decides to attempt to maintain current conditions in money and
             credit markets.
10/28/69     9.125, no change. There is a marginal rise in the funds rate sought by policy between the time
             of the forecast and the time of the meeting. But at this meeting, the FOMC agrees to no
                                                                                                        50

           change in policy with an asymmetry toward easing. The net effect of these two decisions is no
           change.
11/25/69   9.125, no change. The FOMC agrees on no change in policy. There is a suggestion of a slight
           asymmetry toward easing, but not enough to point to a noticeable expected fall in the funds
           rate.
12/16/69   9, no change. Same as previous meeting.


                                                 1970

1/15/70    9 to 8.75. The FOMC agrees to aim for a funds rate of 8.75-9%, with a clear asymmetry
           toward additional easing.
2/10/70    9.125 to 8.625. The FOMC agrees to ease somewhat immediately and ease further after that,
           with an objective of moving the funds rate down cautiously and gradually to somewhere in the
           range of 8-9%. This suggests that a reasonable expectation of the funds rate is slightly over
           8.5%.
3/10/70    8.3125 to 8.125. The FOMC agrees to aim for a funds rate in the range of 8-8.5%, with a clear
           asymmetry toward ease.
4/7/70     7.75, no change. The FOMC agrees to aim for growth rates of money and the bank credit
           proxy that correspond to the staff's projections under the assumption of no change in money
           market conditions.
5/5/70     8.25 to 8.375. The FOMC agrees to aim for growth rates of money and the bank credit proxy
           that correspond to the staff's projections under the assumption of unchanged or slightly firmer
           money market conditions. However, the FOMC's interest in raising the funds rate slightly is
           tempered by concern about Treasury financing and financial market disruptions. Thus, the
           decision corresponds to a small expected tightening, or roughly 1/8 point.
5/26/70    8, no change. The FOMC agrees to attempt to keep interest rates approximately unchanged in
           light of recent problems in financial markets.
6/23/70    7.875 to 7.625. The FOMC agrees that it wants to give greater priority to moderating
           pressures on financial markets, and that it is willing to accept temporarily high growth of
           money and the bank credit proxy. It therefore desires to nudge interest rates down, with an
           asymmetry toward further easing.
7/21/70    7.3125 to 7.0625. The FOMC again agrees to attempt to reduce interest rates slightly, with an
           asymmetry toward further easing.
8/18/70    6.75 to 6.25. The FOMC agrees to aim for a funds rate of 6-6.75%, with an asymmetry toward
           ease. Thus it appears to be agreeing on a direct reduction in the expected funds rate of roughly
           3/8 point, plus an additional expected reduction of roughly 1/8 point from the asymmetry.
9/15/70    6.375 to 6.1875. The FOMC agrees that some easing in credit market conditions is
           appropriate, and that it desires a growth rate of the money stock consistent with staff
           projections of a funds rate toward the low end of 6.125-6.5%.
10/20/70   6.25 to 6.125. The FOMC agrees to a slight and gradual easing, but still wants the funds rate
           to remain in the range of 6-6.5%.
11/17/70   5.75 to 5.125. The FOMC agrees to aim for a funds rate in the lower half of 5-5.75%, with a
           possibility of letting the rate go below 5% if circumstances warrant.
12/15/70   5.125 to 4.75. The FOMC agrees to aim for a funds rate of 5%, with a strong asymmetry
           toward further ease. Given the volatility of the funds rate in this period, the asymmetry
           suggests an additional expected fall in the funds rate of roughly 1/4 point.
                                                                                                       51

                                                 1971

1/12/71    4.5 to 4. The FOMC agrees to aim for a funds rate around 4.25% immediately, with a strong
           asymmetry toward further easing. The lower bound of its range for the funds rate is 3.75%.
           Given the volatility of the funds rate in this period and the strength of the asymmetry, this
           suggests an additional expected reduction of roughly 1/4 point.
2/9/71     3.75 to 3.625. The FOMC agrees on no immediate change, but a clear asymmetry toward ease.
3/9/71     3.5 to 3.625. The FOMC agrees on no immediate change, but a clear asymmetry toward
           tightening.
4/6/71     3.75 to 4.125. The FOMC agrees to tighten. There is no explicit discussion of the magnitude.
           But the summary of the next meeting implies that most but not all of the overall rise of 1/2
           point in the intermeeting period was an implementation of the policy agreed to at this meeting.
5/11/71    4.25 to 4.5. The FOMC had been seeking a funds rate of around 4.25%, but the actual rate had
           been around 4.5% despite its efforts. At this meeting, the FOMC decides that it wants the rate
           to remain around its current level of 4.5%. In addition, there is a complicated asymmetry: the
           FOMC wants to move aggressively to reduce rates if money growth is less than expected, and
           to raise them moderately if money growth is greater than or roughly equal to expected. This
           does not point to an expected rate clearly above or below 4.5%.
6/8/71     4.75 to 5.125. The FOMC agrees to tighten gradually. The Federal Reserve Bank of New
           York open-market desk's series for the expected funds rate rises immediately by 1/4 point; this
           suggests an expected tightening of somewhat more than this. Further, the summary of the next
           meeting does not attribute any of the moves in the Desk's expected rate in the intermeeting
           period, which total 3/8 point, to news.
6/29/71    5.125 to 5.375. The FOMC agrees to tighten policy. The Committee's focal rate for the funds
           rate is 5-5.5%, with a clear expectation that it will be in the upper half of the range.
7/27/71    5.5 to 5.625. The FOMC agrees that it wants more moderate money growth. But there is no
           explicit reference to any firming of money market conditions. Thus there appears to be a slight
           expected tightening. The behavior of the Desk's expected rate is consistent with this: there is
           no immediate change, and then a rise from "5-5.5, upper end" to "5.5-5.75, upper end."
8/24/71    5.625, no change. The FOMC agrees on no change in policy, with a slight asymmetry toward
           tightening. The asymmetry is quite weak, however, and the range for the Desk's expected rate
           in fact moves down slightly.
9/21/71    5.5 to 5.25. The FOMC agrees to ease. The Committee appears to want the funds rate to be in
           the lower half of 5-5.625%, suggesting a rate around 5.1875%. But in the face of low money
           growth over the intermeeting period, the Desk's expected rate falls only to "5.25, or a shade
           under." Balancing these somewhat conflicting pieces of evidence suggests an expected rate of
           about 5.25% on the basis of the policy adopted at this meeting.
10/19/71   5.1875 to 5.0625. The FOMC agrees that some easing might be indicated. The Committee
           wants the funds rate to stay above 5% barring unexpected developments, and the Blue Book
           for the next meeting suggests that the level of the funds rate expected on the basis of this
           meeting was about 5.0625%. Consistent with this, the Desk's expected rate falls to 5-5.125%
           over the two weeks after the meeting.
11/16/71   4.75 to 4.375. The FOMC agrees to seek appreciably easier money market conditions. The
           Committee appears to want a funds rate in the lower half of the range 4.25-4.875%, and the
           material from the next meeting suggests that the fall in the funds rate to 4.375% over the
           intermeeting period was not a response to adverse news.
12/14/71   4.375 to 3.75. The FOMC in effect adopts a lower bound for the funds rate of 3.625%, with a
           policy that is expected to lower the rate to near this bound with substantial probability.
                                                                                                        52

                                                  1972

1/11/72     3.625 to 3.3125. The FOMC agrees to seek a large increase in total reserves to support faster
            monetary growth. The Committee appears to want to reduce the funds rate immediately to
            around 3.25%, with a possibility of lowering it further. The Desk's expected rate, however,
            moves only to slightly below 3.5% and remains there for two weeks despite favorable news
            about money and reserve growth. Balancing these conflicting considerations suggests an
            expected funds rate of slightly above 3.25%.
2/15/72     3.25, no change. The FOMC agrees that it wants to avoid large changes in money market
            conditions in either direction. The Committee agrees to seek a rate of growth of reserves
            available to support private nonbank deposits (RPD's) that the staff projection suggests may
            possibly be associated with some firming. But one member dissents on the grounds that he
            believes the policy will in fact lead to easing. Thus, the Committee does not appear to be
            agreeing on any clear expected change in the funds rate. The Desk's expected rate is not
            available for the two weeks after the meeting, and is therefore not informative.
3/21/72     3.9375 to 4.25. The FOMC agrees not to let the funds rate exceed 4.25% without consultation,
            but also adopts a goal for RPD's that the staff projects will be likely to require a rate over
            4.25%. This suggests that 4.25% is a reasonable estimate for the likely outcome for the funds
            rate.
4/18/72     4.25 to 4.375. The FOMC agrees to a goal for RPD's that the staff projects will lead to a funds
            rate of 4-5%. But it also agrees to aim to keep the funds rate around 4.25% unless reserve and
            money growth appear likely to be outside the Committee's desired ranges. These
            considerations suggest an expected funds rate between 4.25% and 4.5%.
5/23/72     4.25 to 4.5625. The FOMC adopts a range for the funds rate of 4.25-5.5%, but with a desire to
            avoid a large increase and a strong reluctance to let it exceed 5%. This suggests an expected
            rate slightly below the midpoint of 4.25-5%. Consistent with this, the Desk's expected rate
            rises gradually over the intermeeting period to just under 4.5% despite low RPD growth.
6/19-20/72 4.4375 to 4.5625. The FOMC agrees to a goal for RPD's that the staff projection suggests
            might be associated with some firming. The Committee appears to want a funds rate above its
            current level and below 4.75%. The Desk's expected rate rises marginally soon after the
            meeting.
7/18/72     4.625, no change. There is a clear sense that little or no change in interest rates is needed.
            There is more sentiment on the FOMC for a slight updrift than a slight downdrift, but no
            important support for any significant change. Further, there is essentially no change in the
            Desk's expected rate for two weeks after the meeting, and the summary of the next meeting
            suggests that the small change that did occur after two weeks was a response to high RPD
            growth.
8/15/72     4.75 to 4.875. The FOMC adopts a range for the funds rate of 4.5-5.25%, with a focus on the
            narrower range 4.75-5%. Consistent with this, the Desk's expected rate rises quickly by 1/8
            point; it then rises gradually by another 1/8 point in response to high RPD growth.
9/19/72     5 to 5.1875. The FOMC adopts a range for the funds rate of 4.75-5.375%, but with an
            expectation that the rate is unlikely to go below 5%. The Desk's expected rate moves
            immediately to 5.125%, and at the next meeting the open-market manager reports that at the
            time he believed that it was very likely that additional firming would be needed.
10/17/72    5.0625 to 5.1875. The FOMC agrees that a fair amount of emphasis should be put on interest
            rates in implementing policy. It also agrees to seek no immediate change in interest rates, but
            with a clear asymmetry toward tightening.
11/20-21/72 5.0625 to 5.1875. There is again a clear asymmetry toward tightening: the FOMC agrees that
            the funds rate is unlikely to go below 5% or above 5.5%. This suggests an expected rate
            between its current level and the midpoint of 5-5.5%.
12/19/72    5.375 to 5.625. The funds rate had risen by about 1/8 point between the time of the forecast
            and the time of the meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of
                                                                                                            53

              5.125-5.875%. But the Committee is clearly reluctant for the rate either to fall from its current
              level of around 5.5% or to exceed 5.75%.


                                                     1973

1/16/73       5.75 to 6.25. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 5.75-6.375%, but with a clear
              sense that the rate will move to between 6.125% and 6.375%.
2/13/73       6.375 to 6.6875. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 6-6.75%, but with a clear
              sense that the rate will be in the upper part of this range, and with an asymmetry to further
              tightening. This suggests and expected rate slightly above the midpoint of the upper half of
              this range, which is 6.5625%.
3/19-20/73    7 to 7.125. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 6.75-7.5%, with a focus on the
              narrower range of 7-7.25%.
4/17/73       7 to 7.1875. The FOMC adopts a range for the funds rate of 6.875-7.5%, but with money and
              RPD targets the staff projects are most likely to be consistent with a funds rate in the lower
              part of this range. The Desk's expected rate moves immediately to 7.25%, however.
              Balancing these somewhat conflicting pieces of evidence suggests an expected rate of around
              7.1875%.
5/15/73       7.5 to 8. The FOMC adopts a stated range for the funds rate of 7.25-7.875%, but with a fairly
              explicit acknowledgement that the range is probably too low to be consistent with its money
              and RPD targets, and that intermeeting adjustments may be needed. The Desk's expected rate
              moves immediately to 7.875%, and then gradually to 8.5% over the intermeeting period in
              response to high money growth. At the next meeting, the open-market manager comments that
              the stated upper limit of 7.875% had little impact on how policy was conducted. These
              considerations suggest an expected rate slightly above 7.875%.
6/18-19/73    8.5 to 9. The FOMC agrees to a lower target range for RPD growth than the one the staff
              analysis suggests would be associated with little change in money market conditions, and
              agrees that money market conditions might be permitted to vary more in the intermeeting
              period than previously. The Committee adopts a range for the funds rate of 7.75-9.25%, but
              with a clear expectation that interest-rate increases are likely.
7/17/73       9.75 to 10. The FOMC adopts money and RPD targets that the staff projects will be associated
              with little change in interest rates, but with an asymmetry toward tightening and a willingness
              to accept non-trivial fluctuations in interest rates.
8/21/73       10.5 to 10.75. The FOMC adopts a range for the funds rate of 10-11%, but with a clear
              expectation that the rate will be in the upper part of the range.
9/18/73       10.75 to 10.375. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 10.5% immediately, with a modest
              asymmetry toward further easing.
10/16/73      10.5 to 9.75. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 9.75-10%, with a modest asymmetry
              toward further easing.
11/19-20/73   10.125, no change. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 9-10.5%, with a focus
              on the narrower range of 10.125-10.25%. Given the asymmetry of 9-10.5% around 10.125-
              10.25%, this suggests an expected rate slightly below the midpoint of 10.125-10.25%.
12/17-18/73   10.25 to 9.625. The FOMC agrees that in general it will place more emphasis on money
              market conditions. It also agrees to seek a funds rate of 9.75% initially, with an asymmetry
              toward further ease.

                                                     1974

1/21-22/74 9.75 to 9.375. The FOMC agrees to attempt to move the funds rate promptly to 9.25-9.5%.
2/20/74    9 to 8.875. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change in the funds rate, but with a
           modest asymmetry toward ease.
                                                                                                        54

3/18-19/74 9.1875 to 9.875. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 9.75% after a few days, with a
            modest asymmetry toward further tightening.
4/15-16/74 9.875 to 10.5. The Desk's expected rate rose from "9.75, or a shade higher" to "10, or
            somewhat above" between the time of the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the
            meeting, the FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 10.25-10.5%, with a modest asymmetry
            toward further tightening.
5/21/74     11 to 11.375. The Desk's expected rate rose from 11% to 11.25% between the time of the
            forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to a range for the
            funds rate of 11-11.5%, with a modest asymmetry toward tightening.
6/18/74     11.625 to 11.875. The Desk's expected rate rose from roughly 11.625% to roughly 11.75%
            between the time of the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC
            agrees to a range for the funds rate of 11.25-12.25%, with a focus on the narrower range of
            11.75-12%.
7/16/74     12.75 to 12.25. Although the stated upper limit of the FOMC's target range remained at
            12.25% over the entire intermeeting period, the actual rate was generally over 13% and the
            FOMC decided in an intermeeting teleconference not to press hard to bring the rate within the
            target range. Thus it appears that initially the FOMC was aiming for a rate between 12.25%
            and 13-13.5%. At this meeting, the FOMC agrees to ease, and chooses a new target range
            centered on 12.25%. The Desk's expected rate moves quickly to around 12.25% and remains
            there.
8/20/74     12.25 to 11.875. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 11.5-12.5%, with a focus
            on 11.75-12%. The Desk's expected rate goes quickly to "12, or a shade below."
9/10/74     11.75 to 11.125. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of about 11.25% if money growth
            rates are within its target ranges, with an asymmetry toward further ease.
10/14-15/74 10.4375 to 9.625. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of about 9.75% if money growth
            rates are within its target ranges, with an asymmetry toward further ease.
11/19/74    9.5 to 9.25. The FOMC agrees to ease slightly further, and agrees to a target range for the
            funds rate of 8.5-10% with no asymmetry.
12/16-17/74 8.875 to 8.25. The Desk's expected rate fell from around 8.875% at the time of the forecast to
            around 8.75% at the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to some further
            easing, with a range for the funds rate of 7.5-9% and an emphasis on the midpoint of the range.
            The Desk's expected rate falls immediately to 8.25%.


                                                  1975

1/20-21/75 7.25 to 6.6875. The Desk's expected rate fell from around 7.25% to around 7.125% between
           the time of the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to a
           range for the funds rate of 6.5-7.25%, but with a focus on the bottom part of the range. The
           Desk's expected rate moves immediately to 6.75-7%, and then gradually to 6.25% over the
           intermeeting period in response to news. The midpoint of the bottom half of the FOMC's
           range seems a reasonable estimate of the expected funds rate based on this meeting.
2/19/75    6.25 to 5.75. The FOMC agrees that money market conditions will probably have to ease
           further for its money growth targets to be achieved, and it chooses a range for the funds rate
           centered on 5.75%. At the next meeting, the open-market manager reports that he had
           expected to move the funds rate to roughly 5.75% over the intermeeting period.
3/18/75    5.75 to 5.25. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 5.5% immediately. It also agrees that
           in all likelihood it will soon seek a rate of 5.25%, although unusual circumstances could cause
           it to aim either higher or lower. At the next meeting, the open-market manger reports that he
           had expected to move the rate to 5.25%.
                                                                                                        55

4/14-15/75 5.5 to 5.375. The FOMC chooses a range for the funds rate of 4.75-5.75%. But it agrees to
           initially seek a range around 5.5%, and then to let the rate drift gradually down toward 5.25%
           but to avoid aggressive efforts to reach that rate.
5/20/75    5.125, no change. The FOMC agrees to emphasize money market conditions more than
           before, and to seek to attempt to maintain conditions similar to those now prevailing. There is
           a hint of a slight asymmetry toward ease, but not enough to point to a noticeable expected fall
           in the funds rate.
6/16-17/75 5.25 to 5.625. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 5-6% and to initially seek a
           rate of 5.5%, but with an asymmetry toward further tightening.
7/15/75    6 to 6.125. The FOMC agrees to seek roughly unchanged money market conditions, with an
           asymmetry toward tightening. Its new range for the funds rate is centered on 6.125%.
8/19/75    6.1875, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate in its current range of 6.125-6.25%,
           with no asymmetry.
9/16/75    6.125 to 6.375. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 6-7%, but not to go above
           6.75% without consultation. The Desk's expected rate moves quickly to 6.25-6.5%.
10/21/75   5.75 to 5.5. The FOMC agrees that in the absence of significant news, it will seek a funds rate
           of around 5.5%.
11/18/75   5.25 to 5. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate of 4.5-5.5%, and to seek to move the
           rate to 5% barring unusual developments. At the next meeting, the open-market manager
           reports that he had expected to move the rate to 5%.
12/16/75   5.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to keep the funds rate around its current level of
           5.25%. There is a slight asymmetry toward ease, but not enough to point to a noticeable
           expected fall in the funds rate.

                                                  1976

1/20/76    4.75, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to keep the funds rate around its current level of
           4.75%.
2/17-18/76 4.75, no change. Same as previous meeting.
3/15-16/76 4.75, no change. Same as previous meeting.
4/20/76    4.75 to 4.875. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate around 4.875%, and the Desk's expected
           rate moves promptly to this level.
5/18/76    5.125 to 5.375. The Desk's expected rate rose from 5.125% to 5.25% between the time of the
           forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to a policy that is
           likely to involve some modest further firming, and to a range for the funds rate centered on
           5.375%. The Desk's expected rate moves promptly to this level.
6/22/76    5.5, no change. Although there is some sentiment in the FOMC for a slight tightening, the
           Committee agrees to a range of 5.25-5.75% for the funds rate, and the Desk's expected rate
           does not change.
7/19-20/76 5.25, no change. There is slightly more sentiment on the FOMC for tightening than for easing,
           but not enough to point to a noticeable expected rise in the funds rate. Further, the Committee
           agrees to a range for the funds rate centered on 5.25%, and the Desk's expected rate does not
           change.
8/17/76    5.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to keep the funds rate around its current level of
           5.25%.
9/21/76    5.25, no change. There is slightly more sentiment on the FOMC for easing than for tightening,
           but not enough to point to a noticeable expected fall in the funds rate. The midpoint of the new
           range is 5.125%. However, the Desk's expected rate does not change initially, and the
           summary of the meeting indicates that the later fall was a response to news.
10/19/76   5 to 4.875. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of around 4.875%. In fact, however, the
           Desk never lowers its expected rate, because the money growth data on 10/21 are unexpectedly
           high. Nonetheless, the expected reduction agreed to at this meeting is 1/8 point.
                                                                                                          56

11/16/76    5 to 4.75. The FOMC agrees to seek a reduction of the funds rate in two steps to 4.75% unless
            money growth is surprisingly strong. The Desk's expected rate makes these falls.
12/20-21/76 4.6875 to 4.625. The Desk's expected rate fell from 4.625-4.75% to 4.625% between the time
            of the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to seek to keep
            the funds rate around its current level.

                                                   1977

1/17-18/77 4.625 to 4.6875. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate between 4.625% and 4.75%.
2/15/77     4.6875, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to keep the funds rate around 4.625-4.75%.
3/15/77     4.6875, no change. Despite some sentiment for a slight tightening, the FOMC agrees to seek
            to keep the funds rate in the area of 4.625-4.75%.
4/19/77     4.6875 to 4.8125. The Desk's expected rate rose from 4.625-4.75% to 4.75% between the time
            of the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to seek a funds
            rate of about 4.75%. There is some discussion of a target of 4.875%, however, and the
            Committee's new range for the rate is centered on 4.875%. The Desk's expected rate moves
            promptly to "4.75, or a shade higher."
5/17/77     5.25 to 5.375. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate around 5.375%.
6/21/77     5.375, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to keep the funds rate around its current level of
            5.375%.
7/19/77     5.375, no change. Although there is a little sentiment for tightening, the FOMC agrees to seek
            to maintain the funds rate at its current level of 5.375%. The summary of the next meeting
            states that the change in the targeted rate later in the month was a response to news.
8/16/77     5.875 to 6. The Desk's expected rate rose from 5.875% to 6% between the time of the forecast
            and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to seek to maintain the funds
            rate at about the prevailing level of 6%.
9/20/77     6.125 to 6.25. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of about 6.25%, and the Desk's expected
            rate rises promptly to this level.
10/17-18/77 6.5, no change. Although there is a little sentiment for tightening, the FOMC agrees to seek to
            maintain the funds rate around its current level of 6.5%. The Desk's expected rate does not
            change.
11/15/77    6.5, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to maintain the funds rate around its current level of
            6.5%.
12/19-20/77 6.5, no change. Same as previous meeting.


                                                   1978

1/17/78      6.75, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain the funds rate around its current level of
             6.75%. There is a slight asymmetry toward tightening, but not enough to point to a noticeable
             expected rise.
2/28/78      6.75, no change. Similar to previous meeting, though the asymmetry appears even milder.
3/21/78      6.75, no change. Similar to the January meeting. When money growth is unexpectedly high
             during the intermeeting period, the Desk does not act to raise the funds rate; this supports the
             view that the intended policy is not strongly asymmetric.
4/18/78      6.75 to 7. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate slightly above its current level of 6.75%.
             The Desk's expected rate moves immediately to 7%, and the summary of the next meeting
             states that this move was taken in accordance with the Committee's decision at this meeting.
5/16/78      7.3125 to 7.5. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate slightly higher than its current level,
             which is described as between 7.25% and 7.375%, or as slightly above 7.25%. The Desk's
             expected rate moves immediately to 7.5%, and the summary of the next meeting states that this
             move was taken in accordance with the Committee's decision at this meeting.
                                                                                                          57

6/20/78    7.5 to 7.75. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 7.75%, and the Desk's expected rate
           moves promptly to this level.
7/18/78    7.75 to 7.875. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate between 7.75% and 8%, and the Desk's
           expected rate moves promptly to 7.875%.
8/15/78    7.875 to 8. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of around 8%, and the Desk's expected rate
           moves promptly to this level. Somewhat surprisingly, its expected rate then moves to 8-
           8.125% on 8/21; there is no evidence that this is a response to a decision reached at this
           meeting, however.
9/19/78    8.375 to 8.5. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of around 8.5%, and the Desk's expected
           rate moves promptly to this level. There is a little sentiment for more tightening, but it is not
           strong and no asymmetry is agreed to. The Desk's expected rate rises to 8.625% on 9/22, but
           there is no evidence that this is a response to a decision reached at this meeting, and the
           summary of the next meeting suggests that it may have been a response to news.
10/17/78   8.75 to 9. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate around 9%, and the Desk's expected rate
           moves promptly to this level.
11/21/78   9.6875 to 9.875. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of around 9.875%, and the Desk's
           expected rate moves promptly to this level.
12/19/78   9.875 to 10.0625. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 10% or slightly higher, and the
           Desk's expected rate moves promptly to "10, preferring slightly above to below."


                                                  1979

2/6/79     10.0625, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to maintain the funds rate at about its current
           level of 10% or slightly higher, and the Desk's expected rate remains unchanged at "10, or
           slightly above."
3/20/79    10.0625, no change. Same as previous meeting.
4/17/79    10.0625, no change. Same as previous meeting.
5/22/79    10.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to maintain the funds rate at about its current
           level of 10.25%, and the Desk's expected rate is unchanged at this level.
7/11/79    10.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
8/14/79    10.625 to 11. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of about 11%, and the Desk's expected
           rate moves promptly to this level.
9/18/79    11.375 to 11.5. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of about 11.5%, and the Desk's
           expected rate moves promptly to this level.
10/6/79    11.5 to 14.5. As part of its change in operating procedures, the FOMC widens its range for the
           funds rate to 11.5-15.5%, and agrees to place much less emphasis on the funds rate. The
           Committee anticipates that the policy adopted at this meeting will lead to a prompt increase in
           the funds rate. Two pieces of evidence suggest that 14.5% is a reasonable estimate of the
           expected level of the rate implied by the policy adopted at this meeting. First, the Committee
           believes that the rate is much more likely to be in the upper half of its target range than in the
           lower half; the midpoint of the upper half is 14.5%. Second, the Desk's expected rate moves
           immediately to 13%, and then to "might be pushed into upper portions of 11.5-15.5." It then
           rises to 15.5% or above, but the summary of the next meeting makes it clear that this was in
           part a response to news.
11/20/79   13.5, no change. The FOMC agrees to keep the range of 11.5-15.5%, which is centered on the
           current level of 13.5%, with no indication that it expects the funds rate to move in one
           direction or the other. The Desk's expected rate remains steady at 13-14%.
                                                                                                           58

                                                  1980

1/8-9/80   13.5, no change. The FOMC agrees to keep the range for the funds rate at 11.5-15.5%, and
           there is no indication that it desires any change in the rate from the generally prevailing recent
           level, neglecting transitory factors, of around 13.5%. The Desk's expected rate is "down
           somewhat from the 14 recent level."
2/4-5/80   13.5 to 14. The FOMC agrees that the monetary aggregates are more or less on course, and
           agrees to keep the range for the funds rate at 11.5-15.5%. But it wants money growth to slow,
           and does not appear to think that this will happen on its own. Thus there appears to be a
           modest tightening. In light of the volatility of the funds rate, this suggests an expected move of
           roughly 1/2 point. The Desk's expected rate is missing for the two weeks after the meeting,
           and is then 14.5-15%. The summary of the next meeting suggests that there was significant
           news by mid-February, however.
3/18/80    16.5 to 18.25. It is clear that the FOMC is choosing a policy that it anticipates will produce a
           funds rate higher than the current level of both the actual rate and the Desk's expected rate of
           about 16.5%. The Committee raises the lower limit of its range for the rate by 1.5 points and
           the upper limit by 2, suggesting an expected tightening of about 1.75 points. Similarly, the
           average of the current level of the rate and the upper limit of the range is 18.25%. The Desk's
           expected rate is not very informative: it is missing for a week, then 16-18%, and then suggests
           that the rate could go close to 20%.
4/22/80    18.375 to 14.5. It is clear that the FOMC expects a substantial fall in the funds rate. For
           example, the one member who wants only a moderate loosening dissents on the grounds that
           he believes that policy adopted will lead to an excessive fall in rates. The Desk's expected rate
           moves immediately to 14-15%.
5/20/80    10.875 to 9.5. Again, it is clear that the FOMC expects the funds rate to fall. The Desk's
           expected rate moves immediately to "decline .. to not below 9.5%," and the summary of the
           next meeting does not attribute any of the decline in the rate to about 9.375% in the
           intermeeting period to news. Similarly, the average of the current rate and the bottom of the
           Committee's range is 9.6875%, and the midpoint of the lower half of the Committee's range is
           9.875%. All of this suggests an expected fall to the vicinity of 9.5%.
7/9/80     9.375, no change. There is no discussion of expectations about the funds rate in the meeting
           summary, and the Desk's expected rate is missing around this meeting. But the fact that the
           Committee leaves the lower end of its range unchanged at 8.5%, only moderately below the
           current level, suggests that it does not expect a noticeable decline in the rate. And the fact that
           the summary indicates that the Committee will accept higher money growth if demand rises
           suggests that it does not expect a noticeable rise.
8/12/80    9.625 to 9.875. Most members support a policy that would not be expected to lead to any clear
           change in the funds rate in either direction. But a few members favor a more restrictive policy,
           and the FOMC adopts objectives for money growth marginally lower than those the majority
           had been discussing. This suggests a slight tightening. Consistent with this, the Desk's
           expected rate rises slightly.
9/16/80    10.25 to 11.25. The funds rate rose from about 10.25% to about 10.75% between the time of
           the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC expresses a strong desire
           to reduce money growth, although it thinks that this may not require an immediate change in
           money market conditions. Thus there appears to be a clear asymmetry toward tightening. In
           light of the volatility of the funds rate, this suggests an additional expected increase of roughly
           1/2 point. Broadly consistent with this, the Desk's expected rate changes little initially but ends
           up rising above 12% in response to news.
10/21/80   12.125 to 13.625. The Desk's expected rate rose from "12, or somewhat higher" to 12.5-13%
           between the time of the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC
           adopts targets for money growth somewhat lower than ones it believes would lead to little
           expected change in money market conditions. This suggests some immediate tightening.
                                                                                                             59

            Consistent with this, the Desk's expected rate rises immediately to "13, or somewhat higher."
            Further, there is a clear asymmetry toward tightening. In light of the volatility of the funds
            rate, this suggests an additional expected increase in the rate of roughly 1/2 point.
11/18/80    14.5 to 16.25. The funds rate rose from about 14.5% to about 16.25% between the time of the
            forecast and the time of this meeting; much of this rise was associated with an increase in the
            discount rate on November 14. At the meeting, the FOMC gives no clear indication of any
            noticeable expected additional change in the rate in either direction. Surprisingly, the Desk's
            expected rate goes directly from 14-15% to "might go above 17." In light of the discussion at
            this meeting and the fact that the Committee chooses an upper end of 17% for its range,
            however, it is not possible to attribute all of this move to a decision made at this meeting.
12/18-19/80 18.75 to 18. Shortly before the forecast, the FOMC agreed to not be precisely bound by its
            upper limit for the funds rate of 18%, and the actual rate rose to around 18.75% at the time of
            the forecast. By the time of this meeting, the rate had risen to around 19.75%. At the meeting,
            the FOMC wants and expects the rate to fall from its recently prevailing level of 18.75-
            19.75%. The Desk's expected rate is missing for a week and then falls to 17-18%. The
            summary of the next meeting attributes some of this decline to news, however. All of this
            suggests an expected fall to the vicinity of 18%.


                                                    1981

2/2-3/81     17.5 to 17. The Desk had been expecting a funds rate of 17-18%, neglecting some transitory
             factors. At this meeting, there is little discussion of the funds rate, though the tone of the
             discussion suggests that the FOMC thinks a fall is much more likely than a rise. In addition,
             the FOMC adopts a borrowings target that both the open-market manager and the staff expect
             to be associated with a small decline in the funds rate. The Desk's expected rate goes promptly
             to 16-18%.
3/31/81      15 to 15.875. The FOMC agrees to a range for the funds rate centered on 15.5%, and to a
             policy that the staff expects will be associated with some increase in interest rates. In addition,
             there is a clear asymmetry toward additional tightening; given the volatility of the funds rate,
             this suggests a non-negligible further expected increase in the funds rate. The Desk's expected
             rate is missing for a week, but then moves to "some firming above 15.5."
5/18/81      18.5 to 20. The FOMC agrees that it wants to maintain restraint, and to reduce money growth
             rather quickly. The staff expects a funds rate of 19-20%. However, the FOMC agrees to an
             asymmetry toward further tightening, and the Desk's expected rate moves immediately to 20%.
             The summary of the next meeting indicates that the news in the intermeeting period suggested
             low money growth, so it is not possible to attribute any of the move to 20% to news.
7/6-7/81     18.5 to 17.5. The FOMC lowers its range for the funds rate despite the fact that the current
             rate is near the middle of the initial range, and chooses a borrowings target that the staff
             expects to produce a funds rate of 17-18%. The Desk's expected rate, neglecting some
             temporary factors, falls from 18-19% to 17-18%.
8/18/81      18 to 17.5. The summary of the meeting suggests that no major change in policy is intended.
             But there are indications of a modest loosening. Some Committee members want policy to
             focus more on interest rates and explicitly advocate a small decline. And the Committee
             agrees to discount the rapid growth in M2. The Desk's expected rate is missing for a week and
             then falls to 17%; the summary of the next meeting indicates that some of this fall was a
             response to news, however.
10/5-6/81    15.5 to 14.5. There again appears to be a modest loosening without a major change in policy.
             In particular, the Committee wants money growth to rise. The FOMC adopts a borrowings
             target that the staff expects will lead to a funds rate of 14.5-15.5%, with an asymmetry toward
             further easing. The Desk's expected rate moves promptly to 14.5-15.5%.
                                                                                                           60

11/17/81    13.5 to 12.5. The FOMC agrees that it wants interest rates to fall. It agrees to a borrowings
            target that it expects will produce a funds rate around 13%, and to an asymmetry toward
            further easing.
12/21-22/81 12.125 to 11.875. The FOMC agrees not to seek an immediate change in the funds rate, but
            with a mild asymmetry toward easing.

                                                    1982

2/1-2/82    14 to 14.5. The FOMC adopts reserve and money targets slightly tighter than ones the staff
            expects would be associated with little change in interest rates, and the Desk's expected rate
            rises immediately to 14-15% and remains there.
3/29-30/82 14.75 to 14.25. The Desk's expected rate moves from "close to 15" at the time of the forecast,
            to 14-15% before this meeting, and to 14% and then to 14-14.5% after the meeting. The
            discussion at this meeting does not point to any large expected change in interest rates in either
            direction from the level prevailing at the time of the meeting, though there appears to be more
            support for lower than for higher interest rates.
5/18/82     14 to 13.25. The FOMC adopts a reserves target that the staff expects will be associated with a
            funds rate around 13.5%, with a mild asymmetry toward further easing. The Desk's expected
            rate falls from 14% before the forecast, to "14, or somewhat under" at the time of the meeting,
            to 13.5% immediately after.
6/30-7/1/82 14 to 13.5. The FOMC adopts a borrowings target that it expects will lead to a funds rate of
            13.5-14%, with an asymmetry toward further easing.
8/24/82     10.25 to 9.5. The FOMC appears to desire a funds rate in the 9-10% range. The Desk's
            expected rate is unclear for a week, but is then "around 9.5."
10/5/82     10.25 to 9.5. Beginning roughly with this meeting, credit market conditions play a more
            prominent role in discussions of policy. Here, the FOMC agrees that it wants somewhat
            reduced pressures in credit markets, and is willing to accept money growth above its target. It
            adopts a range for the funds rate of 7-10.5%, but with an expectation that the rate is more
            likely to be above than below the middle of the range. The Desk's expected rate falls quickly
            to 9.5%.
11/16/82    9.5 to 9. The FOMC agrees to ease; a funds rate around 9% is often mentioned. The Desk's
            expected rate falls quickly to 9%.
12/20-21/82 8.5, no change. Although there is slight sentiment for some easing, it is not enough to point to
            a noticeable expected fall in the funds rate. The Desk's expected rate is steady at 8.5%.


                                                    1983

2/8-9/83   8.5, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain the existing degree of restraint on reserve
           positions. The Desk's expected rate is steady at 8.5%.
3/28-29/83 8.5 to 8.625. Policy shifted to a slightly less accommodate stance between the time of the
           forecast and the time of this meeting. Here the FOMC agrees to a policy that it expects to
           yield a funds rate of 8.5-8.75%, and the Desk's expected rate is steady at "slightly above"
           8.5%.
5/24/83    8.625 to 8.875. The FOMC votes for a policy of marginally more restraint. The Desk's
           expected rate rises from "8.5, close to or slightly above" to "8.75, or somewhat higher."
7/12-13/83 9.0625 to 9.375. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate above its current level but below
           9.5%. The Desk's expected rate moves from "9, or somewhat higher" to 9.25-9.5%.
8/23/83    9.5625 to 9.5. The FOMC agrees to a policy that it expects will produce a funds rate around
           9.5%
10/4/83    9.375, no change. The FOMC agrees to make no further adjustment in the degree of reserve
           restraint.
                                                                                                         61

11/14-15/83 9.375, no change. Although there is some sentiment for slight tightening, the FOMC agrees to
            maintain the current degree of restraint, and the Desk's expected rate is steady at 9.25-9.5%.
12/19-20/83 9.5 to 9.625. The FOMC agrees to maintain at least the existing degree of restraint, with a
            strong asymmetry toward tightening. The Committee expects that if there is a tightening, it
            will be 1/4 point. This suggests an expected increase in the funds rate of roughly 1/8 point.


                                                   1984

1/30-31/84 9.375, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to maintain the existing degree of restraint.
            There is a slight asymmetry toward loosening, but not enough to point to a noticeable expected
            fall in the funds rate.
3/26-27/84 10.125 to 10.5. The FOMC adopts a policy that it expects will yield a funds rate of around
            10.25-10.5% if the Board of Governors does not increase the discount rate, and around 10.5-
            10.75% if it does. The FOMC appears quite uncertain about whether the discount rate will
            rise; thus a reasonable estimate of the likely funds rate is 10.5%.
5/21-22/84 10.5, no change. The FOMC agrees that no change should be made in the degree of pressure
            on reserve positions.
7/16-17/84 11 to 11.375. The Desk's expected rate rose from 11 to "11, or a touch higher" between the
            time of the forecast and the time of this meeting, and the actual rate rose to around 11.25%. At
            the meeting, the FOMC agrees to maintain the existing degree of restraint on reserve positions,
            with a clear asymmetry toward further tightening. This suggests an expected level of the funds
            rate slightly above its current level of 11.25%. The Desk's expected rate rises immediately to
            11.25%, and then further over the course of the intermeeting period.
8/21/84     11.5625 to 11.5. The evidence from this meeting reveals no signs of a clear desire to move the
            funds rate in a particular direction, but does suggest some preference for a marginal easing.
            Thus the evidence is consistent with a slight fall in the expected funds rate. Both the behavior
            of the Desk's expected rate and the open-market manager's discussion at the next meeting
            suggest the same conclusion.
10/2/84     11.25 to 10.875. The Desk's expected rate fell from 11.25% to 11% immediately after the
            forecast. At this meeting, the FOMC agrees to maintain the lesser degree of pressure on
            reserve positions attained in recent weeks, but with a modest asymmetry toward further easing.
11/7/84     10 to 9.25. The FOMC agrees to ease, and most members favor doing so in steps. The Desk's
            expected rate falls immediately to 9.5%, then to 9% two weeks after the meeting, then to
            8.75% two weeks after that. The summary of the next meeting suggests, however, that some
            of this overall reduction was a response to news. This suggests that the expected reduction as
            of this meeting was roughly 3/4 point.
12/17-18/84 8.75 to 8.125. The FOMC agrees to seek a funds rate of 8.5% or somewhat lower. In addition,
            the Committee believes that a cut in the discount rate is likely, and that this will lead to a
            further reduction in the funds rate. The Desk's intended funds rate falls quickly to 8.5%, then
            to 8-8.25% a week later following a cut in the discount rate.


                                                   1985

2/12-13/85 8.5, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to keep the funds rate around its current level of
           8.5%.
3/26/85    8.5, no change. Similar to previous meeting.
5/21/85    8.125 to 7.75. The Desk appears to have been aiming for a funds rate of about 8-8.25% before
           the forecast, but lowered its intended rate to 7.75% between the time of the forecast and the
           time of this meeting. At this meeting, the FOMC agrees to maintain the current degree of
           restraint.
                                                                                                        62

7/9-10/85   7.625, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain the current degree of pressure on reserve
            positions. There is a slight asymmetry toward tightening, but not enough to point to a
            noticeable expected rise in the funds rate. The immediate reduction in the Desk's intended rate
            from 7.75% to 7.625-7.75% appears to be simply an alignment of the intended rate with how
            policy was being conducted.
8/20/85     7.8125, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain the slightly firmer degree of reserve
            restraint sought in recent weeks. The Desk's intended rate in fact rises immediately from
            7.75% to 7.75-8%. The summary of the meeting suggests, however, that the change is simply
            an alignment of the intended rate with how policy was being conducted.
10/1/85     7.875, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain the degree of reserve pressure sought in
            recent weeks.
11/4-5/85 8 to 7.9375. The FOMC agrees to maintain about the current degree of reserve restraint, but
            with the expectation of a slight downdrift in the funds rate and a slight asymmetry toward
            further ease. The Desk's intended rate moves from 8% to "8-."
12/16-17/85 7.9375 to 7.75. The FOMC agrees to a slight easing, and the Desk's intended rate falls
            immediately from "8-" to 7.75%. There is a slight asymmetry toward further easing, but not
            enough to point to an expected funds rate noticeably below 7.75%.


                                                  1986

2/11-12/86 7.8125, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek unchanged conditions of reserve availability.
4/1/86      7.375, no change. Similar to previous meeting.
5/20/86     6.875, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
            conditions. There is a slight asymmetry toward tightening, but not enough to point to a
            noticeable expected rise in the funds rate. The immediate rise in the Desk's intended rate from
            6.75% to 6.75-6.875% appears be an alignment of the intended rate with how policy was being
            conducted.
7/8-9/86    6.875 to 6.375. The FOMC agrees to ease in conjunction with the pending 1/2 point cut in the
            discount rate, and the Desk's intended rate falls from 6.75-7% to 6.25-6.5% on July 11.
8/19/86     6.3125 to 5.9375. The FOMC agrees to some slight easing. It clearly wants the funds rate to
            decline by less than the pending reduction of 1/2 point in the discount rate. The Desk's
            intended rate falls to 5.75-6%. Since the FOMC expresses a clear desire for a fall of less than
            1/2 point, we conclude that it wanted the Desk to aim for the upper part of this range.
9/23/86     5.875, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
            conditions. There is a slight asymmetry toward tightening, but not enough to point to a
            noticeable expected rise in the funds rate.
11/5/86     5.875, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
            conditions.
12/15-16/86 6, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
            conditions, with a very slight asymmetry toward ease.


                                                  1987

2/11-12/87 6, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
           conditions. There is a slight asymmetry toward tightening, but not enough to point to a
           noticeable expected rise in the funds rate.
3/31/87    6.0625 to 6.25. The FOMC agrees that it wants the funds rate to remain around its current
           level of about 6.25%, rather than at the Desk's intended level of around 6-6.125%. The Desk's
           reported intended funds rate does not change for several weeks, but the open-market manager
           reports at the next meeting that reserve provision immediately became more cautious.
                                                                                                           63

5/19/87     6.5 to 6.75. The FOMC agrees that it wants the funds rate to remain around its current level of
            about 6.75%, rather than at the Desk's intended level of 6.5%. The Desk's intended rate rises
            immediately to 6.75%.
7/7/87      6.75, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
            positions. Although the Desk's intended rate fell from 6.75% to 6.5-6.75% shortly before the
            meeting, the actual rate did not fall, and at this meeting the baseline level is clearly viewed as
            6.75%.
8/18/87     6.625, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
            conditions. There is a slight asymmetry toward tightening, but not enough to point to a
            noticeable expected rise in the funds rate.
9/22/87     7.25, no change. The Desk had been seeking a funds rate of 7.25% since early September,
            although the actual rate had generally been somewhat lower. The FOMC agrees that it wants
            to achieve the degree of reserve pressure sought in recent weeks, clearly implying that it wants
            the Desk to continue to aim for a rate around 7.25%.
11/3/87     7.125 to 6.8125. The Desk's intended rate was reduced from 7-7.25% at the time of the
            forecast to 7% at the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees that it would like
            the rate to fall to 6.75-6.875%, with a slight asymmetry toward further ease. The Desk's
            intended rate immediately falls to 6.75-6.875%.
12/15-16/87 6.8125, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek to maintain the degree of reserve pressure
            sought in recent days. The Desk's intended rate of 6.75-6.875% does not change.


                                                    1988

2/9-10/88   6.625 to 6.5. The FOMC agrees to a borrowings target that it expects will produce a funds rate
            of around 6.5%.
3/29/88     6.5 to 6.75. The FOMC agrees to a slight increase in the degree of pressure on reserve
            positions, and the Desk's intended rate rises immediately from 6.5% to 6.75%.
5/17/88     7 to 7.25. The FOMC agrees to a slight firming after a short interval unless there are
            significant unexpected developments, with a slight asymmetry toward further tightening. The
            Desk's intended rate moves from 7% to 7.25% on May 25.
6/29-30/88 7.375 to 7.625. The FOMC agrees to a policy that it expects will lead to a funds rate of 7.5%
            or a shade higher, with a slight asymmetry to further tightening.
8/16/88     8.125, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain the current degree of pressure on reserve
            positions. There is a slight asymmetry toward tightening, but not enough to point to a
            noticeable expected rise in the funds rate.
9/20/88     8.125, no change. The FOMC agrees to a policy that it expects will keep the funds rate around
            8.125%. There is an asymmetry toward tightening, but the Committee feels that it is unlikely
            to be acted on before the next meeting.
11/1/88     8.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain roughly the current degree of pressure on
            reserve positions. There is a somewhat complicated asymmetry. On the one hand, the stated
            policy is asymmetric toward tightening, though to a degree that is explicitly less than at the
            previous meeting. On the other hand, policy is still to some extent being formulated in terms
            of its implications for borrowings, and some members believe that the policy agreed to is more
            likely to lead to a slight decline than to a slight rise in the funds rate. In any event, the
            evidence does not point to any clear expected change in the funds rate.
12/13-14/88 8.4375 to 9. The FOMC agrees to seek some immediate firming, followed by some further
            tightening at the start of 1989 unless there are significant unexpected developments. The
            Committee expects the funds rate to end up either slightly above or slightly below 9% by the
            end of the intermeeting period. The Desk's intended rate rises gradually to 9% by early
            January.
                                                                                                         64

                                                   1989

2/7-8/89    9 to 9.1875. The FOMC agrees that, depending on circumstances, policy should aim either to
            maintain the funds rate around its current level of 9-9.125% (rather than at the Desk's intended
            level of 9%) or to increase it by roughly 1/4 point from that level.
3/28/89     9.75 to 9.875. The FOMC agrees to maintain the current degree of pressure on reserve
            positions, but with a clear asymmetry toward tightening.
5/16/89     9.8125, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in the degree of pressure on reserve
            positions.
7/5-6/89    9.5625 to 9.3125. The FOMC agrees to attempt to reduce the funds rate from 9.5-9.625% to
            9.25-9.375%.
8/22/89     9.0625, no change. The FOMC agrees to maintain the current degree of pressure on reserve
            positions. There is a slight asymmetry toward easing, but not enough to point to a noticeable
            expected fall in the funds rate.
10/3/89     9, no change. Similar to previous meeting.
11/14/89    8.5, no change. Similar to previous meeting.
12/18-19/89 8.5 to 8.25. The FOMC agrees to a slight easing, and the Desk's intended rate falls
            immediately from 8.5% to 8.25%.

                                                   1990

2/6-7/90     8.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek an unchanged degree of pressure on reserve
             positions, with no asymmetry.
3/27/90      8.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
5/15/90      8.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
7/2-3/90     8.25 to 8. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, but to seek to lower the funds rate
             by 1/4 point fairly soon in the absence of unexpected developments. The Desk's intended rate
             falls from 8.25% to 8% on July 13.
8/21/90      8, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek an unchanged degree of pressure on reserve
             positions. There is an asymmetry toward ease, but the FOMC agrees that policy will not
             change unless something relatively unexpected occurs.
10/2/90      8 to 7.75. The FOMC agrees that it will not seek any immediate change, but that there is a
             presumption that it will seek to lower the funds rate by 1/4 point if the anticipated budget
             agreement between Congress and the President is reached. The Desk's intended rate falls from
             8% to 7.75% on October 29, immediately after the agreement.
11/13/90     7.75 to 7.5. The FOMC agrees to seek to lower the funds rate by 1/4 point, with a modest
             asymmetry toward further easing. The Desk's intended rate immediately falls from 7.75% to
             7.5%.
12/18/90     7.25 to 7. The FOMC agrees to seek to lower the funds rate by 1/4 point, and the Desk's
             intended rate immediately falls from 7.25% to 7%. There is a slight asymmetry toward further
             easing, but not enough to point to an expected rate noticeably below 7%.


                                                   1991

2/5-6/91     6.75 to 6.25. The Desk's intended rate was lowered from 6.75% to 6.25% between the time of
             the forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to seek an
             unchanged degree of pressure on reserve positions, with a slight asymmetry toward ease.
3/26/91      6, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek an unchanged degree of pressure on reserve
             positions, with no asymmetry.
5/14/91      5.75, no change. Same as previous meeting.
7/2-3/91     5.75, no change. Same as previous meeting.
                                                                                                          65

8/20/91      5.5, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek an unchanged degree of pressure on reserve
             positions, with a slight asymmetry toward ease.
10/1/91      5.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
11/5/91      5.25 to 4.75. The Desk's intended rate was lowered from 5.25% to 5% between the time of the
             forecast and the time of this meeting. At the meeting, the FOMC agrees to lower its target for
             the funds rate to 4.75%, and the intended falls rate immediately falls to 4.75%. There is also a
             slight asymmetry toward further ease.
12/17/91     4.5 to 4.25. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, but with a strong presumption
             that there will be a subsequent easing of 1/4 point. The Desk's intended rate in fact falls from
             4.5% to 4% on December 20. The account of the next meeting indicates, however, that this
             move was prompted by news that arrived after the meeting.


                                                   1992

2/4-5/92    4, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in policy, with a slight asymmetry toward
            ease.
3/31/92     4, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in policy, with a slight asymmetry toward
            ease. The summary of the next meeting attributes the cut in the Desk's intended rate to 3.75%
            on April 9 to news.
5/19/92     3.75, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change in policy, with no asymmetry.
6/30-7/1/92 3.75 to 3.625. The FOMC agrees to seek no change, but with a clear asymmetry toward ease.
            The Desk in fact reduces its intended rate to 3.25% on July 2, but this is the result of highly
            unexpected news.
8/18/92     3.25 to 3.125. The FOMC agrees to seek no change, but with a clear asymmetry toward ease.
10/6/92     3 to 2.75. The FOMC agrees that it will seek no immediate change, but that it will ease in the
            absence of unexpected developments. In fact, the Desk's intended rate remains unchanged; the
            summary of the next meeting attributes this to unexpected news, however.
11/17/92    3, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change, with a slight asymmetry toward ease.
12/22/92    3, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change, with no asymmetry.


                                                   1993

2/2-3/93     3, no change. Same as previous meeting.
3/23/93      3, no change. Same as previous meeting.
5/18/93      3 to 3.125. The FOMC agrees to seek no change. But there is substantial support for an
             immediate tightening, and the Committee agrees to an asymmetry toward tightening with an
             expectation that it is more likely than not that the Committee will at least confer during the
             intermeeting period.
7/6-7/93     3, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change, with a slight asymmetry toward
             tightening.
8/17/93      3, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no change, with no asymmetry.
9/21/93      3, no change. Same as previous meeting.
11/16/93     3, no change. Same as previous meeting.
12/21/93     3, no change. Same as previous meeting.


                                                   1994

2/3-4/94     3 to 3.25. The FOMC agrees to seek to raise the funds rate by 1/4 point, with no asymmetry.
             For the first time, the Committee announces the change in the target funds rate.
                                                                                                      66

3/22/94     3.25 to 3.5. The FOMC again agrees to seek to raise the funds rate by 1/4 point, with no
            asymmetry.
5/17/94     3.75 to 4.25. The FOMC agrees to seek to raise the funds rate by 1/2 point, with no
            asymmetry.
7/5-6/94    4.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, with a slight asymmetry
            toward tightening.
8/16/94     4.25 to 4.75. The FOMC agrees to seek to raise the funds rate by 1/2 point, with no
            asymmetry.
9/27/94     4.75 to 4.875. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, but with a clear asymmetry
            toward tightening and a clear sense that there is a good chance of a tightening during the
            intermeeting period.
11/15/94    4.75 to 5.5. The FOMC agrees to seek to raise the funds rate by 3/4 point, with no asymmetry.
12/20/94    5.5, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change. There is an asymmetry
            toward tightening, but with a clear sense that an intermeeting move in unlikely.


                                                 1995

1/31-2/1/95 5.5 to 6. The FOMC agrees to seek to raise the funds rate by 1/2 point, with no asymmetry.
3/28/95     6, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, with a slight asymmetry
            toward tightening.
5/23/95     6, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, with no asymmetry.
7/5-6/95    6 to 5.75. The FOMC agrees to seek to lower the funds rate by 1/4 point, with a slight
            asymmetry toward further ease.
8/22/95     5.75, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, with no asymmetry.
9/26/95     5.75, no change. Same as previous meeting.
11/15/95    5.75, no change. Same as previous meeting.
12/19/95    5.75 to 5.5. The FOMC agrees to seek to lower the funds rate by 1/4 point, with no
            asymmetry.

                                                 1996

1/30-31/96 5.5 to 5.25. The FOMC agrees to seek to lower the funds rate by 1/4 point, with no
           asymmetry.
3/26/96    5.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, with no asymmetry.
5/21/96    5.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
7/2-3/96   5.25, no change. The FOMC agrees to seek no immediate change, with a slight asymmetry
           toward tightening.
8/20/96    5.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
9/24/96    5.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
11/13/96   5.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
12/17/96   5.25, no change. Same as previous meeting.
                                                                                                         67

                                                TABLE A-1

                        Changes in Intended Federal Funds Rate at FOMC Meetings



             Initial Change in                    Initial Change in                Initial Change in
 Meeting    Intended Intended        Meeting     Intended Intended        Meeting Intended Intended
  Date      Rate (%)  Rate (%)        Date       Rate (%) Rate (%)         Date    Rate (%) Rate (%)

 1/14/69    6.4375     0.0000         7/18/72     4.6250     0.0000        5/18/76    5.1250    0.2500
   2/4/69   6.4375     0.0000         8/15/72     4.7500     0.1250        6/22/76    5.5000    0.0000
   3/4/69   6.7500    -0.1250         9/19/72     5.0000     0.1875        7/20/76    5.2500    0.0000
   4/1/69   6.7500     0.5000        10/17/72     5.0625     0.1250        8/17/76    5.2500    0.0000
 4/29/69    7.6875     0.2500        11/21/72     5.0625     0.1250        9/21/76    5.2500    0.0000
 5/27/69    8.5000     0.1250        12/19/72     5.3750     0.2500       10/19/76    5.0000   -0.1250
 6/24/69    9.0000     0.0000         1/16/73     5.7500     0.5000       11/16/76    5.0000   -0.2500
 7/15/69    9.0000     0.1250         2/13/73     6.3750     0.3125       12/21/76    4.6875   -0.0625
 8/12/69    9.5000     0.2500         3/20/73     7.0000     0.1250        1/18/77    4.6250    0.0625
   9/9/69   9.0000     0.0000         4/17/73     7.0000     0.1875        2/15/77    4.6875    0.0000
 10/7/69    9.1250     0.0000         5/15/73     7.5000     0.5000        3/15/77    4.6875    0.0000
10/28/69    9.1250     0.0000         6/19/73     8.5000     0.5000        4/19/77    4.6875    0.1250
11/25/69    9.1250     0.0000         7/17/73     9.7500     0.2500        5/17/77    5.2500    0.1250
12/16/69    9.0000     0.0000         8/21/73    10.5000     0.2500        6/21/77    5.3750    0.0000
 1/15/70    9.0000    -0.2500         9/18/73    10.7500    -0.3750        7/19/77    5.3750    0.0000
 2/10/70    9.1250    -0.5000        10/16/73    10.5000    -0.7500        8/16/77    5.8750    0.1250
 3/10/70    8.3125    -0.1875        11/20/73    10.1250     0.0000        9/20/77    6.1250    0.1250
   4/7/70   7.7500     0.0000        12/18/73    10.2500    -0.6250       10/18/77    6.5000    0.0000
   5/5/70   8.2500     0.1250         1/22/74     9.7500    -0.3750       11/15/77    6.5000    0.0000
 5/26/70    8.0000     0.0000         2/20/74     9.0000    -0.1250       12/20/77    6.5000    0.0000
 6/23/70    7.8750    -0.2500         3/19/74     9.1875     0.6875        1/17/78    6.7500    0.0000
 7/21/70    7.3125    -0.2500         4/16/74     9.8750     0.6250        2/28/78    6.7500    0.0000
 8/18/70    6.7500    -0.5000         5/21/74    11.0000     0.3750        3/21/78    6.7500    0.0000
 9/15/70    6.3750    -0.1875         6/18/74    11.6250     0.2500        4/18/78    6.7500    0.2500
10/20/70    6.2500    -0.1250         7/16/74    12.7500    -0.5000        5/16/78    7.3125    0.1875
11/17/70    5.7500    -0.6250         8/20/74    12.2500    -0.3750        6/20/78    7.5000    0.2500
12/15/70    5.1250    -0.3750         9/10/74    11.7500    -0.6250        7/18/78    7.7500    0.1250
 1/12/71    4.5000    -0.5000        10/15/74    10.4375    -0.8125        8/15/78    7.8750    0.1250
   2/9/71   3.7500    -0.1250        11/19/74     9.5000    -0.2500        9/19/78    8.3750    0.1250
   3/9/71   3.5000     0.1250        12/17/74     8.8750    -0.6250       10/17/78    8.7500    0.2500
   4/6/71   3.7500     0.3750         1/21/75     7.2500    -0.5625       11/21/78    9.6875    0.1875
 5/11/71    4.2500     0.2500         2/19/75     6.2500    -0.5000       12/19/78    9.8750    0.1875
   6/8/71   4.7500     0.3750         3/18/75     5.7500    -0.5000         2/6/79   10.0625    0.0000
 6/29/71    5.1250     0.2500         4/15/75     5.5000    -0.1250        3/20/79   10.0625    0.0000
 7/27/71    5.5000     0.1250         5/20/75     5.1250     0.0000        4/17/79   10.0625    0.0000
 8/24/71    5.6250     0.0000         6/17/75     5.2500     0.3750        5/22/79   10.2500    0.0000
 9/21/71    5.5000    -0.2500         7/15/75     6.0000     0.1250        7/11/79   10.2500    0.0000
10/19/71    5.1875    -0.1250         8/19/75     6.1875     0.0000        8/14/79   10.6250    0.3750
11/16/71    4.7500    -0.3750         9/16/75     6.1250     0.2500        9/18/79   11.3750    0.1250
12/14/71    4.3750    -0.6250        10/21/75     5.7500    -0.2500        10/6/79   11.5000    3.0000
 1/11/72    3.6250    -0.3125        11/18/75     5.2500    -0.2500       11/20/79   13.5000    0.0000
 2/15/72    3.2500     0.0000        12/16/75     5.2500     0.0000         1/9/80   13.5000    0.0000
3/21/72     3.9375     0.3125         1/20/76     4.7500     0.0000         2/5/80   13.5000    0.5000
 4/18/72    4.2500     0.1250         2/18/76     4.7500     0.0000        3/18/80   16.5000    1.7500
 5/23/72    4.2500     0.3125         3/16/76     4.7500     0.0000        4/22/80   18.3750   -3.8750
 6/20/72    4.4375     0.1250         4/20/76     4.7500     0.1250        5/20/80   10.8750   -1.3750
                                                                                              68

                                  TABLE A-1 (continued)



            Initial Change in               Initial Change in            Initial Change in
 Meeting   Intended Intended    Meeting    Intended Intended    Meeting Intended Intended
  Date     Rate (%)  Rate (%)    Date      Rate (%) Rate (%)     Date    Rate (%) Rate (%)

  7/9/80    9.3750    0.0000    12/17/85   7.9375   -0.1875      8/20/91   5.5000    0.0000
 8/12/80    9.6250    0.2500     2/12/86   7.8125    0.0000      10/1/91   5.2500    0.0000
 9/16/80   10.2500    1.0000      4/1/86   7.3750    0.0000      11/5/91   5.2500   -0.5000
10/21/80   12.1250    1.5000     5/20/86   6.8750    0.0000     12/17/91   4.5000   -0.2500
11/18/80   14.5000    1.7500      7/9/86   6.8750   -0.5000       2/5/92   4.0000    0.0000
12/19/80   18.7500   -0.7500     8/19/86   6.3125   -0.3750      3/31/92   4.0000    0.0000
  2/3/81   17.5000   -0.5000     9/23/86   5.8750    0.0000      5/19/92   3.7500    0.0000
 3/31/81   15.0000    0.8750     11/5/86   5.8750    0.0000       7/1/92   3.7500   -0.1250
 5/18/81   18.5000    1.5000    12/16/86   6.0000    0.0000      8/18/92   3.2500   -0.1250
  7/7/81   18.5000   -1.0000     2/12/87   6.0000    0.0000      10/6/92   3.0000   -0.2500
 8/18/81   18.0000   -0.5000     3/31/87   6.0625    0.1875     11/17/92   3.0000    0.0000
 10/6/81   15.5000   -1.0000     5/19/87   6.5000    0.2500     12/22/92   3.0000    0.0000
11/17/81   13.5000   -1.0000      7/7/87   6.7500    0.0000       2/3/93   3.0000    0.0000
12/22/81   12.1250   -0.2500     8/18/87   6.6250    0.0000      3/23/93   3.0000    0.0000
  2/2/82   14.0000    0.5000     9/22/87   7.2500    0.0000      5/18/93   3.0000    0.1250
 3/30/82   14.7500   -0.5000     11/3/87   7.1250   -0.3125       7/7/93   3.0000    0.0000
 5/18/82   14.0000   -0.7500    12/16/87   6.8125    0.0000      8/17/93   3.0000    0.0000
  7/1/82   14.0000   -0.5000     2/10/88   6.6250   -0.1250      9/21/93   3.0000    0.0000
 8/24/82   10.2500   -0.7500     3/29/88   6.5000    0.2500     11/16/93   3.0000    0.0000
 10/5/82   10.2500   -0.7500     5/17/88   7.0000    0.2500     12/21/93   3.0000    0.0000
11/16/82    9.5000   -0.5000     6/30/88   7.3750    0.2500       2/4/94   3.0000    0.2500
12/21/82    8.5000    0.0000     8/16/88   8.1250    0.0000      3/22/94   3.2500    0.2500
  2/9/83    8.5000    0.0000     9/20/88   8.1250    0.0000      5/17/94   3.7500    0.5000
 3/29/83    8.5000    0.1250     11/1/88   8.2500    0.0000       7/6/94   4.2500    0.0000
 5/24/83    8.6250    0.2500    12/14/88   8.4375    0.5625      8/16/94   4.2500    0.5000
 7/13/83    9.0625    0.3125      2/8/89   9.0000    0.1875      9/27/94   4.7500    0.1250
 8/23/83    9.5625   -0.0625     3/28/89   9.7500    0.1250     11/15/94   4.7500    0.7500
 10/4/83    9.3750    0.0000     5/16/89   9.8125    0.0000     12/20/94   5.5000    0.0000
11/15/83    9.3750    0.0000      7/6/89   9.5625   -0.2500       2/1/95   5.5000    0.5000
12/20/83    9.5000    0.1250     8/22/89   9.0625    0.0000      3/28/95   6.0000    0.0000
 1/31/84    9.3750    0.0000     10/3/89   9.0000    0.0000      5/23/95   6.0000    0.0000
 3/27/84   10.1250    0.3750    11/14/89   8.5000    0.0000       7/6/95   6.0000   -0.2500
 5/22/84   10.5000    0.0000    12/19/89   8.5000   -0.2500      8/22/95   5.7500    0.0000
 7/17/84   11.0000    0.3750      2/7/90   8.2500    0.0000      9/26/95   5.7500    0.0000
 8/21/84   11.5625   -0.0625     3/27/90   8.2500    0.0000     11/15/95   5.7500    0.0000
 10/2/84   11.2500   -0.3750     5/15/90   8.2500    0.0000     12/19/95   5.7500   -0.2500
 11/7/84   10.0000   -0.7500      7/3/90   8.2500   -0.2500      1/31/96   5.5000   -0.2500
12/18/84    8.7500   -0.6250     8/21/90   8.0000    0.0000      3/26/96   5.2500    0.0000
 2/13/85    8.5000    0.0000     10/2/90   8.0000   -0.2500      5/21/96   5.2500    0.0000
 3/26/85    8.5000    0.0000    11/13/90   7.7500   -0.2500       7/3/96   5.2500    0.0000
 5/21/85    8.1250   -0.3750    12/18/90   7.2500   -0.2500      8/20/96   5.2500    0.0000
 7/10/85    7.6250    0.0000      2/6/91   6.7500   -0.5000      9/24/96   5.2500    0.0000
 8/20/85    7.8125    0.0000     3/26/91   6.0000    0.0000     11/13/96   5.2500    0.0000
 10/1/85    7.8750    0.0000     5/14/91   5.7500    0.0000     12/17/96   5.2500    0.0000
 11/5/85    8.0000   -0.0625      7/3/91   5.7500    0.0000
                                                                                                    69

                                           REFERENCES


Barth, Marvin J., III, and Valerie A. Ramey. 2001. "The Cost Channel of Monetary Transmission." NBER
        Macroeconomics Annual 16: 199-240.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov. 1998. "Measuring Monetary Policy." Quarterly Journal of Economics
       113 (August): 869-902.

Boivin, Jean. 2001. "The Fed's Conduct of Monetary Policy: Has It Changed and Does It Matter?"
        Unpublished paper, Columbia University (October).

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. 1996. "The Effects of Monetary Policy
        Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds." Review of Economics and Statistics 78 (February):
        16-34.

Cochrane, John H. 1998. "What Do the VARs Mean? Measuring the Output Effects of Monetary Policy."
       Journal of Monetary Economics 41 (April): 277-300.

De Long, J. Bradford. 1997. "America's Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s." In Reducing Inflation:
      Motivation and Strategy, edited by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (Chicago: University
      of Chicago Press for NBER): 247-276.

Jansson, Per, and Vredin, Anders. 2001. "Forecast-Based Monetary Policy in Sweden 1992-1998: A View
        from Within." Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Number 120 (February).

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 1989. "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the
       Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4: 121-170.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 1994. "Monetary Policy Matters." Journal of Monetary
       Economics 34 (August): 75-88.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2000. “Federal Reserve Information and the Behavior of
       Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 90 (June): 429-457.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 2002. “The Evolution of Economic Understanding and
       Postwar Stabilization Policy.” In Rethinking Stabilization Policy (Kansas City: Federal Reserve
       Bank of Kansas City): 11-78.

Rudebusch, Glenn D. 1995. "Federal Reserve Interest Rate Targeting, Rational Expectations, and the Term
       Structure." Journal of Monetary Economics 35 (April): 245-274.

Sims, Christopher A. 1992. "Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Effects of Monetary
       Policy." European Economic Review 36: 975-1000.

Tufte, Edward. 1978. Political Control of the Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Annual Report. Various years.

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee.
       Various years.
                                                                                                   70

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Transcripts of Federal Open Market Committee.
       Various years.
                                                                                                                       71

                                                     ENDNOTES
1
 The Record of Policy Actions of the Federal Open Market Committee is published in the Annual Report of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. These brief summaries were renamed the Minutes of Federal
Open Market Committee Meetings in 1993. To prevent confusion between the modern, brief Minutes and the very
detailed Minutes for the pre-1976 period, we call the brief summaries the Record of Policy Actions in all periods.
2
  We also have an internal e-mail showing the "intended federal funds rate" from March 1984 to the present, which we
use as a check on our analysis after September 1992. Since the Federal Reserve has been targeting the funds rate so
closely and explicitly since 1987, this check is of little importance.
3
 In addition, a mechanical rule based on the expected funds rate series would not be practical. There are a number of
entries for which the expected rate is missing, and for much of the period a range is given rather than a single number.
Also, for the period before 1987, the expected series is dated by week rather than by the actual day of change.
4
  The horizons are relative to the date of the forecast corresponding to meeting m. That is, if the meeting is in early
July 1980 and the forecast is in late June 1980, the contemporaneous forecast is for the second quarter of 1980. In
computing the forecast innovations, the forecast horizons for meetings m and m-1 are adjusted so that the forecasts
refer to the same quarter.
5
  This procedure obviously destroys some information about when in the month the shock occurred. However, the loss
is not large because the dating of the shock is inherently somewhat imprecise. We use as the input to our analysis
decisions made at FOMC meetings. However, the actual actions may occur as much as two weeks after the decision.
Therefore, one would not want to use our indicator to analyze responses to monetary shocks within such short periods
that the exact days of the shocks are important.
6
  Recording these observations as zeroes is appropriate. Our shock series shows changes in Federal Reserve
intentions for the federal funds rate decided at FOMC meetings that are not systematic responses to forecasts. If
there is no meeting, there is no change in Federal Reserve intentions around an FOMC meeting that is not a response
to forecasts. There is, therefore, a shock of zero by our measure, not a missing observation.
7
  It is important to note that the goal of our regression is not to estimate the Federal Reserve’s reaction function as
well as possible. What we are trying to do is to purge the intended funds rate series of movements that are
correlated with other developments that might affect output and prices in the future. Once we have accomplished
this, it is in fact desirable to leave in as much of the remaining variation in the residuals as possible. It is this
variation that will allow us to identify the relationship between monetary shocks and other economic developments.
The evolution of the behavior of the Federal Reserve is arguably a key source of changes in the intended funds rate
that are not correlated with other developments affecting economic conditions, and so should not be removed from
the shock series.
8
 The scale is different in panels a and b of Figure 1. The new monetary shocks series shows much smaller
movements than either of the broader measures.
9
 The federal funds rate data are from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System website. We use series
RIFSPFF_N.M. We use the change in the monthly average of the funds rate to minimize the effects of extreme day-to-
day variation.
10
  The industrial production data are from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System website. We use
series B50001 in its non-seasonally-adjusted form.
11
   The standard errors are computed by Monte Carlo methods. Specifically, we repeatedly draw coefficients from a
multivariate normal distribution with mean and variance-covariance matrix given by the point estimates and variance-
covariance matrix of the regression coefficients. For each draw, we compute the implied response of output to a
realization of S of 100 basis points. The standard error for the response at month h is then the standard deviation across
the different draws of the estimated responses at month h. The standard errors used in constructing the figures are
based on 500 draws.
                                                                                                                         72

12
   These results are similar in their essentials to those in our earlier work on the real effects of monetary policy
(Romer and Romer, 1989, 1994). In the earlier papers we identified only a very specific type of shock: Federal
Reserve decisions to contract aggregate demand in order to reduce inflation from its current level. We found that
the maximum impact of such a decision on industrial production was a reduction of 12% after 32 months. Like our
new measure, this anti-inflation shock variable is designed to isolate changes in monetary policy not taken in
response to anticipated developments. It is, however, not calibrated as the new measure is, and does not include
positive shocks. The obvious reason that the earlier studies found a larger effect is that the average shock is much
larger: in the seven episodes we identify, the actual monthly funds rate rose an average of 3.6 percentage points
(measured as the difference between the low in the six months before the shock to the high in the six months after
the shock). The finding that the lags with which policy affects output are longer for these shocks than for our new
measure could stem from the fact that important interest rate movements often occurred after the decisions to follow
tighter policy that we identify.
13
   Since it is not plausible that contractionary monetary policy shocks raise output in the short run, restricting the
coefficients on the first two lags to zero is likely to improve the accuracy of estimates of the impact of policy on output.
Imposing this restriction makes the estimated effect somewhat more rapid and larger than before. The estimated
cumulative impact now becomes negative in month 3 rather than month 5. By month 12, the cumulative impact is
 -3.3% (with a t-statistic of 3.8) rather than -2.3% (t = 2.6), and the peak effect is now -5.9% (t = 3.8) rather than -4.8%
(t = 3.5). The estimated effects are statistically significant in months 3 through 34.
14
  The PPI data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics website. We use series WPUSOP3000, not seasonally
adjusted.
15
   As with output, the result that the estimated price effect is slightly positive initially is not important to the results.
Restricting the effects on inflation over the first 8 months to zero changes the estimated impact of a 100-basis-point
monetary shock on the price level after 18 months from +0.1% to -0.4%, and its estimated impact after 48 months from
-5.9% to -6.3%.
16
     The series that we use is the index of world commodity prices from International Financial Statistics.
17
  Restricting the number of lags, as Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans do, has mixed effects. When we reestimate
our basic VAR with only one year of lags, the estimated response of output to a policy shock tracks the response
with three years of lags closely for a year, but then diverges. The response peaks at -1.6% after 12 months; with
three years of lags, in contrast, the estimated effect continues rising through month 22 and reaches a maximum of
-3.2%. Reducing the number of lags has a smaller effect on the estimated response of prices, though again the
estimated impact is smaller when fewer lags are included. These findings suggest that the true response of output
and prices to monetary policy is quite drawn out and that forcing the direct effects to be zero after a year leads to
underestimates of the effects of policy.
18
   Sims (1992), for example, estimates a maximum impact of a 100-basis-point innovation to the funds rate on
industrial production of about one and a half percent. Using real GDP rather than industrial production, Bernanke
and Mihov (1998) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996) find a maximum effect of slightly less than one
percent.
19
  We discuss each FOMC meeting that occurs during our sample period. Some of these intentions, however, do not
end up being used in the estimation of the shock series because there is no corresponding Greenbook forecast with the
appropriate horizon.
