                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DID AMERICAN WELFARE CAPITALISTS
                     BREACH THEIR IMPLICIT CONTRACTS?
          PRELIMINARY FINDINGS FROM COMPANY-LEVEL DATA, 1920-1940

                                            Chiaki Moriguchi

                                          Working Paper 9868
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9868


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




I would like to thank Megan MacGarvie, Erika McCaffrey, and Hilah Geer for their research assistance. I
received valuable comments from Price Fishback, Avner Greif, Ran Abramizky, Lee Alston, Joe Ferrie,
Roger Horowitz, Luojia Hu, Sanford Jacoby, Joel Mokyr, and participants in the DAE spring meeting at the
NBER and economic history seminars at Northwestern University, Stanford University, and University of
California Berkeley. Financial support I received from the Harvard Business School Division of Research
when I was a faculty member is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Chiaki Moriguchi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did American Welfare Capitalists Breach their Implicit Contracts? Preliminary Findings from
Company-level Data, 1920-1940
Chiaki Moriguchi
NBER Working Paper No. 9868
July 2003
JEL No. N32, N82, J32, J50

                                           ABSTRACT

It has been claimed that American employers' experiments in private welfare capitalism collapsed
during the Great Depression and were subsequently replaced by the welfare state and industrial
unionism. However, recent studies reveal considerable differences among firms, adding complex

nuances to a simple story of discontinuation. Characterizing private welfare capitalism as a set of
personnel practices that constituted an implicit contract equilibrium, this paper compiles data of

fourteen manufacturing firms and tests the implications of implicit contract theory. It finds that the
repudiation of implicit contracts was positively correlated with the severity of the depression
experienced by a firm and negatively correlated with the effectiveness of internal enforcement
mechanisms. It also shows that a firm with more repudiation experienced greater change in labor-

management relations under the New Deal regime. A comparative case study complements the
findings by providing quantitative evidence.



Chiaki Moriguchi
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
chiaki@northwestern.edu
1         Introduction

Recent empirical studies have documented that the choice of human resource management
(HRM) practices pertaining to blue-collar employees can have a signiﬁcant impact on labor
productivity (Jones & Kato (1995); Ichniowski, Shaw & Prennushi (1997); Lazear (2000); Knez
& Simester (2001); Kato & Morishima (2002)). HRM policies, including compensation plans,
training and education, job design and assignments, promotion, and more, thus have important
implications for economic eﬃciency and industrial performance. The objective of this paper is
to study the dynamic evolution of HRM practices among American manufacturing ﬁrms from
1920 to 1940 from a contract-theoretic perspective.
        Historians have traced the development of personnel management and internal labor markets
back to the beginning of the twentieth century with the advent of big business (Nelson (1975);
Jacoby (1985)). In particular, the movement known as “private welfare capitalism,” which
refers to employers’ voluntary provision of non-wage beneﬁts, greater employment security, and
employee representation to their blue-collar workers, gradually spread among large industrial
concerns during the ﬁrst three decades of the century. It has been argued, however, that the
experiments in private welfare capitalism had failed during the Great Depression and were
subsequently replaced by the state social welfare and trade unionism under the New Deal regime
(Bernstein (1960); Brandes (1970); Brody (1980)). In this view, an extraordinary economic shock
constituted a suﬃcient condition to mark an end to corporate welfarism: “Three decades after
the New Deal,” observes Brandes (1970), “only vestiges of welfare capitalism remained” (p.30).
        More recently, a growing number of historians have revisited this view, adding richer and
more complex pictures to a simple story of discontinuation and replacement.1 Berkowitz &
McQaid (1988) emphasize the continuing inﬂuence of welfare capitalists into the post-WWII
period which shaped a uniquely American “mixed” social welfare system built upon private
welfarism precedents. Jacoby (1997) observes that not all corporations abandoned their inno-
vative HRM practices during the Great Depression, suggesting substantial heterogeneity across
ﬁrms. In particular, he hypothesizes that employers who implemented welfare capitalism more
wholeheartedly during the 1920s and were less aﬀected by the depression were more likely to

    1
   Berkowitz & McQaid (1980); Zahavi (1988); Nelson (1989); Cohen (1990); Tone (1997); Jacoby (1997); Bordo,
Goldin & White (1998).


                                                     3
maintain their personnel practices and nonunion status (Chapter 1).
      While the welfare capitalism debate has stimulated numerous historical studies, due to the
absence of an analytical framework and systematic measurement, it has been diﬃcult to syn-
thesize evidence across disparate studies. The purpose of this paper is threefold: to introduce a
game-theoretic framework and substantiate Jacoby’s hypothesis; to test the derived implications
using company-level data; and to oﬀer a comparative case study to document internal dynamics.
      Recent applications of game theory to institutions in historical contexts highlight the merit of
modelling an institution as a self-enforcing equilibrium rather than as the rules of the game (Greif
(1993); Greif, Milgrom & Weingast (1994)). In particular, implicit contract theory captures
the essential features of private welfare capitalism and provides a useful tool in examining
strategic interactions between management and workers (Moriguchi (2000, 2003)). First, it
indicates that, when contracts are contingent on unveriﬁable variables (i.e., implicit contracts),
they require internal enforcement mechanisms to be an equilibrium. The theory also implies
the existence of a threshold time discount factor below which it is no longer proﬁtable for
management to maintain implicit contracts. Taken together, managerial decision to breach the
implicit contract is a function of the severity of the depression and the eﬀectiveness of internal
enforcement mechanisms. Second, the theory indicates multiple equilibria in which expectations
of management and workers can play a critical role in an equilibrium selection. In particular,
once mutual trust breaks down and labor-management relations become adversarial, the theory
predicts that implicit contracts would likely be replaced by legally-enforceable (i.e., explicit)
contracts.
      To test the above implications, I compile company-level data from fourteen major welfare
capitalists combining primary and secondary sources.2 The ﬁndings are consistent with the
implications of implicit contract theory. First, holding the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement
constant, a company that was hit harder by the depression was more likely to breach its implicit
contract. Second, holding the severity of the depression constant, the presence of stronger
internal enforcement was associated with a lower degree of repudiation. Lastly, a higher degree
of repudiation was associated with employees’ support for outside unions and the development

  2
    The sample ﬁrms are: Bethlehem Steel, Eastman Kodak, E.I. du Pont de Nemours, Endicott Johnson, Ford
Motor, General Electric, General Motors, Goodyear Tire & Rubber, International Business Machines, Interna-
tional Harvester, Procter & Gamble, Standard Oil of New Jersey, U.S. Steel, and Western Electric of AT&T.


                                                    4
of more explicit union contracts.
        The case study analysis complements the above ﬁndings by providing qualitative details. I
compare the experience of two companies, General Electric and General Motors, which were hit
equally severely by the depression but diﬀered in the extent to which they kept their implicit con-
tracts. The comparative analysis highlights a subtle but important role for internal enforcement
mechanisms that bound managerial actions and helped maintain implicit contractual relations.
This observation is consistent with the recent advances in personnel economics that identify an
important complementarity among HRM practices (McDuﬃe (1995); Ichniowski et al. (1997);
Kato & Morishima (2002)).
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 lays out a game-theoretic framework
and its implications, Section 3 presents company-level data and the main ﬁndings, Section 4
provides a case study analysis, and the ﬁnal section concludes.


2         Conceptual Framework

2.1        Historical Observations

Private welfare capitalism refers to employers’ voluntary provision of beneﬁts and compensation
to their employees apart from those oﬀered under spot contracting. Although the early personnel
movement was often erratic and short-lived, after World War I private welfare capitalism ma-
tured into more substantive and sophisticated HRM policies in the hands of leading employers.3
Throughout the 1920s, private welfare capitalism was conﬁned to a “progressive minority” in
the economy, mainly large ﬁrm in capital-intensive industries. Yet, as Tables 1 and 2 indicate,
it was a sizable and growing minority. By the end of the decade, at least 400 establishments
(or 200 ﬁrms) employing approximately 1.5 million or 15% of production workers in the U.S.
adopted comprehensive corporate welfarism.4 In these establishments, corporate welfarism typi-
cally encompassed the following three areas in HRM: (a) implicit incentive contracts, (b) human
capital investment, and (c) internal enforcement mechanisms (Moriguchi (2003)).
        First, management introduced pecuniary incentive contracts that were contingent on em-

    3
    Slichter (1929); Berkowitz & McQaid (1980), p.56; Jacoby (1985), p.174; Cohen (1990), p.161 and p.430.
    4
    U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (1919); U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics (1928); NICB (1929); and NICB (1934). See Moriguchi (2003) for a detailed discussion.


                                                    5
ployees’ ﬁrm-speciﬁc tenure and other desirable characteristics, such as merit, workmanship, and
loyalty. In these programs (e.g., retirement pension, employee stock ownership, life, health, and
accident insurance, paid vacations, housing plans), employers promised beneﬁts whose amount
increased with an employee’s tenure, but retained discretion to qualify or disqualify employees
on an individual basis. Since the provision of these beneﬁts was voluntary and beyond legal
obligation, management held the right to modify or discontinue the plans altogether if it so de-
sired. In other words, even though these contracts were explicitly spelled out, they were legally
unenforceable and thus implicit contracts.5
      Second, while oﬀering incentive contracts to encourage long service and meritorious behav-
ior, management also invested in the human capital of blue-collar employees. Leading employers
established training programs, provided technical, safety, and health education, and dissemi-
nated practical information through employee magazines and pamphlets. In a typical corporate
apprenticeship program, young employees enrolled in two- to ﬁve-year courses that combined
on-the-job training and in-class instructions and received job oﬀers from their employer upon
graduation with satisfactory performance. The corporate training was tied to a policy of internal
promotion that oﬀered career prospects to production workers based on their merits, skills, and
tenure.6
      Third, large employers instituted various personnel programs to provide internal contract
enforcement (Moriguchi (2003), pp.10-12). To win employees’ loyalty and trust, employers
sponsored a variety of social and recreational activities involving employees and their families.
To establish credible commitment, management formalized HRM programs and announced their
rules, regulations, and operations through bulletin boards, employee handbooks, and employee
magazines. Some employers set up funds for pension plans and committed corporate resources ex
ante to meet future ﬁnancial obligations. To ensure fair and consistent implementation, manage-
ment appointed personnel managers, centralized personnel administration, and kept employee
records. To facilitate bilateral communication and employee involvement, management initiated
suggestion systems, joint committees, and group meetings. In particular, employers introduced
joint administration, whose most formal expression was an employee representation plan (ERP),

  5
    U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (1919), p.11; U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics (1928), p.74; Commons, Lescohier & Brandeis (1935), pp.338-39; Jacoby, p.197.
  6
    Allen (1943); Rumm (1989); Nelson-Rowe (1991); Young & Tuttle (1969); Schacht (1975).


                                                    6
also known as a company union.7 Even though ERPs were by no means collective bargaining
units comparable to trade unions, they provided regular forums for information sharing and
labor-management consultation that previously had been non-existent.8
       Company-speciﬁc evidence indicates that, in a number of instances, corporate welfarism be-
came a mutually binding commitment between management and workers. At Endicott Johnson,
once management introduced corporate welfare policies, they became an “independent code of
just behavior” by which employees judged corporate actions. Managers felt that they could
not abandon the programs “for fear of violating the explicit and implicit expectations” it had
created among employees (Zahavi (1988), p.105 and p.143). At Eastman Kodak, a formula for
its proﬁt-sharing plan was maintained regardless of business conditions, as management was
“deathly afraid” that workers would misunderstand any change as reneging on a deal (Jacoby
(1997), p.79). In general, employers were concerned about an impact on employee morale, pos-
sible labor disputes, and negative consequences for future recruitment that the termination of
personnel programs might trigger (NICB (1931), p.13).


2.2       Implicit Contract Analysis

Based on the above observations, I develop an analytical framework which characterizes corpo-
rate welfarism as a set of HRM practices that could constitute an implicit contract equilibrium.9
Consider a game between an inﬁnitely-lived ﬁrm and over-lapping generations of workers who
live for two periods. I assume that each worker can invest in human capital with a cost that will
increase his labor productivity one period later. The human capital investment, which material-
izes as high employee quality, such as merit and loyalty, is assumed to be non-contractable, i.e.,
observable within the ﬁrm but unveriﬁable by a third-party.10 Suppose that the human capital
investment produces a net surplus. To induce the investment, an employer can design an im-
plicit contract that provides a young worker with an employment guarantee for two periods and

   7
     In ERPs, employee representatives were elected from among blue-collar employees and regularly met with
management representatives to discuss matters of mutual concern, including corporate welfare programs.
   8
     Houser (1927), pp.15-20; Slichter (1929), p.413; Nelson (1982).
   9
     The basic model underlying this framework is a repeated game with non-contractable human capital developed
by Kanemoto & MacLeod (1989), which is modiﬁed and extended for the purpose of historical analysis. See the
theoretical appendix in Moriguchi (2001) for the formal model.
  10
     The level of employees’ output is also assumed to be non-contractable, i.e., even though the quantity of output
can be measured without cost, measuring the quality and other dimensions of the output is assumed to be costly.



                                                         7
promises extra compensation in the second period contingent on his human capital acquisition.
If the game is played only once, anticipating that the employer will renege on the promise once
the investment is sunk, a worker never invests in human capital.
   Under what conditions can the implicit contract be self-enforced? I assume reputation as a
primary enforcement mechanism: an employer’s breach of contract will cause current and future
employees to withdraw cooperation by restraining work eﬀort, stop investing in human capital,
and joining outside unions. The self-enforcement condition requires that the employer’s gain
from appropriating extra compensation today be smaller than the present value of the future
losses resulting from such appropriation.
   I focus on two subgame perfect Nash equilibria of the repeated employment game that re-
semble spot contracting and corporate welfarism, respectively. The Spot Contract Equilibrium
(SCE) is characterized by short-term employment relations, no human capital investment, a
basic wage paid to young and old workers, and low labor productivity. By contrast, the Implicit
Contract Equilibrium (ICE) is characterized by long-term employment relations, extra compen-
sation paid to old workers, high human capital investment, high labor productivity, and internal
enforcement based on reputation.
   The implicit contract theory generates the following implications.
   1. Multiple Equilibria & Coordination: The existence conditions for the equilibria imply that
when the ICE exists the SCE also exists. In the presence of multiple equilibria, management
cannot unilaterally “select” an equilibrium, as its realization will depend on workers’ expecta-
tions. If workers believe that the ﬁrm would not honor its implicit contract, the equilibrium
unravels and degenerates to the spot contracting outcome, fulﬁlling the workers’ original expec-
tations. Therefore, the coordination of expectations and the establishment of mutual trust are
necessary in achieving the ICE.
   2. Complementarity: The theory underscores the importance of internal enforcement mecha-
nisms and indicates a complementarity among diverse HRM practices. In particular, an eﬀective
reputation mechanism requires workers’ ability to monitor management as well as to deter man-
agerial opportunism. In contrast to a common view that management always beneﬁts when
it can “divide and conquer” workers, the implicit contact theory indicates that the ﬁrm may
beneﬁt from empowering employees to a limited degree to establish credible commitment.


                                               8
    3. The Impact of the Great Depression: The theory implies that the ICE is vulnerable to
economic ﬂuctuations. Assume that a depression exogenously shortens the ﬁrm’s time horizon
and lowers its time discount factor. A suﬃciently severe depression will move the ﬁrm’s discount
factor below the “threshold” given by the self-enforcement condition. Note that the threshold
discount factor is decreasing in the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement mechanisms. The theory
thus predicts that (1) a ﬁrm is more likely to repudiate if a depression is deeper holding the
eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement constant, and that (2) a ﬁrm is less likely to repudiate if it
has stronger internal enforcement holding the severity of a depression constant.
    4. The Rise of the Explicit Contract Equilibrium: Lastly, the theory implies that, after
the breakdown of the ICE and the reversion to the SCE, management and labor may advance
an alternative contractual arrangement using third-party enforcement. That is, in the pres-
ence of mutual distrust, the employer and workers may agree to develop contractable proxies
for non-contractable human capital (e.g., seniority, job grades, skill certiﬁcations) and write
legally-enforceable contracts contingent on these proxies. The resulting equilibrium, the Explicit
Contract Equilibrium (ECE) is more eﬃcient than the SCE but generally less eﬃcient than the
ICE.
    The ﬁrst two implications are consistent with the historical observations presented above.
The multiplicity of equilibria, however, is diﬃcult to empirically test due to unobservability
of critical variables, and the same is true for a complementarity across HRM practices. In
the following analysis, I focus on the last two implications, exploring the relationships among
the severity of the depression, the strength of internal enforcement, the repudiation of implicit
contract, and the nature of subsequent labor-management relations.


3      Evidence from Company-level Data

Although there is an extensive literature on American welfare capitalism, existing work tends to
be either comprehensive macro-level studies (Bernstein (1960); Brandes (1970); Brody (1980);
Jacoby (1985); Fairris (1997); Tone (1997)) or in-depth company studies (Ozanne (1967); Fine
(1969); Schatz (1983); Nelson (1988); Zahavi (1988)). Available evidence is predominantly
descriptive and qualitative with the exception of the surveys by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
and the National Industrial Conference Board (BLS (1919, 1928); NICB (1929, 1934)). The

                                                9
survey data, however, are aggregated to the industry or national level and, to my knowledge,
the original questionnaires did not survive.
       In order to test the implications of implicit contract theory, I construct company-level
data combining extensive primary and secondary sources. The sample presently consists of 14
manufacturing companies: Bethlehem Steel (BS), Eastman Kodak (KODAK), Du Pont (DP),
Endicott Johnson (EJ), Ford Motor (FORD), General Electric (GE), General Motors (GM),
Goodyear Tire & Rubber (GTR), International Business Machines (IBM), International Har-
vester Company (IHC), Procter & Gamble (P&G), Standard Oil of New Jersey (SONJ), U.S.
Steel (USS), and Western Electric of AT&T (WE). These ﬁrms were not only well-known propo-
nents of corporate welfarism in the 1920s, but also the largest and most resourceful corporations
in their industries. The sample is deliberately biased towards elite ﬁrms on the assumption that
if there were any that could maintain corporate welfarism during the Great Depression, these
ﬁrms were most likely to have done so. Table 3 reports basic company characteristics, such as
ﬁrm age, size, and capital intensity. Nine of the sample ﬁrms were the members of the Special
Conference Committee (SCC) which was formed by ten business leaders in 1919 to study HRM
practices and exchange information.
       For each company, I measure (1) the extent of corporate welfarism at the end of the 1920s;
(2) the severity of the Great Depression; (3) managerial responses to the depression; and (4)
the changes in labor-management relations under the New Deal. The data are collected from
corporate publications (annual reports, employee magazines, beneﬁt pamphlets) and archives,
trade journals, Moody’s manual of investments, CRSP ﬁnancial data, and NLRB publications.11
Clearly, an ideal unit of observation is an establishment or plant rather than a company, as each
company operated multiple plants and delegated the implementation of HRM practices to plant
managers. Due to the diﬃculty of collecting establishment-level data, I instead use company-
level data and assume that intra-ﬁrm heterogeneity was less than inter-ﬁrm heterogeneity. This
assumption is partially supported by the fact that most HRM programs were designed at the
corporate level and introduced to its establishments.

  11
    All corporate annual reports are available in microﬁlm. Their informational content varies substantially from
company to company. In addition to income statement and balance sheet, some ﬁrms reported their personnel
programs in detail including quantitative data. Most of other corporate publications are located in the Baker
Library at Harvard Business School and the New York Public Library.



                                                       10
3.1    Preliminary Findings

Table 4 documents the extent of corporate welfarism prior to the Great Depression. The ﬁrst
section of the table lists 17 representative HRM practices divided into (a) incentive contracts,
(b) human capital investment, and (c) internal enforcement mechanisms. Each cell reports
whether or not a company had a given program in 1929, and if “yes,” the number of years
the program had been in operation is also reported. If a company had a plan but abolished it
before 1929, the cell reports “no (past).” If a plan was exclusively for white-collar employees, it
enters also as “no.” The symbol “?” indicates a lack of data: a ﬁrm might or might not have
had a program. The comprehensiveness of corporate welfarism is measured by the total number
of personnel programs in operation in 1929. I also measure the substantiveness of corporate
welfarism by estimating corporate expenditures on welfare programs based on annual reports and
other sources.12 Although incomplete, Section II of Table 4 reports (1) total corporate welfare
expenditures in 1929, (2) welfare expenditures per employee, and (3) welfare expenditures as
a percentage of annual payroll. Finally, the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement is measured
by (1) the number of programs categorized under the internal enforcement mechanisms and
(2) the average years of operating major programs (as a proxy for reputation). I refer to the
eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement mechanisms also as the level of “managerial commitment,”
since the presence of stronger internal enforcement through bilateral communication and mutual
monitoring makes it more diﬃcult for management to deviate from the implicit contract.
    To summarize Table 4, BS, IHC, WE, GE, SONJ, and KODAK instituted the most compre-
hensive welfare programs, whereas less comprehensive programs were found at FORD, GM, USS,
EJ, and IBM.13 Most ﬁrms annually spent several million dollars in their personnel programs
pertaining to blue-collar workers. The welfare expenditures at WE, GE, P&G, SONJ, EJ, and
KODAK were particularly high, exceeding 5% of annual payroll or $80 per employee. With re-
spect to the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement mechanisms, I categorize IHC, GTR, GE, DP,
and P&G into the “high commitment” group, as they instituted several internal enforcement

  12
     Details of the estimation are available from the author upon request. All numbers are subject to further
revisions.
  13
     FORD was an early adopter of corporate welfarism but also an early quitter (e.g., its famous proﬁt sharing
plan, the ﬁve dollar day, was introduced in 1914 and abandoned in 1921), whereas IBM was a latecomer that
adopted comprehensive programs in the late 1930s (Meyer (1981); Engelbourg (1976)).




                                                      11
mechanisms including ERPs and had relatively long experience in operating corporate welfarism.
BS and SONJ are also in this group as they instituted a complete set of internal enforcement
mechanisms. By contrast, FORD, GM, USS and IBM belong to the “low commitment” group
as they instituted fewer internal enforcement mechanisms and had relatively short experience in
corporate welfarism.
       Section I of Table 5 documents the severity of the Great Depression measured by the peak-to-
trough decline in (1) net sales, (2) net income to surplus, and (3) common stock price. The data
reveal substantial inter-ﬁrm variation. The companies that were hardest hit by the depression
are FORD, IHC, and WE, as their sales declined by approximately 80% and their proﬁt turned
negative at the trough of the depression. GM, USS, BS, GTR, and GE were the close second with
a 60 to 70% decline in sales and more than a 90% decline in proﬁts. By contrast, the companies
that suﬀered less during the depression are DP, P&G, SONJ, EJ, and KODAK, experiencing
less than a 50% decline in sales. IBM was untouched by the depression.14
       Section II of Table 5 documents managerial responses to the depression. The degree of
the “repudiation” of corporate welfarism is measured by a composite of (1) wage cuts, (2)
employment reductions, (2) the curtailment of HRM programs, and (4) the lack of relief eﬀorts
by management during the depression. All the ﬁrms in the sample instituted worksharing
and maintained the employment level, as well as hourly wages, relatively intact until early
1931. By 1932, however, most ﬁrms launched wage and employment reductions. In particular,
FORD, GM, BS, IHC, GTR, WE, and GE resorted to massive dismissals, cutting 50 to 80%
of their workforce.15 In addition, most ﬁrms discontinued, suspended, or curtailed their HRM
programs. In Table 5, the “discontinuation” refers to the case where a plan was discontinued at
once or permanently suspended, while the “suspension” refers to the case in which a plan was
inactive as of 1934 but reinstated by 1937. The “curtailment” includes a reduction of beneﬁts,
tighter restrictions on eligibility, or increased employee contributions. As ﬁrms often covertly
inactivated or revised their programs, Table 5 likely understates the extent of these incidents.
Nevertheless, the data show that a majority of stock ownership plans, proﬁt-sharing plans,
and housing loans were discontinued. The rate of discontinuation/suspension was particularly

  14
     IBM received a steady stream of rental revenues from business and government oﬃces during the depression
(Engelbourg (1976), p.239).
  15
     IBM was the only company whose employment rose during the depression.


                                                     12
high among FORD, GM, USS, and WE. There were employers who instituted emergency relief
plans during the depression, however. Most notably, BS, GTR, WE, DP, and SONJ provided
dismissal compensation extended to their blue-collar workers, and IHC, GE, P&G, and KODAK
set up private unemployment beneﬁt funds. From the four measures, the “high repudiation”
group consists of GM, FORD, and USS, which are characterized by both the high rate of
discontinuation and the lack of relief eﬀort. The “low repudiation” group consists of P&G,
KODAK, and IBM, which maintained both their programs and employment relatively intact,
as well as DP and SONJ, which discontinued some programs but maintained their workforce
and instituted relief measures. Intermediate cases are BS, IHC, GTR, GE, and WE, which
resorted to mass layoﬀs and discontinued a signiﬁcant fraction of their programs, but engaged
in extensive relief eﬀorts.
      The last section of Table 5 documents the change in labor-management relations under the
New Deal labor laws. When the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) of 1933 recognized
workers’ collective bargaining right, a large number of employers introduced ERPs to meet the
letters of the law. The Wagner Act of 1935 subsequently outlawed ERPs or any employer-
sponsored labor organizations and created a powerful enforcement agency, the National Labor
Relations Board (NLRB). Employers dissolved their ERPs in compliance, but some were recon-
stituted as independent local unions (ILU) unaﬃliated to any national unions. A ﬁerce rivalry
between ILUs and industrial unions ensued in major companies. Eventually, a majority of ILUs
were either disestablished by the NLRB or lost against industrial unions in elections, and the
number of ILUs declined from more than 1,500 in 1935 to less than 300 in 1947.16 I measure
the change in employment relations by (1) union status, (2) the percentage of votes received by
ILUs in representation elections, and (3) the nature of union contracts.
      The samples ﬁrms can be divided into two groups by their union status. The ﬁrst group
was organized by industrial unions by the early 1940s. Within this group, the management
of GE, GM and USS made early and voluntary recognition of the industrial unions in 1936-
37. FORD, BS, IHC, and GTR took more combative stance, but their major plants were
unionized by the CIO by 1941.17 The second group of ﬁrms, by contrast, remained largely

 16
      Mills & Montgomery (1945), p.523 and pp.852–53; Jacoby (2000).
 17
      Harris (1982); Schatz (1979, 1983); Fine (1969); Ozanne (1967); Nelson (1988, 1989).



                                                        13
unorganized by outside unions. At major establishments at WE, DP, and SONJ, their ILUs
received employees’ majority support throughout the 1940s despite the repeated challenges by
the industrial unions.18 All establishments of P&G, KODAK, EJ, and IBM remained nonunion
well into the postwar period.19 Since ILUs were almost always the successors of ERPs, employees’
continuing support of the ILUs after the passage of the Wagner Act can be seen as an indication
of their approval of corporate welfarism. To obtain a ﬁner measure of the employee support, I
report the percentage of votes received by ILUs in the earliest representation elections held by
the NLRB.20 The data show that, even though the industrial unions won a majority, a sizable
proportion of employees (26 to 45%) in BS, IHC, GTR, and GE voted for the ILUs.
       The last row of Table 5 reports the nature of the early contracts signed between management
and unions (the CIO or ILU) at major establishments. Reﬂecting the relatively cooperative na-
ture of union-management relations, early union contracts at GE, P&G, and SONJ were implicit
and discretionary, restating much of the existing corporate personnel policies. By contrast, re-
ﬂecting adversarial union-management relations, the contracts at FORD, GM, and USS were
explicit and detailed, introducing third-party arbitration in case of disputes. According to the
above measures, FORD, GM, and USS underwent a drastic change in their labor-management
relations. WE, DP, P&G, SONJ, EJ, KODAK, and IBM, by contrast, experienced a minimum
change, maintaining their establishment-wide employee representation and other HRM practices.
BS, IHC, GE, and GTR exhibit an intermediate case.


3.2      Interpretation

The above data, though incomplete, reveal considerable heterogeneity among the elite welfare
capitalists. Table 6 summarizes the ﬁndings and ranks the fourteen ﬁrms according to (a)
the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement mechanisms (or the level of managerial commitment),
(b) the severity of the depression, (c) the degree of repudiation, and (d) the change in labor-
management relations under the New Deal. The rank order correlation coeﬃcient between the
degree of repudiation and the change in labor-management relations is 0.87, showing a strong

  18
     Vallas (1993); Retzler (1963); Larson, Knowlton & Popple (1971).
  19
      Feis (1928); Company (1937); Jacoby (1997); Zahavi (1988).
  20
     The results of all NLRB certiﬁed representation elections after 1935 are reported in The Decisions and Orders
by the National Labor Relations Board.



                                                       14
positive correlation between the two. By contrast, the correlation between the severity of the
depression and the change in labor-management relations is positive but weaker (r=0.73). The
correlation coeﬃcient between the level of managerial commitment and the degree of repudiation
is -0.14, indicating that higher commitment per se did not imply less repudiation.21
       The data exhibit three distinct patterns (see Table 7). First, there is a set of ﬁrms, P&G,
DuPont, Standard Oil of New Jersey, and Kodak, that implemented corporate welfare programs
with strong internal enforcement, experienced a relatively mild impact of the depression, and
exhibited a low degree of repudiation. Second, there is a set of ﬁrms, GE, International Har-
vester, Bethlehem Steel, and Goodyear, that also had strong internal enforcement mechanisms in
place, but experienced a serious deterioration of business conditions during the depression, and
exhibited an intermediate degree of repudiation. Third, there is a set of ﬁrms, GM, U.S. Steel,
and Ford, that instituted corporate welfare programs with weak internal enforcement, suﬀered
serious consequences of the depression, and showed a high degree of repudiation.22 Further-
more, the ﬁrst set of ﬁrms is associated with ILUs and the continuation of implicit contractual
relations, whereas the third set of ﬁrms is associated with industrial unions and the adoption
of explicit union contracts. The second set of ﬁrms exhibits an intermediate case: although
these ﬁrms were organized by industrial unions, their ILUs received higher employee support in
representation elections, and resulting union contracts were less explicit and legalistic.
       To summarize, the data show that, for a given level of commitment, the degree of the
repudiation of implicit contracts was greater if the depression was more severe, and for a given
magnitude of the depression, the degree of repudiation was smaller if the level of managerial
commitment was higher. The greater degree of the repudiation of implicit contracts during
the depression was associated with the greater change in labor-management relations under the
New Deal. In summary, the company-level data are consistent with the implications of implicit
contract theory, conﬁrming Jacoby’s original insights.

  21
      One may worry that the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement might be endogenous: i.e., ﬁrms in cyclical
industries may choose a low degree of managerial commitment anticipating downturns. Table 6, however, shows
little correlation between the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement and the severity of the depression (r=0.15).
   22
      There is a fourth set of ﬁrms, IBM and possibly Endicott Johnson, which had relatively weak internal
enforcement and experienced a mild depression, but the data are too incomplete to draw any conclusions.




                                                      15
4     Case Study Analysis

To supplement the quantitative data and investigate the causal relations implied by implicit
contract theory, this section presents a comparative case study of General Electric and General
Motors. Both GE and GM were founding members of the Special Conference Committee, an
exclusive committee specialized in the research of industrial relations policies. Contemporaries
in the 1920s viewed the two companies as leading welfare capitalists, and the severity of the
Great Depression experienced by the two was comparable. Yet, as shown above, they diﬀered
considerably in their responses to the depression and their subsequent experiences in personnel
management. Did the “internal enforcement mechanisms” really matter? Did the “repudiation”
by management aﬀect employees’ beliefs? The following analysis documents internal dynam-
ics that led to the divergent outcomes and conﬁrms the subtle but important role of internal
enforcement mechanisms.


4.1    General Electric

Among the fourteen welfare capitalists, GE implemented one of the most comprehensive wel-
fare programs. At the Schenectady Works, its largest plant, management introduced a non-
contributory pension plan in 1912, a supplementary compensation plan in 1915 (in which 5%
of annual wages were paid to an employee with ﬁve or more years of service), a paid vacation
plan for blue-collar workers in 1917 (which was liberalized in 1929 to give employees one week of
vacation after 3 years of continuous service and two weeks after 10 years of continuous service),
a stock ownership plan and a non-contributory group life insurance plan in 1920 (in which the
company provided an employee with free insurance starting from $500 up to $1,500 depending on
an employee’s length of continuous service). In their visit in 1912, BLS oﬃcials found spacious,
well lit, well ventilated, and clean workrooms as well as a “splendidly equipped” restaurant at
Schenectady (BLS (1913)). The company also maintained a hospital division at each plant,
providing surgical and medical services to their employees free of charge (Duncan (1932), p.81).
    The experience of the 1921 recession prompted GE to increase the ﬁnancial stability of welfare
plans. In 1922, GE set up a pension reserve ﬁnanced by company contributions. It also replaced
the employee stock ownership plan by a savings and investment plan and established the GE
Employees Securities Corporation (GEESC) to centralize investment management. Under the

                                               16
new plan, an employee could purchase ten-year bonds issued by the GEESC paying 6% interest,
to which the company promised to add 2% as long as the original purchaser remained employed
and retained the bonds (Annual Report 1930).23 The GEESC invested its funds in GE stocks
and the securities of major public utilities, and it soon became the largest single holder of GE
common stock. In the late 1920s, consistently over 40% of employees participated in the savings
and investment plan, holding on average $800 to $1,000 worth of bonds (AR 1925-30). In 1924,
the company adopted a corporate-wide housing plan to assist employees to purchase homes (AR
1925).24 In 1928, the company created a pension trust with an initial contribution of $5 million.
In addition, it established a contributory pension plan with a lower retirement age, in which
employees with more than ﬁve years of service were required to participate. By 1929, GE had
accumulated more than $12 million in the pension trust fund, which helped the company keep
its pension plan during the Great Depression without any revisions (AR 1929).
       GE was a leading manufacturer of electrical products both in capital goods (industrial mo-
tors, turbines, generators) and in consumer goods (candescent lamps, refrigerators). At GE’s
main factories in 1930, approximately 25% were skilled workers, 60% were semiskilled workers,
and the rest were unskilled laborers.25 At Schenectady, except for the refrigerator department,
the major divisions that manufactured heavy-current products did not use mass production
technology. In these divisions, work was highly skilled, and emphasis was placed on product
quality rather than quantity. The retention of semiskilled workers was as important as that of
skilled craftsman for GE management. According to a study at the Lynn Works, the cost of
turnover could be higher for the semiskilled than for the skilled, because semiskilled machine
tenders obtained most of their skills through on-the-job training.26 Management believed that
“employees long in the service have acquired experience and greater skill and consequently have
more value” to the company, recognizing a ﬁrm-speciﬁc component of human capital (AR 1928).
       The company had operated formal apprenticeship programs to train skilled mechanics, drafts-
men, designers, and engineers since 1902. At Schenectady and Lynn, the Apprentice School for
grammar-school graduates and the Engineering School for high-school graduates oﬀered exten-

  23
     The 8% interest rate was substantially higher than the risk-free interest rate of 4% at that time.
  24
     The details of this plan are not clear, but it was not large-scale: by 1929 only 2,500 homes had been ﬁnanced
through this plan and 3% of employees had been assisted.
  25
     Schatz (1979), p.588.
  26
     Alexander (1914); Alexander (1916).


                                                       17
sive training courses.27 They combined practical training in the shop with classroom instruction
given by full-time company instructors. Each apprentice was paid low wages during the program
and awarded a bonus at its completion contingent on satisfactory performance.28 Upon gradua-
tion, the company oﬀered jobs to qualiﬁed graduates as far as business conditions permitted.29
The company viewed the apprentice system as a means not merely to increase supply of skilled
labor, but also to foster favorable employer-employee relations, instill diligence and loyalty, re-
duce labor turnover, and identify potential foremen and supervisors. According to Nelson-Rowe
(1991), GE retained 38% of its 1903-17 apprentice graduates as its employees in 1921, and 28%
of them in 1931. Almost 75% of the apprentice graduates subsequently moved into skilled oc-
cupations and supervisory positions at GE and other companies. Notably, the graduates who
remained at GE in 1931 were 3.5 times as likely to be promoted to foreman and beyond than
those who worked for other employers (pp.40-1). In addition to the apprenticeship system,
there were electrical courses and business training courses for high school graduates, business
and factory training for college graduates, and foremen training courses.30
      At GE, employees were actively involved in personnel programs. The company instituted a
safety committee at every shop by the late 1910s. A formal suggestion system was introduced
in 1922, accepting suggestions for improving working conditions and the safety and eﬃciency of
manufacturing. Monetary awards were given to the suggestions that led to “tangible savings”
to the company, and to ensure fairness, employee representatives were present when sugges-
tions were reviewed. In a typical year, GE employees made more than 16,000 suggestions, and
management adopted 30% of them and awarded a total of $60,000 (AR 1928-1930, 1942). To
facilitate employer-employee communication, the company issued a monthly employee magazine,
General Electric News, at each plant since the 1910s. The magazine reported a summary of ERP
meetings and even reprinted the balance sheet and income account of the GEESC.31 The com-
pany distributed employee handbooks and beneﬁt pamphlets that clearly laid out the rules and
regulations of welfare plans, notifying workers of any revisions. In a characteristic manner, the
company pension pamphlet tabulated expected pension beneﬁts according to weekly earnings

 27
    In 1912, 400 apprentices were enrolled in four-year training courses at Schenectady alone (BLS (1913)).
 28
    The bonus was, if paid in full, $100 for the four-year courses and $75 for the three-year courses in 1924.
 29
    The Apprentice System, West Lynn (1924); Nelson-Rowe (1991), pp.36-8.
 30
    Duncan (1932), pp.41-53.
 31
    General Electric News, April 6, 1928, Schenectady, GE.


                                                       18
and years of service for a clear exposition.32 At each plant, employees sponsored recreational
activities, such as athletic teams and social gatherings, with company assistance.
      At GE, the ﬁrst ERP was introduced at Lynn in 1918 under the auspices of the War La-
bor Board. At Schenectady no ERP was introduced until 1924 due to employees’ opposition.
While they shared the same basic principle, the details of the ERPs diﬀered from plant to
plant. At the Erie Works, the ERP consisted of six joint committees with equal numbers of
employee and management representatives in (1) administration of the ERP and elections, (2)
mutual adjustment of wages and working conditions, (3) eﬃciency, economy and suggestions,
(4) safety, (5) athletics, heath and entertainment, and (6) education. The plan thus facilitated
joint employer-employee administration in major HRM programs. Regular meetings of the ERP
were held monthly and the minutes of meetings were posted on bulletin boards.33 Since most
welfare beneﬁts were determined based on the length of continuous service, a policy concerning
discharge and layoﬀ became an important issue. While giving foremen full authority, the ERP
at Erie explicitly protected employees’ right to appeal to the joint committee decisions con-
cerning transfers, layoﬀs, or discharges in case of workforce reductions. The industrial service
department kept suitable records to protect employees’ continuity of service.34
      Interviewing managers and workers at Lynn two years after the introduction of the ERP,
Morrow (1921) reported that, although various criticisms and concerns were voiced, there was a
shared opinion that the ERP provided communication channels between employees and manage-
ment; trained employee and company representatives to base their judgments on fact; acquainted
management with actual conditions in the plant; educated employees along economic lines; and
increased production. Although management retained the ﬁnal say, out of 476 cases handled by
the joint committees during 1919-25, 205 cases or 43% were settled in favor of employees (Burton
(1926), p.270). Based on his ﬁrst-hand observations at Schenectady, Milton Derber noted that
initially the plan was simply a “sounding board” for management policy, but “as realization
[among workers] grew that no more eﬀective means of representation was near, eﬀorts were
made to utilize and extend the plan.”35 During the 1920s, employee representatives played an

 32
    GE Group Life Insurance Plan (1929); GE Pension Plan (1929); and GE Additional Pension Plan (1929).
 33
    Plans of Representation of Employees, Erie Works (1920).
 34
    The Lynn Plan of Representation (1923); GE Information and Rules for Employees (1922).
 35
    Chapter 14 written by Derber in Millis (1942), p.749.



                                                  19
increasingly active role in communicating employees’ viewpoints to management, which resulted
in the adoption or modiﬁcation of several programs upon employee initiative.36
       Reﬂecting the comprehensive HRM programs in place, GE’s welfare expenditures were non-
trivial. According to my estimate, in the late 1920s, the company annually spent $7 to $10
million or 5.3 to 6.4% of total payroll on these programs, which amounted to more than $100
per employee.37 During the 1920s, the company reported low employee turnover and no labor
disputes, which management attributed largely to its HRM policies. At the end of the 1910s,
turnover was over 50% at major GE plants; as the layoﬀs of the 1921 depression cut back the
workforces to core employees, turnover fell by half in 1922, and it remained low for the rest of
the decade. In 1928, 58% of GE employees had more than ﬁve years of continuous service and
26% had more than twenty years of service at the company (AR 1928). The company also ex-
perienced a decline in accident rates during the 1920s: at Schenectady, the number of lost-time
accidents per man-year fell by a factor of ten between 1914 and 1926 (Wise (n.d.), p.283).
       The electrical industry was hard hit by the Great Depression, recording a 76% peak-to-trough
decline in production. At GE, between 1929 and 1933, total sales declined by 67%, net income
by 80%, and stock price by 91%. Although GE managed to remain in the black throughout
the 1930s, after paying dividends to stockholders the company recorded deﬁcits every year from
1931 to 1934 (AR 1929-34). During the depression, management tried to protect the “corps of
skilled and loyal employees” in which the company had invested during the previous decades
(Schatz (1983), pp.58-60). Management instituted worksharing to prevent large-scale layoﬀs and
engaged in an extensive relief eﬀort. In 1930, after conferring with employee representatives, the
company announced an employment stabilization program. At its core was an unemployment
pension plan, which operated under the principle of equal contribution and joint administration
between management and employees.38 For the ﬁrst two years of the depression, despite a 50%
decline in sales, GE maintained 75% of its workforce using extensive worksharing and intraﬁrm
transfers as well as its wages and beneﬁts.

  36
     Morrow (1921); Millis (1942), p.750; AR 1927; Hirao (1998), Chapter 6.
  37
     The estimate is based on GE annual reports, company magazines, and beneﬁt pamphlets. It includes corporate
expenses for pensions, supplementary compensation, group life insurance, savings and investment plan, paid
vacation, suggestion plan, and employee magazines. I ﬁnd no data for training and education, ERPs, medical
services, recreational activities, and administrative costs. The expenditures are net of employee contributions,
and any plans pertaining only to white-collar employees are excluded.
  38
     GE Unemployment Pension Plan (1930).


                                                      20
      In late 1931, however, the company announced a 10% wage cut breaking its earlier pledge
to President Hoover. By 1933, the workforce was reduced to less than one half the 1929 size.
According to the company rules, employees who had been laid oﬀ for more than 12 months lost
their continuous service records.39 Moreover, GE discontinued the home-mortgage assistance
and suspended the 5% supplementary compensation for blue-collar employees, while keeping
extra compensation for salaried employees, and cancelled paid vacations (AR 1932-33; Schatz
(1983), p.60). The company also revised the savings and investment plan to lower its interest
payments. Accordingly, estimated welfare expenditures at GE declined from $10 million in 1931
to $6 million in 1933. Workers were deeply disturbed by reduced earnings, depression layoﬀs,
and discontinued beneﬁts (Millis (1942), p.751). In addition, as the depression deepened, HRM
plans that had satisﬁed employees in the expansive economy began to invite resentment. For
example, the policy that weighed merit and family need as well as seniority in determining
layoﬀs caused little diﬃculty in the 1920s, but discontent ﬂared during the depression (Schatz
(1983), p.61). Similarly, employees with more than ﬁve years of service were required to enroll
in the additional contributory pension and group life insurance plans. Although the employees
largely welcomed these arrangements in the 1920s, premium payments became a burden as their
earnings declined 30% during the depression.
      Stimulated by this discontent, a group of workers at Schenectady and other plants secretly
started unions around 1932. With the passage of the NIRA in 1933, these unions came out and
began organizing GE employees in earnest. In response, management renamed the existing ERPs
“Workers Councils” and withdrew management representatives. As the business recovered,
the company gave increasing concessions to workers through Workers Councils, such as wage
increases, new overtime pay, and the restoration of supplementary compensation for blue-collar
workers. Even after the passage of the Wagner Act in 1935, the Schenectady Workers Council
received 86% of employees’ votes in a company-held representation election. The union at
Schenectady, a local of the CIO-aﬃliated United Electrical and Radio Workers of America
(UE), challenged the election result and ﬁled a petition with the NLRB in 1936. Contrary
to wildly-held expectations, the UE local won the election against the Workers Council with
5,111 to 4,033 votes (56% to 44%). The Workers Council was disbanded three days later. Top

 39
      GE Information and Rules for Employees (1922).



                                                       21
management of GE subsequently decided voluntarily to accept the UE at the corporate-level,
which took even union oﬃcials by surprise (Millis (1942), p.751; Schatz (1983), p.63).
      Despite the corporate acceptance, the UE had diﬃculty organizing GE workers. By 1938,
seven establishments employing about 30,000 workers were unionized, but more than 45,000
workers remained nonunion. After the 1937 Supreme Court’s decision validating the Wagner
Act, Workers Councils at GE became independent local unions (ILUs) and kept challenging the
UE in representation elections. Contemporaries noted employees’ loyalty to the company as
the major obstacle to unionization. The extensive beneﬁt plans, provided with “a minimum of
paternalistic spirit” and combined with a variety of social and recreational facilities, had made
“unusually diﬃcult the union task of binding its membership into a cohesive unit,” observed
Derber.40 In fact, although GE’s welfare expenditures declined by 40% from 1929 to 1933,
according to my estimate, the company still spent $6 million every year between 1933 and 1936,
$2 million of which were unemployment beneﬁt disbursements. As GE management restored
supplementary compensation in 1934 and paid vacations in 1935, and introduced a cost-of-living
adjustment plan in 1937, corporate welfare expenditures at the end of the 1930s surpassed the
pre-depression level.
      Even though the economic crisis and unionization process strained labor-management rela-
tions at GE, its HRM policies showed strong continuity before and after the depression. The
ﬁrst GE-UE contract signed in 1938 was, in principle, a restatement of existing corporate HRM
practices. During contact negotiations, the UE proposed that management convert a company
booklet into a one-year national contact with minor changes, to which management agreed. The
contract was drafted without the aid of lawyers on either side, as “neither party had the slight-
est intention of going to court to seek interpretation or enforcement of the contract,” and was
simple and short, only six-page long.41 The corporate welfare programs pertaining to blue-collar
workers, such as group insurance, paid vacations, and supplementary compensation, continued
with little or no modiﬁcation. One important change was in the application of seniority: as
the union pressed for seniority preference to protect union oﬃcials, the seniority principle was
applied with growing strictness at GE, and the burden of proving that ability and other factors

 40
      Millis (1942), p.759.
 41
      Matles & Higgins (1974), pp.83-8.



                                               22
outweighed the length of service fell increasingly upon management (Millis (1942), pp.752-5).
Another signiﬁcant change was brought about by the Social Security Act. As the Act insti-
tuted federal pensions and state unemployment insurance, the company de facto discontinued
its non-contributory pension plan for blue-collar employees and also terminated the unemploy-
ment pension plan (AR 1935-36). These changes notwithstanding, corporate welfarism based
on implicit contracts and cooperative employer-employee relations continued to characterize GE
throughout the 1930s.


4.2    General Motors

To contemporaries, General Motors was also a leading welfare capitalist in the 1920s. The com-
pany operated a large-scale housing program as early as in 1910. Through subsidiary companies,
GM built and sold houses to employees at cost less a liberal allowance. The company’s annual
investment in these subsidiary companies exceeded $10 million in the late 1920s (AR 1925-30).
The company introduced a bonus plan in 1918 (under which a ﬁxed percentage of proﬁt was
set aside to reward employees for “conspicuous service”) and a savings and investment (S & I)
plan in 1919. The 1921 recession, during which GM recorded a loss of $38 million, however,
led to the curtailment of the programs. Management limited the eligibility of the bonus plan
to employees with annual salary of $5,000 and above, excluding all blue-collar employees, and
reduced the employer contribution to the S & I plan by one half.
   Under the amended S & I plan, an employee could make an annual deposit up to $300 into
a savings fund that would bear 6% interest. The corporation would contribute an amount equal
to 50% of the employee’s savings to a separate investment fund, which would be invested in GM
common stock. The entire amount in the investment fund was credited to the employee after ﬁve
years if he remained employed and kept his savings undisturbed. Employees could apply their
savings to home mortgage payments under the GM housing plan without losing any beneﬁts.
Forfeitures in the investment funds due to withdrawals before maturity or separation from the
company would revert to the company. To reduce ﬁnancial risk, the company guaranteed to
employees a minimum beneﬁt equal to 50% of their original savings, and the beneﬁt was paid
in cash and common stocks. During the 1920s, the plan proved to be highly proﬁtable for both
the employer and employees thanks to capital appreciation. The returns to savings made in the


                                             23
early 1920s regularly surpassed 300%. Accordingly, the number of employees participating in
the S & I plan increased dramatically, exceeding 70% of the GE workforce at the end of the
1920s. The percentage of employees receiving beneﬁts at maturity was much smaller but also
increasing: in 1930 approximately 12% of employees received average payments of $435 for the
initial savings of $124. Of the deposits made in 1925, one-third were withdrawn before maturity
and two-thirds remained intact (AR 1920-30). In addition to the S & I plan, GM established an
employee stock ownership plan in 1924 under which the company paid $2 per share purchased
by employees for ﬁve years as a special inducement. In 1927, management introduced a joint-
contributory group insurance plan that assisted employees with more than three months of
service to purchase $1,000 life insurance policies. After 1929 the plan was expanded to include
increased death beneﬁts and health and non-occupational accident beneﬁts. In 1929, 99% of
eligible employees participated in the plan, receiving on average $18 of insurance payments for
death, permanent disability, sickness, and injury (AR 1924-29).
   Since the early 1920s, GM was involved in training autoworkers in Flint. In sponsoring
education programs for blue-collar workers, the company emphasized two objectives: to oﬀer
practical courses and to identify and train “promising young men” for future leadership positions.
In 1922, the company began oﬀering four-year apprenticeship programs at the Flint Institute
of Technology, in addition to executive and sales training courses. By 1926, the Institute was
renamed the General Motors Institute of Technology (GMI) and incorporated as a nonproﬁt
educational institution, extending its service to other GM divisions. The number of students
enrolled in the GMI reached 11,477 in 1928, and the school continued to operate throughout the
Great Depression, although its total registration fell from 9,933 in 1930 to 2,150 in 1932 (Young
& Tuttle (1969), pp.26-33 and p.61). It is worth noting that less than 20% of the workers in the
U.S. automobile industry were engaged in assembly-line operations in the late 1920s. According
to the 1930 Census of Manufacturing, 24% of wage earners in the industry were skilled and 74%
were semiskilled or unskilled. In 1935, 24% of GM employees in Flint were skilled mechanics,
machinists, or blacksmiths, and 55% were semiskilled operators (Fine (1969), p.54).
   In sharp contrast to GE, GM adopted few policies to facilitate labor-management communi-
cation and employee involvement during the 1920s. The company adopted no ERP prior to the
passage of the NIRA, and foremen assumed the primary responsibility for adjusting individual



                                               24
grievances at each plant before 1933. The company’s ﬁrst employee magazine was published in
1930. It was only in 1934 when the ﬁrst director of the industrial relations department was ap-
pointed in the central oﬃce, and not until 1937 were personnel programs centralized in a single
department at GM (Fine (1969), p.28). Although management claimed that it had been a cor-
porate policy to encourage suggestions from employees, a formal suggestion system comparable
to GE’s was established only in 1942 (AR 1942-43). According to my estimate, in the late 1920s,
GM spent annually $4 to $9 million on HRM programs, which was on average 2% of its annual
payroll or $40 per employee.42 The reasons for the lower corporate welfare expenditures per
employee at GM compared to GE are twofold. First, GM instituted fewer programs pertaining
to blue-collar employees. For example, the company did not have pension or paid vacation plan,
and its supplementary compensation plan was restricted to higher-income employees. Second,
many of the programs were joint-contributory, in which employees shared part of the cost.
       The automobile industry was as hard hit by the Great Depression as the electrical industry,
recording a 74% decline in the level of production. At GM, total sales declined by 71% and
the stock price by 90% during 1929-33. Like GE, GM also remained in the black throughout
the depression, but dividend payments far exceeded net income in 1931 and 1932. In 1932, the
company paid no executive bonuses and cut back its dividends on common stock from $3.00 to
$1.25 (AR 1932). During the ﬁrst year of the depression the company laid oﬀ one-fourth of its
workers, and, by the end of 1932, 50% of GM workers lost their jobs. Compared to GE, GM
reduced its workforce more quickly without resorting to extensive worksharing and instituted
no corporate-wide relief programs.
       In 1930, management discretely discontinued the stock subscription plan, although it kept
paying the special inducement for those who had already subscribed. In the same year, facing the
collapse of its stock price, the company dropped the clause in the S & I plan that guaranteed the
payments at maturity equal to 50% of the original deposit (AR 1930-35). In 1931, management
emphasized that the S & I plan was serving as an emergency reserve for employees, observing
that employees had withdrawn $35 million from the S & I funds during 1930-31 (AR 1931;
Fine (1969), p.26). By 1932, total withdrawals reached $78 million, at which point management

  42
    The estimate is based on GM annual reports and includes the cost of operating the S & I plan, stock ownership
plan, group insurance plan, and medical and health services. No data is available for the housing program, training
and education, recreational activities, and administrative costs.


                                                        25
announced the suspension of the S & I plan. In the same year, reporting an increasing number of
cancellations of housing contracts and employees’ inability to maintain payments, the company
stopped building houses and began to liquidate its housing investment.43 The S & I plan was
resumed in August 1933, but the corporation contribution was curtailed to 25% from 50% and
interest was lowered to 5% from 6%. In the early 1930s, forfeitures in the investment fund rose
dramatically. For instance, 82% of employees who had participated in the plan in 1928 did not
receive beneﬁts because they either made early withdrawals or were laid-oﬀ. Since all forfeited
beneﬁts reverted to the company, ironically the corporation made a proﬁt from the S & I plan
in 1933 and 1935 (AR 1928-36). Reﬂecting these changes, estimated welfare expenditures at
GE fell from over $9 million in 1931 to less than $2 million (or 0.7% of its annual payroll)
on average during 1933-36. According to Fine (1969), during the depression years there were
increasingly bitter complaints from workers: some lost their GM homes because they could not
maintain their payments; others felt that the S & I plan was a “big detriment” to them because
the principal beneﬁt was lost when they lost their jobs; and, above all, employees resented the
fact that they had no say in the administration of welfare programs and that management could
unilaterally change or abandon them whenever it saw ﬁt.44
      The process of unionization at GM was bitter and confrontational. Management decided
to introduce ERPs immediately after the passage of the NIRA in 1933. The plan was drafted
and distributed to its divisions, and modiﬁed according to divisions’ needs. The ERPs, named
“Employee Associations,” were then inaugurated without submitting them to workers for ap-
proval. In his careful assessment, Fine (1969) observes that the ERPs established a mechanism
through which management was made aware of employee grievances for the ﬁrst time, contribut-
ing to some improvements in working conditions (p.44). Management also developed a foremen
course at the GMI to help implement the ERPs. The company’s eﬀort to facilitate bilateral
communication and encourage employee involvement, however, came too late: a majority of
GM employees deemed the ERPs managerial instruments; for many supervisors, the concept of
employee representation was “diﬃcult to accept wholeheartedly” as it was a drastic departure
from traditional methods (Young & Tuttle (1969), p.63).

 43
      By 1939 GM completely divested from the subsidiary housing companies.
 44
      Fine (1969), p.26, citing workers’ testimony at the Congressional Hearings.




                                                        26
       In the meantime, the United Automobile Workers of America (UAW) began organizing GM
plants. Before 1936, however, the union had little success meeting managerial opposition. In
December 1936, GM workers at Flint occupied plant production facilities, which developed into
the famous sit-down strike that lasted for six weeks. In a concurrent development, congressional
hearings led by the La Follette Committee discovered illegal antiunion practices conducted by
GM management since 1933.45 As the ﬁndings were widely publicized, the reputation of GM as
a welfare capitalist fell apart. Even though the sit-down strike was eﬀectively an illegal seizure
of private property, state government oﬃcials did not intervene despite the company’s request.
In February 1937, GM ﬁnally agreed to recognize the UAW as a bargaining agency in 17 plants,
and the ﬁrst GM-UAW contract was signed in March 1937. The principal feature of the contract
was an elaborate grievance procedure that was spelled out in great detail.46 Through this formal
grievance mechanism, workers secured their voice in wages, hours, job analysis, and production
speed. UAW oﬃcials also won a stricter application of seniority rules in layoﬀ and rehiring.
In the 1938 NLRB certiﬁed election held at the Chevrolet plant, only 3% of GM employees
voted against industrial unions. In 1940 alone, the UAW won representation at 48 GM plants
employing 120,000 workers (Fine (1969), pp.323-9).
       The Great Depression and New Deal legislation brought about a discontinuous change in
HRM policies and employer-employee relations at GM. After 1935, the only welfare program
pertaining to blue-collar employees in operation at GM was the group insurance plan. The S & I
plan was discontinued in 1935 due to “uncertainty concerning legal requirements under the Social
Security Act and the Securities Act” (AR 1935-36). A notable exception was the introduction
of an income security and layoﬀ beneﬁt plan for factory workers in 1939. Despite its promising
name, the plan merely provided interest-free advances to employees with more than ﬁve years
of service who were aﬀected by business conditions, and the advances were to be deducted
from employees’ future wages. The plan was discontinued in 1942.47 Accordingly, welfare

  45
     According to the ﬁndings of the Committee, GM employed 14 detective agencies for extensive labor espionage
against unions; between 1933 and 1936 the company spent more than $1 million on espionage, strikebreaking,
and munitions (U.S. Senate, Committee on Education and Labor (1937)).
  46
     Agreement between General Motors Corporation and the International Union of United Automobile Workers
of America, February 11, 1937, and March 12, 1937, Box 9, Non-current Collective Bargaining Agreements Files
6030, Labor-Management Documentation and Archives, Cornell University.
  47
     During the two years of its operation, the average amount of annual advances received by qualiﬁed employees
was a mere $40.



                                                      27
expenditures at GM remained below the pre-depression level throughout the late 1930s and the
early 1940s. By contrast, GM established a pension plan and a separation allowance plan in
1940 both exclusively for salaried employees (AR 1940-42). In other words, there was a growing
diﬀerence between the treatment of white-collar workers and blue-collar workers within the
company. While GM maintained implicit contractual relations with its white-collar employees,
labor-management relations at the shopﬂoor evolved towards explicit contracts and industrial
jurisprudence in the 1940s.


4.3    Discussion

The comparative analysis of General Electric and General Motors conﬁrms the role of internal
enforcement mechanisms implied by the implicit contract theory. In the absence of eﬀective
labor-management communication and monitoring mechanisms, GM management could and
did unilaterally revise or discontinue its major pecuniary programs during the depression. By
contrast, at GE, most changes in personnel programs were made upon consultation with employ-
ees. Similarly, GM’s ERPs were introduced in haste after the NIRA and received little support
from employees during the unionization process. ERPs at GE, by contrast, were in place since
the 1920s and continued to receive substantial employee support throughout the 1930s. By
the early 1940s, adversarial labor relations at GM resulted in the development of detailed and
explicit union contracts, while relatively cooperative labor-management relations at GE led to
the continuing adoption of more implicit and discretionary contracts.
   The case study analysis also provides new insights that merit further theoretical and empir-
ical investigations. The analysis so far takes an initial commitment to corporate welfarism as
given. Why did GE and GM choose a diﬀerent degree of corporate commitment in the 1920s?
Was GE management simply benevolent, while GM management was opportunistic? Although
diﬀerence in CEOs’ personality – Gerard Swope and Alfred P. Sloan Jr. – is a plausible hypoth-
esis, economic theory provides an alternative hypothesis. The implicit contract theory indicates
that, if a ﬁrm is motivated by long-run human capital investment that is non-contractable,
management has an incentive to adopt comprehensive corporate welfarism including internal
enforcement mechanisms. If a ﬁrm provides beneﬁts and services motivated primarily by im-
mediate economic opportunities arising from incomplete markets, however, management would


                                              28
not invest in internal enforcement mechanisms.
    Observe that skill compositions of production workers at the two companies were similar
(24-25% skilled and 55-60% semi-skilled in 1930) and their capital-labor ratios were comparable
(see Table 3). Anecdotal evidence, however, suggests that the skills and knowledge possessed
by GE workers might have been more ﬁrm-speciﬁc and more indispensable than those of GM
workers. In other words, the nature of the human capital and its substitutability may explain
the diﬀerence in the mix of HRM programs and the level of commitment chosen by employers.
Further examination of this hypothesis is left to future work.


5    Concluding Remarks

Did American welfare capitalists breach their implicit contracts during the Great Depression?
In this paper, I document that some did but some did not and investigate the reason for the
disparate managerial responses. The company-level data and comparative case study show that,
in addition to the severity of the Great Depression, the eﬀectiveness of internal enforcement
mechanisms was an important factor in explaining the observed heterogeneity, conﬁrming the
predictions of implicit contract theory.
    In interpreting the ﬁndings in a broader historical context, recall that the fourteen compa-
nies studied in this paper were among the largest and most resourceful employers in the U.S.
Therefore, the ﬁrms, such as DuPont, Procter & Gamble, and Standard Oil of New Jersey,
which maintained their HRM practices throughout the depression, were exceptions rather than
norms. In other words, it was General Motors and U.S. Steel that represented the experience of
a majority of large American ﬁrms during the depression. After the La Follette Committee in-
vestigation and the sit-down strike, GM in particular came to symbolize the “collapse” of private
welfare capitalism, reinforcing a popular belief that corporate welfarism was mere antiunionism
that had little to do with the improvements of employees’ welfare.
    After the Supreme Court’s decisions to uphold the Wagner Act and the Social Security Act, it
became harder even for the welfare capitalists who had endured the depression to continue their
HRM policies. The fall of private welfare capitalism, or the perception thereof, and the ensuing
shift in the legal framework together created path dependence in the course of institutional



                                               29
development (Moriguchi (2000)). By the 1960s, the American industrial relations system was
characterized by legalism and adversarial labor-management relations commonly referred to as
industrial jurisprudence. This is not to say that corporate welfarism had disappeared, as large
unionized ﬁrms reintroduced the provision of welfare beneﬁts and job security based on ﬁnely
deﬁned seniority rights after WWII. The nature of private welfare capitalism, however, was
transformed from implicit to explicit contractual relations during the process. Only in the 1980s
and 1990s, did “innovative” HRM practices characterized by implicit contracts, employment
security, discretionary corporate beneﬁts, and joint labor-management committees, spread again
among American manufacturing ﬁrms.




                                               30
References
Alexander, M. (1914), ‘Waste in hiring and discharging men’, Iron Age 94, 1032–1033.
Alexander, M. (1916), ‘Hiring and ﬁring: Its economic waste and how to avoid it’, Annals of the American
    Academy of Political and Social Science 40, 130.
Allen, H. (1943), The House of Goodyear: A Story of Rubber and Modern Business, Corday & Gross
     Company, Cleveland.
Berkowitz, E. & McQaid, K. (1980), Creating the Welfare State, Praeger, New York.
Bernstein, I. (1960), The Lean Years: A History of the American Worker, 1920-1933, Houghton Miﬄin;
    Boston, Boston.
Bordo, M., Goldin, C. & White, E. (1998), The Deﬁning Moment: The Great Depression and the Amer-
    ican Economy in the Twentieth Century, University of Chicago Press.
Brandes, S. (1970), American Welfare Capitalism, 1880-1940, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Brody, D. (1980), Workers in Industrial America, Oxford University Press, New York.
Cohen, L. (1990), Making A New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919-1939, Cambridge University
    Press.
Commons, J. R., Lescohier, D. & Brandeis, E. (1935), History of Labor in the United States, 1896-1932,
   MacMillan Company; New York.
Company, P. . G. (1937), The Procter and Gamble Company: History and Information.
Duncan, M. (1932), Personnel Practices of Two Electrical Equipment Companies with Reference to
    Employee Training and Welfare, PhD thesis, University of Pittsburgh.
Engelbourg, S. (1976), International Business Machines: A Business History, Arno Press.
Fairris, D. (1997), Shopﬂoor Matters: Labor-Management Relations in Twentieth-Century American
     Manufacturing, Routledge, New York.
Feis, H. (1928), Labor Relations: A Study Made in the Procter and Gamble Company, Adelphi Company.
Fine, S. (1969), Sit-down: The General Motors Strike of 1936-1937, University of Michigan Press, Ann
     Arbor.
Greif, A. (1993), ‘Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade: The maghribi traders’
     coalition’, American Economic Review 83(3), 525–548.
Greif, A., Milgrom, P. & Weingast, B. (1994), ‘Coordination, commitment, and enforcement: The case
     of the merchant guild’, Journal of Political Economy 102(4), 745–776.
Harris, H. (1982), The Right to Manage: Industrial Relations Policies of American Business in the 1940s,
    University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
Hirao, T. e. a. (1998), Amerika Daikigyo to Rodosha (Big Business and Workers in the United States in
    the 1920s), Hokkaido Daigaku Tosho Kankokai.
Houser, J. D. (1927), What The Employer Thinks: Executives’ Attitudes Toward Employees, Harvard
    University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ichniowski, C., Shaw, K. & Prennushi, G. (1997), ‘The eﬀects of human resource management practices
     on productivity: A study of steel ﬁnishing lines’, American Economic Review 87, 291–313.
Jacoby, S. (1985), Employing Bureaucracy: Managers, Unions, and the Transformation of Work in
    American Industry, 1900-1945, Columbia University Press, New York.


                                                   31
Jacoby, S. (1997), Modern Manors: Welfare Capitalism since the New Deal, Princeton University Press,
    Princeton, NJ.
Jacoby, S. (2000), A road not taken: Independent local unions in the united states since 1935, in B. Kauf-
    man & D. Taras, eds, ‘Nonunion Employee Representation’, M. E. Sharpe, Armonk, NY.
Jones, D. C. & Kato, T. (1995), ‘The productivity eﬀects of employee stock-ownership plans and bonuses:
    Evidence from Japanese panel data’, American Economic Review 85(3), 391–414.
Kanemoto, Y. & MacLeod, B. (1989), ‘Optimal labor contract with non-contractible human capital’,
    Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 3, 385–402.
Kato, T. & Morishima, M. (2002), ‘The productivity eﬀects of participatory employment practices:
    Evidence from new Japanese panel data’, Industrial Relations 41(4), 487–520.
Knez, M. & Simester, D. (2001), ‘Firm-wide incentives and mutual monitoring at continental airlines’,
    Journal of Labor Economics 19(4), 743–772.
Larson, H., Knowlton, E. & Popple, C. (1971), History of Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) V.3: New
    Horizons 1927-1950, Harper & Row.
Lazear, E. (2000), ‘Performance pay and productivity’, American Economic Review 90, 1346–1361.
Matles, J. & Higgins, J. (1974), Them and Us: Struggles of a Rank-and-ﬁle Unions, Printice-Hall Inc.
McDuﬃe, J. P. (1995), ‘Human resource bundles and manufacturing performance: Organizational logic
   and ﬂexible production systems in the world auto industry’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review
   48(2), 197–221.
Meyer, S. (1981), The Five Dollar Day: Labor, Management, and Social Control in the Ford Motor
    Company, State University of New York Press.
Millis, H., ed. (1942), How Collective Bargaining Works: A Survey of Experience in Leading American
     Industries, Twentieth Century Fund, New York.
Mills, H. & Montgomery, R. (1945), Organized Labor, McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Moriguchi, C. (2000), ‘The evolution of employment relations in U.S. and Japanese manufacturing ﬁrms,
    1900-1960: A comparative historical and institutional analysis’. NBER Working Paper No.7939,
    Cambridge, MA.
Moriguchi, C. (2001), ‘Implicit contracts, the Great Depression, and institutional change: A comparative
    study of U.S. and Japanese manufacturing ﬁrms, 1910-1940’. Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern
    University.
Moriguchi, C. (2003), ‘Implicit contracts, the Great Depression, and institutional change: A compara-
    tive analysis of U.S. and Japanese employment relations, 1920-1940’, Journal of Economic History
    63(3), 1–41.
Morrow, E. (1921), The Lynn Plan of Representation, M.B.A. Thesis, Harvard University.
Nelson, D. (1975), Managers and Workers: Origins of the Twentieth-Century Factory System in the U.S.,
     1880-1920, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
Nelson, D. (1982), ‘The company union movement, 1900-1937: A reexamination’, Business History Review
     56(3), 335–357.
Nelson, D. (1988), American Rubber Workers and Organized Labor, 1900-1941, Princeton University
     Press, Princeton.
Nelson, D. (1989), ‘Managers and nonunion workers in the rubber industry: Union avoidance strategies
     in the 1930s’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43, 41–52.


                                                   32
Nelson-Rowe, S. (1991), ‘Corporation schooling and the labor market at general electric’, History of
     Education Quarterly 31(1), 27–46.
NICB (1929), Industrial Relations Programs in Small Plants, National Industrial Conference Board.
NICB (1931), Industrial Relations: Policies and Programs, National Industrial Conference Board.
NICB (1934), Eﬀect of the Depression on Industrial Relations Programs, National Industrial Conference
   Board.
Ozanne, R. (1967), A Century of Labor-Management Relations at McCormick and International Har-
    vester, University of Wisconsin Press.
Retzler, J. (1963), ‘Labor organization at du pont: A study in independent local unionism’, Labor History
     4, 178–195.
Rumm, J. (1989), Mutual Interests: Managers and Workers at the Du Pont Company, 1802-1915, Ph.d.
   thesis, University of Delaware.
Schacht, J. (1975), ‘Toward industrial unionism: Bell telephone workers and company unions, 1919-1937’,
    Labor History 16, 5–36.
Schatz, R. (1979), ‘Union pioneers: The founders of local unions at general electric and westinghouse,
    1933-1937’, Journal of American History 66, 586–602.
Schatz, R. (1983), The Electrical Workers: A History of Labor at General Electric and Westinghouse,
    1923-60, University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Slichter, S. (1929), ‘The current labor policies of american industries’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
     43, 393–435.
Tone, A. (1997), The Business of Benevolence: Industrial Paternalism in Progressive America, Cornell
    University Press, Ithaca, NY.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (1919), Bulletin No.250: Welfare Work for Em-
     ployees in Industrial Establishments in the United States, GPO, Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (1928), Bulletin No.458: Health and Recreation
     Activities in Industrial Establishments, 1926, GPO, Washington, DC.
U.S. Senate, Committee on Education and Labor (1937), Industrial Espionage, Vol. Report No.46, Part
     3: 75th Congress, 2nd Session, GPO, Washington, DC.
Vallas, P. (1993), Power in the Workplace: The Politics of Production at AT&T, State University of New
     York.
Wise, G. (n.d.), ‘General electric’s century: A history of the general electric company from its origins to
    1986’.
Young, C. & Tuttle, R. (1969), The Years 1919-1969: A History of General Motors Institute, General
    Motors Institute.
Zahavi, G. (1988), Workers, Managers, and Welfare Capitalism: The Shoeworkers and Tanners of En-
    dicott Johnson, 1890-1950, University of Illinois Press.




                                                    33
Table 1. Growth of Human Resource Management Programs, 1917 and 1926

                                             Establishments with Program (% of total)
             HRM Program
                                                    In 1917                   In 1926

A. Incentive Contracts

    Retirement Pension Plan                              75 (17)                        N.A.

    Disability Benefit Plan                              80 (19)                 214 (50)

    Group Insurance Plan                                32 (7.4)                 186 (43)
    Savings Plan                                       188 (44)                  196 (46)

    Stock Ownership Plan                                      N.A.               123 (29)

    Profit Sharing Plan                                       N.A.                 50 (12)

    Paid Vacation Plan                                  16 (3.7)                 133 (31)

B. Human Capital Investment

    Employee Classes                                     72 (17)                 140 (33)

    Company Libraries                                    99 (23)                 127 (30)

C. Internal Enforcement Mechanisms

    Company Picnics                                    140 (33)                  177 (41)

    Social Gatherings                                  239 (56)                  316 (74)

    Athletic Teams                                     142 (33)                  223 (52)

    Recreational Facilities                            152 (35)                  235 (55)

    Joint Administration                               200 (46)                  343 (80)

Total Number of Establishments                       431 (100)                  430 (100)

Sour ce: U.S. Depar tment of Labor , Bur eau of Labor Statistics, Bulletin No. 250 (1919) and Bulletin
No. 458 (1928).
Notes:
1) The 1917 sample consists of 431 establishments w ith 1.7 million employees; the 1926 sample
consists of 430 establishments, many of w hich w er e r ev isited since 1917, w ith 2.0 million
employees.
2) All pr ogr ams w er e for blue- collar w or ker s. Employer s bor e a par t or all of the cost of each
program.
3) Disability benefits cov er ed sickness and accident inj ur y cases that w er e not cov er ed by the
workmen’s compensation laws.
4) Group insurance plans included life, sickness, and accident insurance.
5) Sav ings plans included sav ings and loan funds, sav ings and inv estment funds, building and loan
funds.
6) J oint administr ation included employee par ticipation in w elfar e administr ation thr ough ERPs,
mutual benefit associations, employee committees, and other employee organizations.
Table 2. Prevalence          of Human Resource Management Programs                        in 1 9 28


                                                       Small                  Large
               HRM Program                                                                         Total
                                                   Establishments         Establishments

A. Incentive Contracts

     Retirement Pension Plan                            121 (4.8)              474 (28)                 685

     Group Life Insurance Plan                        1,600 (36)               774 (47)              2,374

     Stock Ownership Plan                               163 (3.7)              287 (17)                 450

     Profit Sharing Plan                                168 (3.8)               80 (4.8)                248

     Savings Plan                                       168 (3.8)              328 (20)                 496

     Housing Plan                                       264 (6.0)              386 (23)                 650

     Length-of-Service Bonus                            384 (8.7)              183 (11)                 567

     Paid Vacation Plan                                  926 (21)              427 (25)              1,353

B. Human Capital Investment

     Apprenticeship Training                             683 (16)               499 (30)             1,182

     Training Unskilled or Semi-skilled                  472 (11)               330 (20)                802

     General Education                                    35 (0.8)             119 (7.1)                154

     Internal Promotion                                 176 (4.0)              401 (24)                 577

C. Internal Enforcement Mechanisms

     Picnics or Outings                                  666 (15)              657 (39)              1,323

     Athletic Teams                                      454 (10)              717 (43)              1,171

     Employees’ Club                                    106 (2.4)              288 (17)                 394

     Employee Magazine                                    97 (2.2)             303 (18)                 400

     Centralized Employment                             273 (6.2)              701 (42)                 974

     Centralized Discharge                              194 (4.4)              401 (24)                 595

     Foreman Training                                   216 (4.9)               322 (19)                538

     Personnel Department                               110 (2.5)              575 (34)                 685

     Suggestion System                                  212 (4.8)              389 (23)                 601

     Group Meetings                                     300 (6.8)              251 (15)                 551

     Employee Representation Plan                       110 (2.5)              146 (8.7)                256

Total Number of Establishments                      4,409 (100)            1,676 (100)               6,085

Source: NICB (1929), Industrial Relations Programs in Small Plants, Chapter I I .
Notes:
1) The sur v ey cov er ed 4, 409 small establishments (employing 250 or few er w or ker s) and 1, 676
lar ge plants establishments (employing mor e than 250 w or ker s). The number of establishment
adopting each HRM program and its percentage of total is reported.
2) All pr ogr ams w er e for blue- collar w or ker s and w er e not r equir ed by law . Employer s bor e a par t
or all of the cost of each program.
3) Sav ings plans included sav ings and loan funds, sav ings and inv estment funds, building and loan
funds.
4) Housing plans included company housing and home ownership plans.
TABLE 3: COMPANY CHARACTERISTICS




                            FORD          GM        US STEEL      B-STEEL        IHC            GTR          WE            GE          DUPONT          P&G       SO of NJ       EJ           KODAK          IBM


Year of Establishment       1903         1908         1901         1904         1902           1898         1887          1892          1802          1837         1870       1890            1880         1911


 Year of incorproation      1903         1908         1901         1904         1902           1898         1915          1892          1903          1890         1882       1919            1901         1918


   SCC Membership           never        1919-        1934-        1919-        1919-          1919-        1925-         1919-         1919-         never        1919-      never           never        never

                                                                            agricultural rubber tires telephone         electrical    explosives,                             leather                     business
    Main Products        automobile    automobile steel & iron steel & iron machinery      & tubes    equipments        machinery        dye         soap, oil   petroleum     shoes       film, camera   machines

                            mass          mass      continuous   continuous      mass        continuous      mass          mass       continuous    continuous   continuous                continuous     job lot
      Technology         production    production    process      process     production      process     production    production     process       process      process                   process       system


  Total Employment          170,000      233,000      225,000        64,000       48,000        47,000       84,000        88,000         35,000        12,000      57,000      17,000         27,000         6,000

 Total Assets (million
       dollars)                  760        1,230        2,280          800            380         240            370           490          540           130        1,060           51          160              44


  Capital-Labor Ratio         4,470        5,280       10,130       12,520        7,920          5,170        4,440         5,590        15,490        11,080      18,600       3,000           6,040        7,330

Source: Moody's Manual of Investments
Notes: Total employment and total assets are in 1929. Capital-labor ratio is the ratio of total assets to total employment.
TABLE 4:    CORPORATE WELFARE RPOGRAMS IN 1929


                                 FORD         GM       US STEEL      B-STEEL        IHC       GTR          WE            GE        DUPONT      P&G        SO of NJ        EJ        KODAK        IBM
I. Corporate Welfare Programs in 1929 & the Number of Years in Operation
a. Incentive Contracts

           Disability benefits   yes 23       no       no (past)       yes 3       yes 19    yes 20      yes 16       yes 27         no       yes 14       yes 11       yes 11       yes 18     yes 18
             Group insurance      no         yes 3      yes 2          yes 3        no       yes 15        no         yes 19       yes 10       no           no           no         yes 1       no
        Retirement pension        no          no        yes 18         yes 6       yes 21    yes 15      yes 23       yes 17       yes 25     yes 35       yes 11       yes 11       yes 1       no
            Stock onwership       no         yes 5      yes 16         yes 5       yes 9    no (past)    yes 8       no (past)     yes 20     yes 26        yes 8         no           no        no
      Savings & investment       yes 8       yes 9        no             ?           ?         ?         yes 3         yes 8         ?          no           no         yes 7        yes 8        ?
               Profit-sharing     yes     no (past)       no          yes 18       yes 20      ?           no         yes 14       yes 25       no                      yes 10       yes 17       ?
               Paid vacation      no          no          no            no         yes 1     yes 15      yes 3        yes 12         no         no          yes 7       yes 10         no        no
                Housing loan      no         yes 19     yes 9          yes 5         ?       yes 17      yes 7         yes 4       yes 11        ?         yes 11       yes 7        yes 9        ?
b. Human Capital Investment

       Training & education      yes 13      yes 3       yes             ?         yes 22    yes 26      yes 11       yes 28         ?           ?         yes 11         ?          yes 9      yes 11
           Internal promotion                 yes          ?             ?           ?        yes         yes           yes         yes         yes         yes 7        yes           ?          ?
    Employment guarantee          no          no          no            no          no         no          no            no          no        yes 6         no           no          yes        no
c. Internal Enforcement Mechanisms

                  Recreation       ?          yes        yes            yes         yes      yes 6       yes 10         yes         yes         yes          yes         yes          yes        yes
        Employee magazine        yes 13       no          no           yes 5       yes 20    yes 17      yes 17       yes 12         no      no (past)     yes 11       yes 10         no       yes 10
     Personnel department        yes 15        ?           ?            yes        yes 11    yes 17       yes            ?         yes 10     yes 10       yes 11         ?          yes 10       ?
        Suggestion system         no          no           ?           yes 3       yes 3      yes           ?          yes 7       yes 15      yes 3       yes 11         ?          yes 32       ?
                          ERP     no          no          no          yes 11       yes 9     yes 10        no         yes 11       yes 10     yes 11       yes 11         no        no (past)    no
     Employee benefit fund        no          no        yes 18         yes 2        yes        ?         yes 23        yes 7       yes 10     yes 35        yes 2         ?          yes 1       no


No. of programs instituted         6           7           7            12          12         12          12            14          11         10           13           9            12         4

Average no. of years              10.4        5.6        10.5           6.1         12.7      16.9        11.0          12.8        15.1       17.5          9.5         8.4          9.7        7.8


II. Corporate Welfare Expenditures in 1929
                                                                    at least $4                                                                          at least $4
        Total expenditures                $9 million   $9 million                                       $7 million   $10 million                                     $1.3 million
                                                                       million                                                                              million

               per employee                   $40        $40        at least $65                          $90          $120                 at least $90 at least $80   $100

                                                                      at least                                                                                                      at least
              as % of payroll                2.3%        2.0%                                             5.8%         6.4%                 at least 6% at least 5%      6%
                                                                       3%                                                                                                            10%
TABLE 5: THE IMPACT OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION



                                  FORD         GM       US STEEL    B-STEEL        IHC        GTR          WE          GE       DUPONT         P&G       SO of NJ        EJ       KODAK       IBM

I. The Severity of the Great Depression (peak-to-trough)

         Net sales change         -79%        -71%        -66%        -71%        -74%        -57%        -83%        -67%                    -51%         -49%         -37%       -25%      -5.6%

      Net income change          -122%       -100%        -99%        -97%       -110%        -95%       -115%        -94%        -66%        -45%                      -79%       -77%      -11%

       Stock price change         N. A.       -90%        -93%        -95%        -92%        -96%        -70%        -91%        -90%        -78%         -68%                    -82%      -70%



II. Managerial Responses

a. Wage Change                    -30%                    -20%                    -25%                    -10%                                                          -10%        -5%       0%

b. Employment Change              -72%        -50%        -30%        -53%        -58%        -53%        -80%        -53%        -20%        -28%         -20%                    -24%      18%

c. Welfare Programs in Operation as of 1934

        Disability benefits        yes         …           …           yes         yes        yes          yes         yes      curtailed      yes        discont.       yes        yes       yes

          Group insurance          …           yes      curtailed      yes         …          yes        discont.      yes         yes          …        curtailed       …          yes       …

      Retirement pension           …           …        curtailed      yes         yes         ?           yes         yes      curtailed      yes       curtailed    curtailed     yes       …

         Stock ownership           …         discont.    discont.    discont.   suspended      …         discont.      …         discont.      yes        discont.       …           …        …

    Savings & investment suspended          suspended      …           …           …           …         discont.   curtailed      …            …           …            yes        yes       …

               Profit-sharing    discont.      …           …         discont.       ?          …           …        suspended      …         curtailed      …         curtailed     yes       …

               Paid vacation       …           …           …           …            ?          ?           yes      suspended      …            …           yes       suspended      …        …

               Housing loan        …         discont.    discont.       ?          …          yes           ?        discont.    discont.       …            ?        suspended      ?        …

      Employee magazine            yes         …           …        curtailed      yes        yes        discont.      yes         …            …           yes           ?          …        yes

No. of discontinuation              1           2           2           2                                   4           1           2           0            2           0                    0

No. of suspension                   1           1           0           0          1           0            0           2           0           0            0           2           0        0

% discontinued or suspended 50%               75%         50%       33 to 50%   17 to 50%   0 to 33%    50 to 63%     38%         40%          0%        29 to 43%    29 to 43%   0 to 17%    0%

d. Emergency Relief Effort

         Relief assistance         no          no          yes         yes         yes        yes          yes         yes         yes         yes          yes          yes        yes        ?

      Dismissal allowance          no          no          no          yes         no         yes          yes         yes         yes          ?           yes          no          ?         ?

   Unemployment benefit            no          no          no          no          yes         no          no          yes         no          yes          no           no         yes       no



III. Change in Labor-Management Relations

Union Status                    1941- CIO   1937- CIO   1937- CIO   1939- CIO   1941- CIO   1941- CIO      ILU      1936- CIO   mostly ILU     ILU       mostly ILU      ILU        ILU       ILU

Votes Received by ILU                          3%                     26%         33%         27%                     44%         57%                      80%          82%         75%

The Nature of Contract           explicit    explicit    explicit                                                    implicit                implicit     implicit
TABLE 6: SUMMAY RANKING


       A. Effectiveness of Internal     B. Severity of Great Depression          C. Degree of Repudiation         D. Change in L-M Relations
        Enforcement Mechanisms
High                                  Severe                              High                              Large
                   IHC                                 Ford                                GM                                GM
                   GE                             Western Electric                         Ford                            US Steel
                   P&G                                  IHC                              US Steel                            Ford
              Goodyear T&R                              GM                Intermediate                      Intermediate
                 DuPont                               US Steel                       Western Electric                  Bethlehem Steel
             Standard Oil NJ                      Bethlehem Steel                           GE                          Goodyear T&R
             Bethlehem Steel                            GE                           Bethlehem Steel                         IHC
Intermediate                                       Goodyear T&R                            IHC                                GE
             Western Electric         Intermediate                                    Goodyear T&R          Low
                  Kodak                               DuPont                         Endicott Johnson                  Western Electric
Low                                                     P&G               Low                                              DuPont
                   Ford                           Standard Oil NJ                        DuPont                             Kodak
                 US Steel                         Endicott Johnson                    Standard Oil NJ                   Standard Oil NJ
            Endicott Johnson                           Kodak                              Kodak                              P&G
                   GM                 Very Mild                                            P&G                         Endicott Johnson
                   IBM                                  IBM                                IBM                               IBM
Table 7. SUMMARY


                        Mild Depression                   Severe Depression


    High       I: P&G, DuPont, Standard Oil of NJ,   II: GE, International Harvester,
 Commitment                  Kodak                     Bethlehem Steel, Goodyear




    Low
                                                         III: GM, US Steel, Ford
 Commitment
