                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WHY THE WELFARE STATE LOOKS LIKE A FREE LUNCH

                                             Peter H. Lindert

                                          Working Paper 9869
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9869


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




This paper draws on Chapters 10, 12, 18, and 19 in a two-volume book Growing Public: Social Spending and
Economic Growth since the Eighteenth Century, forthcoming in 2004 from Cambridge University Press. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research

©2003 by Peter H. Lindert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Why the Welfare State Looks Like a Free Lunch
Peter H. Lindert
NBER Working Paper No. 9869
July 2003
JEL No. H0, N4

                                           ABSTRACT

The econometric consensus on the effects of social spending confirms a puzzle we confront in the
raw data: There is no clear net GDP cost of high tax-based social spending on GDP, despite a
tradition of assuming that such costs are large. The paper offers five keys to this free lunch puzzle.

First, the costly forms of transfers usually imagined have not been practiced by real-world welfare
states. Second, better tests confirm that the usually imagined costs would be felt only if policy had

strayed out of sample, away from any actual historical experience. Third, the tax strategies of high-
budget welfare states are more pro-growth and less progressive than has been realized. Fourth, the
work disincentives of social transfers are so designed as to shield GDP from much reduction if any.
Finally, we return to some positive growth and well-being benefits of the high social transfers, and

suggest how democratic cost control relates to budget size.

Peter H. Lindert
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu
        It is well known that higher taxes and transfers reduce productivity. Well known -- but
unsupported by statistics and history. This paper dramatizes a conflict between intuition and
evidence. On the one hand, many people see strong intuitive reasons for believing that the rise
of national tax-based social transfers should have reduced at least GDP, if not true well-being.
On the other, the fairest statistical tests of this argument find no cost at all. Multivariate
analysis leaves us with the same warnings sounded by the raw historical numbers. A bigger
tax bite to finance social spending does not correlate negatively with either the level or the
growth of GDP per capita. How can that be true? Why haven’t countries that tax and transfer
a third of national product grown any more slowly than countries that devote only a seventh of
GDP to social transfers?1
        This paper shows the width of the gap between intuition and evidence, and then tries to
explain it. All our well-known demonstrations of the large deadweight losses from social
programs overuse imagination and assumption. There are good reasons why statistical tests
keep coming up with near-zero estimates of the net damage from social programs on economic
growth. It’s not just that the tales of deadweight losses describe peculiarly bad policies. It’s
also that the real-world welfare states benefit a style of taxing and spending that is more pro-
growth than the policies of most free-market countries.
        The keys to the free lunch puzzle are:


        (1) For a given share of social budgets in Gross Domestic Product, the high-budget
welfare states choose a mix of taxes that is more pro-growth than the mix chosen in the
United States and other relatively private-market OECD countries.
        (2) On the recipient side, as opposed to the tax side, welfare states have adopted
several devices for minimizing young adults’ incentives to avoid work and training.
        (3) Government subsidies to early retirement bring only a tiny reduction in GDP,
partly because the more expensive early retirement systems are designed to take the least
productive employees out of work, thereby raising labor productivity.
        (4) Similarly, the larger unemployment compensation programs have little effect on
GDP. They lower employment, but they raise the average productivity of those remaining
at work.




                                                                                      Page 2
       (5) Social spending often has a positive effect on GDP, even after weighing the
effects of the taxes that financed the spending. Not only public education spending, but
even many social transfer programs raise GDP per person.
       (6) The design of these five keys suggests an underlying logic to the pro-growth side of
the welfare state. The higher the social budget as a share of GDP, the higher and more visible
is the cost of a bad choice. In democracies where any incumbent can be voted out of office,
the welfare states seem to pay closer attention to the productivity consequences of program
design. In the process, those countries whose political tastes have led to high social budgets
have drifted toward a system that delivers its tax bills to the less elastic factors of production.




                    I. The Familiar Cautionary Tales Miss the Mark


       The intuition that taxing and giving hurts economic progress is centuries old. Since
the 1970s a host of analytical supports have seemed to reinforce this intuition. This section
surveys the new ramparts defending the old beliefs, noting their limitations.


A. Disincentives on the Blackboard, or the Back of the Envelope


       It is easy for anybody with undergraduate training in economics to believe that
taxing some people to pay others who earn little will reduce national output, and cause
“deadweight” losses of net national well-being. The key insight in such a pair of diagrams
is that there are costs on both sides of the tax-transfer system.
       On the taxation side, higher tax rates infamously cut incentives to work, invest, and
take risks, causing a loss of GDP and well-bring. In the back-of-the-envelope tradition, Robert
Lucas’s presidential address to the American Economic Association offered two findings about
the huge costs of taxation and, by implication, of the social transfers that are the excuse for
most taxes:




                                                                                     Page 3
       (1.) “[S]tudies found that reducing capital income taxation from its current U.S.
       level to zero (using other taxes to [replace it]) would …. imply an increase of
       consumption along a balanced growth path of 7.5 to 15 percent.”


       (2.) “Edward C. Prescott … shows that …. [t]he steady-state welfare gain to French
       households of adopting American tax rates would be the equivalent of a
       consumption increase of about 20 percent…. with no increase in work effort! …. in
       the neoclassical growth model.”2


       Such findings have two distinctive features. First, they show big numbers. Second
they are not really findings. Contrary to the words offered so traditionally and casually by
economists, none of these authors actually “found” or “showed” their results. Rather, they
chose to imagine the results they announced. In every study Lucas cited here the crucial
ingredient was a theoretical model heavily laden with assumptions.3 It is educated, intelligent,
plausible fiction -- but fiction nonetheless.
       Theory and fiction cannot be dismissed out of hand, of course. Every theoretical
model, like every good novel, is inspired by observation of the real world. Yet for every
theoretical prediction worth debating, some scholar will imagine and derive the opposite
prediction, if only because scholarly self-interest generates such a dialectic. We need
empirical tests that can choose among competing views on the basis of evidence.
       On the recipients’ side of the tax-transfers system, there is also a disincentive to
produce. For each extra dollar a low-skilled person earns with extra work, part or all of
that dollar will be taken away from them because they have less “need” for income support
-- a clear disincentive to work. One can fiddle with the system, promising to let the
recipients keep their first $x of labor earnings before starting to deduct benefits. But
sooner or later the benefits must be withdrawn if the person keeps earning more and
becoming more self-sufficient. The higher the earnings threshold at which the benefits are
withdrawn, the more the program drains the government budget. Thus we posit
disincentives on both sides, and we try to quantify both to judge the damage done by taxing
the productive and supporting the poor.




                                                                                    Page 4
       The logic is persuasive, but so far the story is fiction. The deadweight costs are
something we imagine, not something we have derived from facts and tests.


B. Micro-studies of Labor Supply


       If there are disincentives on both the taxpayer and recipient sides, how do we know
whether people really respond to the incentive gaps? If they don’t adjust their effort or
their willingness to innovate and take risks, then the disincentives to be productive would
have no growth consequence. Some further kinds of analysis have been designed to argue
that people will respond, leading to a loss of output.
       Economists have probed deeply into the elasticity of labor supply, the key
parameter that sets the scale of losses from work disincentives. The elasticity of labor
supply relative to the net after-tax wage matters a great deal to the debate, since loss of
labor effort is imagined to be a main vehicle taking us from the extra disincentives to the
lost output and well-being.
       The after-tax wage is something that we imagine could be changed either through
market forces that determine the pre-tax wage or by changing the tax and subsidy
incentives. Economists have used large data sets of individual households’ labor supplies
to infer how changing tax rates would cause lost employment, to which the main losses in
GDP and well-being would be tied if taxes were changed. Careful econometrics has
produced a range of estimates and a general understanding of the estimation difficulties.4
Economists specializing in labor economics and public finance, surveyed in the 1990s,
tended to agree that the elasticities of labor supply with respect to the after-tax wage were
between zero and 0.50 for both men and women, though a few outliers believed in either
elasticities above 0.50 or negative elasticities (as if people would work less in response to a
higher wage). The specialists have agreed that women’s labor supply is more elastic than
men’s labor supply. If both sexes faced a 10 percent increase in take-home wage rates,
women’s labor supply should respond by 3.5 percent more than men’s essentially zero
response.5
       The main limitation to this work is that most of it has been done in the wrong
laboratory. Most of the studies try to use non-policy variation to infer the effects of policy



                                                                                    Page 5
changes. The large data sets consisting of surveyed households in one country, typically
the United States, don’t provide the real-world laboratory in which the whole national tax
and benefit structure is transformed from a relatively free-market economy into a high-
budget welfare state. Rather the people in the sample differed mainly in their gross wage
rates, as well as their wages net of taxes and benefits, for individual reasons. It is not a
fiscal policy experiment, not a test of the welfare state environment.
       Part of this literature, however, does succeed in exploiting differences in policy
regimes to see how people respond to changes in work incentives. Some were controlled-
sample experiments in which some people were given one set of welfare and tax incentives
not given to a control group, as in the American “negative income tax experiments” of the
1960s and 1970s. These tended to yield rather modest elasticities of labor supply response
like those just summarized. 6 Other valid policy experiments used inter-state differences in
welfare policies to infer the differences in labor supply. These tend to confirm that
marginal rates of taxation do matter, especially when they are combined with work hours
requirements.7 Yet if this smaller group of studies confirms that more generous guarantees
of a minimum income discourage work, why don’t such guarantees drag down the GDP of
high-budget welfare states? We return to this puzzle below.


C. Simulations


       The next type of analysis uses computer simulation models to follow how the
effects of taxes and welfare payments would reduce output and well-being. Since the
1970s several economists have used basic theory and computer simulations to estimate how
much, in their view, greater taxes and social spending will cost the nation a large
percentage of the amounts transferred. While the reasoning would have been clear to an
eighteenth-century critic of poor relief, the analytical apparatus is much more sophisticated.
Our focus here is on their results, not on the details of their assumptions.
       The deadweight-cost argument rests on a strong negative influence of tax-based
spending on GDP, an influence that should rise with the square of the tax wedge.
Browning and Johnson argued in 1984 that each dollar redistributed to the poor not only
costs taxpayers that dollar but also entails an additional $2.49 of deadweight costs around



                                                                                      Page 6
1976.8 At that time the Browning-Johnson estimate was atypical both in method and in
magnitude. Yet even measures based on more widely-accepted welfare economics, such as
Charles Stuart’s estimate of $0.72 in deadweight costs on top of the dollar taken from
taxpayers, also suggested substantial costs. Alternative simulations by Ballard and Triest
got deadweight-cost rates like those of Stuart, such as $0.50 - 1.30 in certain baseline
cases.9 These are still noticeable costs.
       A more recent set of simulations has raised the imagined price once again. Martin
Feldstein has estimated the welfare losses from the income tax around 1991. His focus was
limited to the tax side, with emphasis on tax-avoidance behavior other than the usually
imagined withdrawal of labor and capital. Having an income tax system at all has cost us
only 32 cents in welfare for each dollar collected. Expanding the marginal income tax rates
by 10 percent would be worse, however, costing $2.06 for each dollar raised. And making
the income tax system more progressive would bring a deadweight loss of $3.76 for every
dollar of revenue.
       High as these estimates may seem, they all leave out a cost we should include if we
are to quantify the effects of the tax-transfer system on the level of Gross National Product,
something easier to measure than deadweight losses or gains in well-being. The
“deadweight cost” concept allows any loss of productive effort to be offset in part by the
value of one’s own extra home time (if one works fewer hours) or of one’s energy. Any
drop in Gross Domestic Product is not offset by that personal saving of time and energy, so
the resulting drops in GDP would be typically bigger in the simulations run by these studies
than their deadweight-loss price tags have shown us. If these studies are correct, the GDP
loss from extra taxes and social spending must be huge.
       The most glaring limitation of the simulation-based estimates of the deadweight
cost per dollar redistributed is their sheer extravagance. How could countries spending a
sixth of GDP on welfare alone, and taking half of GDP in taxes, defy their logic? Surely
the deadweight costs should show up empirically. Consider the fact that Sweden spent 20
percent more of GDP on tax-based social transfers than the United States in 1995. If we
used the simulation-based deadweight cost multipliers, Sweden’s decision to have such a
large welfare state must have cost Sweden anything from 10 percent (the bottom Ballard-
Triest estimates) to 50 percent of GDP (Browning-Johnson), or even higher if Sweden had



                                                                                   Page 7
a progressive tax system like that Feldstein imagined. Such large figures, again, refer only
to the deadweight costs, not the larger GDP costs. Such huge costs cannot be plausible
unless empirical tests can somehow reveal them. Nor did any of the simulation studies
provide the evidence, the empirical tests. Like the blackboard exercises and the parables,
they are educated fiction. The computer was told to imagine a “virtual reality.” We await
the true tests.


E. Global Growth Econometrics


        The final kind of evidence of the growth costs of government spending takes the
econometric form of a significantly negative coefficient on “government consumption” in
recent studies that explore the determinants of 1960s-1980s growth in scores of countries
around the world.10 These studies succeed in taking many factors into account, including
political instability and type of political regime. The fact that they get negative effects of
government consumption suggests a cost of bigger government that stands out when other
factors have been given their due.
        The econometrics of economic growth in global cross-sections cannot be used to
assess the cost of redistributive taxes and transfers. Their “government consumption,”
which negatively affected growth, does not even refer to social spending.11 Rather it is
government purchases of goods and services other than for current national defense and
education, excluding all transfers and most public education services. It therefore consists
of an eclectic set of purchased services, including government payrolls.
        Even as a comment on the costs of what it does measure, the government
consumption measure fails to show costs relating to OECD democracies, for at least two
reasons. One is that the government consumption sector is a service-producing sector for
which the accepted way to measure its outputs is by measuring its inputs, mainly inputs of
labor time. Therefore, by design, no productivity gains can be measured, even if those
services are improving. Therefore, a larger “government consumption” sector
automatically lowers the measured labor-productivity growth of the whole economy,
regardless of its performance. A second reason for the negative effect of government
consumption comes from the sample’s inclusion of Third-World non-democracies. These



                                                                                     Page 8
did indeed waste a lot of money in government consumption between the 1960s and the
1980s. In 1987, for example, such government consumption was 37 percent of GNP in
Kenneth Kaunda’s Zambia and 26.4 percent in Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe. The fact that
such kleptocracies were bad for growth tells us nothing about Europe’s welfare states.




                               II. What Better Tests Show


       The best laboratory for finding the harm that heavy taxation and redistribution
might do to economic growth should have these attributes:


       (a) Social transfers take a large share of national product on the average -- large
       enough to show their damage to GDP per capita.
       (b) Their share varies greatly over the sample.
       (c) The units of observation are the polities that set policy toward taxes and social
       transfers.
       (d) We have credible data on most of the usual leading sources of growth, not just
       the budgetary policies being judged.
       (e) The sample is a pooled time-series and cross-sectional analysis, in order to walk
       the least dangerous line between the perils of the two modes of analysis.
       (f) We have enough separate insights on the sources of both social transfer behavior
       and economic growth to identify both sides of the simultaneous system that links
       spending and growth. Other studies have omitted this simultaneity between policy
       determination and the sources of growth, with possible biases in their growth
       results.
       (g) We allow the GDP effects of social transfers to be non-linear. Theory says they
       should rise non-linearly, but authors of most empirical studies have failed to explore
       this crucial twist.




                                                                                   Page 9
       These attributes call for a postwar OECD sample, whether or not it is supplemented
by data from non-OECD countries in the good data club. The results from two different
postwar pooled samples covering different periods from 1962 through 1995 seem to show:


       (1) If a country foolishly taxed only capital or property, and taxes them so heavily
as to fund a Swedish level of social transfers, then yes, there would be large costs in terms
of GDP, though the deadweight costs would be smaller.
       (2) But such costs arise only when the patterns are extrapolated beyond the sample
range, beyond the actual historical experience. Within the range of true historical
experience, there is no clear net GDP cost of higher social transfers.
       (3) A particular kind of social transfer, unemployment compensation, does reduce
work. Yet the GDP reduction is so small that even small pro-growth features of other
transfers can make the net costs zero or negative.


       Other studies approaching this ideal have found no clear net GDP cost from social
transfers.12 Yet the whole list of conditions needs to be satisfied, and past studies have
fallen short mainly by not confronting policy-growth simultaneity and the nonlinearity of
any cost function.
       Tables 1 and 2 develop these points with illustrative regression results typical of the
broader tests presented elsewhere.13 The growth side of the simultaneous system is
illustrated for 19 countries’ experience in 1962-1981 and for 21 countries’ experience in
1978-1995. The sources of growth start with familiar variables from the convergence
literature. Other things equal, growth is faster in countries with a greater shortfall behind
the United States in GDP per capita ten years earlier, an effect that presumably represents
technological catching-up among countries in the OECD “convergence club.” Human and
non-human capital also have positive effects on growth. The equation then adds OECD-
wide proxies for demand and supply shifts in the global macro-economy.14 In some
equations the effects of total social transfers and particular kinds of taxes are quadratic, to
imitate the way that total deadweight costs are supposed to vary with tax wedges. In others,
they are cubic, to generalize the search for possible cost effects while still allowing the
costs to be quadratic as a special case.



                                                                                    Page 10
        The implied impacts of greater social transfers and taxes on GDP growth highlight
two results: The free lunch puzzle is confirmed, and intuition about soaring costs would
have been confirmed if we extended the equations out beyond any real-world experience.
First, the free lunch puzzle is confirmed by the absence of any significantly negative slope
of growth with respect to social transfers. One can search beyond these mid-sample slopes
for the effects of bigger changes in social transfers, such as a jump from transferring only
ten percent of GDP (such as US or Japan around 1980) to 33 percent of GDP (Sweden’s
maximum). Yet this would again fail to show significant negative costs. Only in one
equation with a cubic transfer-cost function could I find sizeable GDP losses from a big
US-to-Sweden jump in transfers. that cost is not robust, however. It hinges crucially on
interpreting the 1991-1995 slump of Sweden and Finland as due to social transfers and the
welfare state. Yet the two countries shared that slump because they had pegged their
currencies to the soaring mark during a world recession. Removing this macroeconomic
policy effect removes brings us back to where we started: No clear net GDP cost of social
transfers.
        Second, the data do confirm the usual intuition if we ask about imaginary bad
versions of the welfare state. Yes, financing all average and marginal social transfers out
of either corporate taxes or personal property taxes would have huge costs, as shown in two
rows near the bottom of Table 2. But no OECD country ever did anything like that.
Corporate and property taxes never reached such heights. As we shall see shortly, large
welfare-state transfers have been funded by more pro-growth and regressive taxes.
        The overriding fact about the cases of costly welfare states, then, is that they never
happened. That’s what their being extrapolations out of the sample range really means.
Once we draw back from such imaginary extrapolations to the historical range of policies
actually tried, no expansion of taxes and transfers significantly lowers (or raises) GDP.
The free lunch puzzle is confirmed, even by the most appropriate available kind of
econometric test.




                                III. How Can that Be True?




                                                                                   Page 11
       How can the statistical evidence contradict our common belief that taxing and
transferring through government will lower national product? Institutional history can
explain how econometric near-zero results are not only plausible but even likely. Knowing
more of the recent history of the high-budget welfare states can stimulate fresh thinking
about how program costs and benefits are handled in practice, even though we cannot offer
a complete accounting of all growth effects. The keys are to be found on both the tax side
and the social spending side of the welfare state. Let us turn first to the taxpayers’ side,
before looking at the transfer recipients’ side and the pro-growth social programs.




                          IV. The Welfare-State Style of Taxing:
                            Pro-Growth and Not So Progressive


       Postwar history has brought the evolution of a different style of taxation in the
countries where social transfers take a large share of GDP. Contrary to what many have
assumed about redistributive welfare states, that style tends to raise GDP and inequality,
relative to the tax mixtures in the lower-spending countries. In the high-tax high-budget
social democracies, the taxation of capital accumulation is actually lighter than the taxation
of labor earnings and of leisure-oriented addictive goods. That, at least, is what the latest
attempts to compare tax rates across countries seem to tell us.
       Measuring the growth effects of the whole tax system remains a difficult task.
Knowing that it is marginal rates, not average rates, of taxation that govern choices about
how much to work or accumulate or innovate, economists have tried to measure the growth
effects of “the” marginal rate of income taxation.15 Yet as the path-breaking authors in this
line of research freely admit, marginal tax rates are not only harder to find for a large
sample of countries, but hard to trust as well. There are two core problems with using
marginal tax rates as quantifiable growth influences. One is that marginal rates of taxation
are too numerous to summarize. Even a single income-tax code typically has a multiplicity
of marginal rates, and it is not obvious how to average them into “the” marginal rate. The
other core problem is that individuals find numerous ways, mostly legal, to make the
effective marginal rate lower than the top official marginal rate. Many individuals switch



                                                                                   Page 12
activities or assets so as to cut the effective tax, and it is hard to measure the lower
marginal incentive they actually face.
        The difficulties of gathering and interpreting marginal tax rates have led other
researchers to develop the “average effective tax rate (AETR),” first in a series of articles
by Enrique Mendoza and co-authors and then in a large OECD study.16 Once again the
authors have been candid about the limitations of their estimates. All the usual ambiguities
about the final incidence of taxes apply to the AETRs, as well as to the marginal rates.
        Let us turn to a mixture of the two approaches. For capital incomes, let us look at
two kinds of marginal rates paid by corporations and top-income households. Capital
incomes have not been subject to higher rates of taxation in the welfare states than in, say,
the United States. So say the top marginal tax rates on dividends and on all sources of
capital invested in manufacturing.17
        Whatever one might have thought, the smaller-government countries such as Japan,
the United States, Switzerland, Canada, and Australia tax capital and private property at least
as heavily as the welfare states of Scandinavia, Germany or the Netherlands. Taken at face
value, the estimates in Figures 1 and 2 imply that the taxation of capital and property is
slightly negatively related to the social-transfer share of GDP, a proxy for welfare state
democracy.
        One institutional mechanism that has added to the burden on capital in low-
spending Japan, Switzerland, and the United States has been their persistent double-
taxation of dividends, as both corporate income and household income. Other countries,
including the welfare states, either excuse dividends from personal income tax or give it a
lighter tax rate.18
        The capital-taxation issue has been explicitly debated in countries like Sweden,
with attention to issues of international capital mobility as well as to issues of equity.
Indeed, in Sweden in the 1980s, the effective net tax rate on personal capital income was
actually negative for the top 60 percent of the income ranks, once one adjusts for the
generous provisions regarding deductions of interest payments and other tax advantages. It
has been estimated that the taxation of personal capital income actually reduced
government tax revenues by half a percent of GDP as of 1982. Part of the tax relief on
capital came from the distinction between real and nominal income in the presence of



                                                                                    Page 13
rising prices. Wealthy households got to deflate their gross capital incomes to pay on only
their real incomes in prices of an earlier year. Yet they got to deduct the full nominal value
of interest payments on debts incurred to pay for their capital assets. Accordingly, many
wealthy households took on higher gross assets and debt than otherwise, thus avoiding
virtually all taxes on capital income. As of 1982, the final effective tax rate on capital
income was still positive for modest-income households but actually negative for the
wealthy.19 Thus the true average tax rates on Swedish capital and property incomes were
lower than the rates shown here.
       By contrast, labor incomes have been taxed more heavily in the welfare-state
countries, as Figure 3 shows. Their preference for taxing labor rather than capital is
regressive, of course. It is also pro-growth, to the extent that capital is internationally
mobile and would take positive productivity effects with it when migrating. Indeed the
difference here resembles a change in the tax system that American public economists have
favored on growth grounds, namely full replacement of all capital income taxation with
labor taxation. The median American specialist in public economics thinks that the shift
from capital taxation to labor taxation would raise the annual growth rate of GDP by 0.2
percent.20 The pro-growth regressive switch in tax mixture has been put into effect -- in the
welfare states, not in the United States.
       As Figure 4 shows, the welfare-state democracies tax consumption more heavily,
just as they tax labor incomes heavily. The heaviest tax rates on general consumption tend
to be those in Scandinavia and Ireland. By contrast, this more pro-savings and pro-growth
form of taxation has been less preferred in low-spending Japan, Switzerland, the United
States, and Australia.
       The difference even extends to the design, as well as to the overall level, of
consumption taxes. The consumption tax is not only higher, but flatter in high-budget
Europe than in the low-spending countries. Food and other necessities have historically
had to pay the same consumption tax rate as other goods in Denmark, Norway, and
Sweden, in contrast to the practice in other settings, such as exempting foods from state
sales taxes in the United States. Similarly, luxuries usually do not bear special higher
consumption taxes in the same three Scandinavian countries or in Germany or Ireland.21




                                                                                    Page 14
       Another striking pattern emerges when we look at the taxation of specific types of
consumption goods. To encourage work ethic, health, and a cleaner environment, one
would want to shift taxation away from productive activities and toward the consumption
of addictive goods that are complements to leisure and threaten health and environmental
quality. To serve these social goals, one would want to lower the general tax rates on
income and consumption and raise the specific tax rates on tobacco, alcohol, and gasoline -
- even though such a shift takes a greater percentage tax bite from lower income groups.
       Which countries put the heaviest taxes on three kinds of goods with external costs is
shown in Figures 5 - 7. The heavier the reliance on social transfers through government, the
heavier the tax rates on cigarettes, alcohol, and such environmental-cost products as
gasoline. Behavior that has bad externalities ends up being punished more in welfare
states. In each case, special national factors might have played a role. For cigarettes, it
might be that tobacco producer interests, as in the United States and Japan, lobbied for
holding down the tax.22 For alcohol, it might be that Scandinavian governments are able to
exploit a less elastic demand with a Ramsey tax. For gasoline and other environmental-
cost goods, the correlation may be reinforced by America’s peculiar policy taste for heavy
energy consumption, which might be unrelated to budgetary fights over the welfare state.
Yet the correlations with social transfer budgets remain.
       Thus the welfare-state choice of a large overall tax burden to support transfers is
usually accompanied by a political choice of taxes that promote growth and environmental
quality – without equalizing incomes much more than in lower-spending countries. This is
not just a temporary condition captured in our 1995 snapshots. It has been the case over
the last third of the twentieth century, with some softening of the relative taxes on capital
after 1980. We are several steps closer to understanding how high shares of social transfers
in GDP might not have meant any reduction in GDP per capita.




                              V. Recipients’ Work Incentives


       On the recipients’ side, as well as on the taxpayers’ side, real-world welfare states
seek to avoid huge disincentives. In a few policy dimensions, recipients of transfers in



                                                                                  Page 15
high-budget countries may have more incentive to work than their American counterparts.
In other policy dimensions, the higher-budget welfare states do indeed discourage more
work, but with little effect on GDP.


A. The Poor May Face Lower Work Disincentives in the Welfare State


       Just as the high-budget countries often have lower marginal tax rates at the top of
the income spectrum, so too they can have lower marginal tax rates at the bottom, with
high marginal tax rates only across the broad middle range of incomes. If that is true, then
the debate over work incentives needs to be redirected. The net effect on labor supply and
GDP may depend on something never researched, namely whether work and productivity
respond more sensitively to marginal tax rates in the middle range or at the ends. If the
response is greater in the middle range, then the welfare state indeed reduces work and
GDP. But if conservative fears are correct in emphasizing that the supply of effort is most
fragile at the two ends of the income spectrum, then it is possible that the pattern of
marginal tax rates in the high-budget welfare states discourage work less than the pattern
prevailing in low-budget countries.
       Fortunately, we have the benefit of a long policy debate and careful research that
has penetrated the jungle of marginal incentives faced by those at the bottom of the income
spectrum, most of it relating to the United States and the United Kingdom. The policy
under investigation is the policy toward poor lone parents -- or unmarried “welfare
mothers” in the American parlance -- a pair of studies has grappled with the whole
complexity of the tax and transfer system that people face in that situation.
       America’s national policy has traditionally faced poor lone parents with high
marginal tax rates, cutting off aid as soon as the recipient earns even a low wage income.23
The Social Security Act of 1935 set up AFDC (Aid to Families in Dependent Children) this
way. The then-small population of single mothers, mainly young widows who were
expected to stay at home with the children, faced a 100-percent marginal tax rate on any
earnings. Such strict “means testing” of benefits had become controversial by the 1960s,
when the share of women who sought work outside the home had risen considerably.
Economists Milton Friedman and James Tobin, among others, called for a change in policy



                                                                                  Page 16
that would let the poor keep much of their benefits while still earning modest amounts
outside the home. In 1967 such concerns helped to shape new legislation lowering the
marginal tax rate to two-thirds, but in 1981 Congress and the Reagan Administration
reverted to stricter means testing and raised the marginal tax rate back to 100 percent.
Meanwhile, related welfare programs expanded and became more complex, so that an
accurate measure of the true marginal tax rate would require an in-depth study of the
combination of AFDC, Food Stamps, medical care for the poor, subsidized housing, child
care subsidies, and Supplemental Security Income for groups with particular needs.
       Yet the concern about heavily taxing work by the poor continued to push both
America and Britain toward a system that lowered the marginal tax rate for those getting a
low-paying job. In both countries this took the form of a tax credit for low-earning
households, beginning in the 1970s but becoming a major factor only in the 1990s. In the
United States, this tax credit is the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) started in 1975 and
greatly expanded in 1993. The British counterpart is the Working Family Tax Credit
(WFTC), started as the Family Income Supplement in 1971, and fully implemented in
2000. Similar employment-conditioned benefits now exist in Australia, Ireland, Canada,
Finland, France, and New Zealand, most of them countries with relatively low social
transfer budgets.
       The 1990s drift toward EITC and WFTC lowered marginal tax rates at the bottom
of the income spectrum, raising them in the “phase-out range” further up the ranks. The
upper panel of Table 3, even though it is based on conditions in the year 2000, aptly shows
the state of play before the 1990s. When the poor didn’t get any tax credits for low-pay
work, they faced very high marginal tax rates in both countries. By taking on low-paying
work, a single mother could lose more than half of her earnings in withdrawn benefits, a
higher marginal tax rate than is faced by most people.
       What would happen if instead of tough means testing, we let poor lone parents keep
much of their extra earnings? This experiment has crept into American and British policy
when EITC and WFTC were phased in. It’s a step toward the universalist approach to
family benefits in some high-budget welfare states, where you keep your benefits, still paid
for by taxpayers, even if your earnings rise toward the national average. The lower panel
in Table 3 shows us the results under this policy of tax credits for low-paid work, as



                                                                                 Page 17
practiced in these two countries plus Sweden. In America and Britain it lowers the tax
rates from getting a job at all, and from moving from part-time to full-time work at
minimum wages. On the other hand, it raises the marginal tax rate higher up the ladder, as
shown by the third column of numbers. Reaching that phase-out range is inevitable, since
somebody somewhere up the income ranks must pay the extra taxes if the poorest people
don’t. Still, the final column reveals that the drift toward broader forgiveness from taxes
has brought a net reduction in marginal tax rates for the whole range of options facing lone
parents in the bottom income ranks.
       So at the bottom of the income spectrum, as at the top end subject to taxes on
capital and property income, the universalist welfare states may well have lower marginal
tax rates than the lower-budget countries, with their emphasis on strict means testing.
Table 3 implies that Sweden was such a case, keeping the marginal tax rate below fifty
percent for people below the threshold for defining poverty.24
       If welfare states really have lower marginal tax rates at the top and bottom of the
income spectrum, but higher tax rates in the middle, do they discourage work more, or less,
than the low-budget governments of Japan, Switzerland, and the United States? Putting it
this way shows that the net balance of work disincentives rests on something that nobody
has measured yet. How do these conflicting responses net out for the labor force as a
whole? We don’t know yet. For now, it is time to take one step backward, away from the
common implicit assumption that higher-tax countries have higher marginal tax rates up
and down the income ranks.


B. Early Retirement: Good Riddance to Old Lemons?


       The most dramatic withdrawal of people from paid work has occurred in the 55-64
age group, not among young single mothers or work-shirking young men. Many European
countries took dangerous steps to subsidize earlier retirement. The invitation to quit work
earlier, combined with the rise of senior life expectancy, has hastened the crisis over
pension budgets.
       So surely, one might think, it is in the lavish public subsidies to earlier retirement
that we finally discover a program that must have taken a large toll on Gross Domestic



                                                                                   Page 18
Product. And the subsidies are indeed lavish in some cases. Take the case of France
versus the United States. In 1995, France spent 10.9 percent of GDP on public pensions,
disability and survivors’ benefits, which was more than double the American share of 5.2
percent. Many of the extra French benefits went to people who were in the 55-64 age
group, in the form of more generous pensions, more generous disability payments, and
special unemployment benefits for that age group.25 In the same year, the percentages of
people in the 55-64 age group who were working differed as follows:


                              France          United States
       Both sexes             33.6            55.1
       Men                    38.4            63.6
       Women                  28.9            47.5


Doesn’t France’s paying people to quit work in their mid-fifties and early sixties mean
dramatic losses in GDP? Hasn’t American gained GDP by restraining the invitation to
earlier retirement?
       In fact, public subsidies to early retirement have only a negligible cost in terms of
GDP, for three main reasons.26 First, we must remember that the incentive to retire in the
55-64 age range is built into many private employers’ pension plans as well as public social
security programs. A world in which taxpayers decline to subsidize early retirement in still
a world in which each extra year of work just before age 65 can still pay a tax in the form
of lost retirement benefits. Private and public pension programs vary in their net retirement
incentives, and the average difference is less than the public subsidy viewed alone.27
       Second, even in the smoking-gun cases where public pension programs do kill some
work incentives, and the GDP loss cannot be zero, the loss of output is still quite small.
Some basic accounting guides us toward a rough answer. Here is a definitional relationship
between the Gross Domestic Product per capita, numbers of workers and the age
distribution:


GDP per capita = GDP per worker
       times (total workers divided by the 55-64 population)



                                                                                 Page 19
       times (55-64 population divided by total population).

Converting this into rates of change and re-arranging terms yields this link between the
growth of GDP per capita and the amount of labor lost by subsides to earlier and easier
retirement:


The percentage change in GDP per worker induced by retirement subsidies


       = (A) the percentage change in productivity per worker


               plus the product of these three terms:


       (B) induced percent change in employment for the 55-64 age group)
       + (C) the share of those 55-64 who are employed (if no subsidies)
       + (D) the ratio of the 55-64 age group’s population to total employment.


For France in 1995, the policy-induced percent change in employment (B) might have been
as great as the whole difference between the French and American employment shares for
the age group, or (33.6 percent minus 55.1 percent = minus 21.5 percent. This looks like a
large number. In fact, it was larger than the percent shortfall of France’s GDP per worker
below the U.S. GDP per worker in 1995, or 19 percent. But the GDP effect of the jobs
given up by France’s 55-64 year olds is smaller. Using the formula above, this induced
change of – 21.5 percent in employment for the 55-64 age group must be multiplied by the
two fractions (C) and (D). One is the initial share of those in the 55-64 age group who
would have jobs if there were no early-retirement subsidy (C). That initial share would be
something below France’s actual share of 0.336, but let’s use the 0.336 multiplier to get a
conservatively high number. The next fraction is the ratio of France’s 55-64 population to
France’s total employment for all age groups. This works out to 0.259. So the policy-
induced change of –21.5 percent gets multiplied by (0.336 times 0.259), which brings it
down to a net GDP loss of less than 1.9 percent – if the same ratios applied to all women.
They do not. The effects on women’s work are smaller, suggesting a still lower GDP cost.


                                                                                Page 20
The same point holds for five main smoking-gun cases of taxpayer subsidies to early
retirement -- Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands -- though it does not
apply to the longer-working populations of Canada, Japan, Sweden, Norway, and the
United States.
       The third reason deserves the most attention here. Subsidizing early retirement
probably raises productivity per worker. That is, it raises (A) in the simple accounting
above. Those who retire early have lower-than-average productivity in their age group.
Having them quit work means an even lower percentage cost in GDP than in employment.
       Could early retirement have no cost at all in terms of GDP? Could the marginal
productivity of a retiring senior worker be zero? Such an absolute-zero result has actually
been suggested by Xavier Sala-i-Martin in 1996. In what we might call his “good riddance
to geezers” hypothesis, Sala-i-Martin argued that older workers could be so
counterproductive in their effect on the whole work unit’s output that their marginal
product is in fact zero. That might be the case if senior workers have excessive power, and
are especially hard to get rid of once their marginal product has dropped off. Sala-i-Martin
says that university faculties could still produce as much if they paid professors over, say,
55 to leave campus permanently. The idea deserves further investigation (by younger
faculty?), even if the assumption that an extra 55-64-year-old adds zero to the economy
seems extreme, at least to this author.
       The truth, if less extreme, does point in the same direction. The productivity of the
lost labor is reduced by the way in which the early-retirement incentives are structured.
Countries that invite early retirement actually send a more urgent invitation to the less
productive workers. The Gruber-Wise research team found a much greater early-
retirement subsidy for workers earning only in the 10th salary percentile than for workers
earning in the 90th. Lower-earning, and presumably less productive, workers were given
much less incentive to continue work in those same five countries -- Belgium, France,
Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands -- and also in Canada, Japan, Spain, and Sweden. Of
the eleven countries studied by the Gruber-Wise research team, only America and Britain
kept the tax on senior workers low at all salary levels up to age 65.28 The mechanisms
varied. The Germans up to 1982, the Italians before 1984 and the Dutch before 1995 did it
largely with generous disability benefits, while the Belgians and French had generous



                                                                                  Page 21
unemployment and layoff benefits. There is at least some evidence that such generous exit
packages were approved and manipulated by employers as a way of getting rid of less
productive and more problematic workers.29
        There is indirect evidence that less productive senior workers do respond more
strongly, given the stronger invitation, relative to more productive seniors. The OECD
found a definite relationship between educational level and the employment shares at
different age groups.30 Those who stay on the job tend to be more educated in any age
group, but especially in the 55-64 age group. For French men in 1995, with generous
early-retirement subsidies in effect, there was a particularly strong educational twist in the
age-employment profile. The share of men with a university education who were still at
work in the 55-64 age group was 30 percentage points greater than one would have
predicted if they had retired as fast as the less educated. This pattern, combined with the
biased retirement incentives we have just noted, suggests that early-retirement policies
deliberately and successfully culled out the less productive and kept the more productive at
work.


C. Does the Dole Also Harvest Lemons?


        Thus far my listing of work incentive studies has given only light treatment to a
core kind of transfer payment: classic unemployment compensation, or what British history
has called “the dole.” Doesn’t this kind of subsidy to not working (for a while) lower job-
taking? The answer is yes, it does lower employment, according to both past writings and
new results aired in this book.31 But here a puzzle arises: If the dole clearly cuts
employment, why does it not visibly reduce GDP?
        The resolution to this part of the puzzle is twofold. First, the true effect of
unemployment compensation on GDP could be negative, but be small enough to hide
within the broad confidence intervals in statistical tests. Second, jobs may be lost with very
little reduction of GDP if the more generous unemployment compensation widely practiced
in Europe actually raises the average productivity of those who continue to work. This
might occur because European governments use unemployment compensation as a way to
get the least productive workers out of their jobs, to leave a more productive labor force at



                                                                                    Page 22
work, just as we saw them doing with early retirement policies. That is, the dole may be so
implemented in practice that it casts out “lemon” workers, those with the lowest
contribution to overall labor productivity. Indeed, related work revises the econometrics of
European job markets to show that more generous unemployment compensation goes with
higher productivity per worker or per labor hour, other things equal.32




                  IV. Some Growth Benefits of High Social Spending


       Thus far, we have established that the GDP costs of early retirement and
unemployment compensation are close to zero, even closer than their effects on labor time
would imply. From these costs should be subtracted any small gains in work and earnings
coming from the fact that higher-budget welfare states may impose a lower marginal tax
rate on poor lone parents. The “deadweight” effects on well-being are smaller still,
because the reduction in labor time means a gain in valuable home time. Were we to
switch focus from GDP costs to true well-being, then the extra leisure and vacation time of
the European welfare states would loom large enough to erase any net loss at all. yet if we
stick with the GDP focus of the free lunch puzzle, there is still a bit more work to do. As
long as there is a net reduction of work from the welfare-state package, we should still
presume that the GDP loss is close to zero, but not zero.
       The next step is to note that some kinds of social transfers have positive effects on
the level and growth of GDP. Many types of social transfers are in fact pro-growth, and the
growth benefits they provide tend to be greater in the higher-spending countries. If we set
aside the clear productivity gains from extra public education, which are not defined as
“social transfers” here and were covered in Chapter 6, which kinds of social transfers are
most likely to have a positive GDP impact that has not been confronted yet?


A. Active Labor Market Policies: Not Much There


       Let us start with a kind of social transfer that should, in principle, have directly
cancelled the job losses from unemployment insurance. Support for the unemployed often



                                                                                   Page 23
includes sizable expenditures on “active labor market policies” (ALMP), a rubric that
covers public subsidies to job search, job re-training, and public sector jobs for those who
are hard to employ.
       Yet studies of the ALMP bundle of pro-job interventions suggest only modest
payoffs in improved job-holding and earnings, and therefore a near-zero rate of return. The
modesty and fragility of the gains show up in all three main legs parts of the ALMP bundle
-- job search assistance, retraining, and public sector jobs for the least qualified. The return
is particularly low for males, and not so bad for females, perhaps because females’ prior
disruption of training was less rooted in an aversion to school.33
       Such sobering limitations to the payoff of active labor market policies seem to
square with two other kinds of findings by labor economists. First, the vast research on
interventions to improve the lot of disadvantaged youth has concluded that the earlier the
intervention in the life cycle, the better. Interventions in pre-natal, infant, and pre-school
care and training have achieved high returns, especially under certain program designs.
Yet programs to set teenagers back on track have shown only weaker returns, unless one
counts just keeping them off the streets and out of prison as a major social gain.34 This
earlier-is-better pattern squares with the low returns to retraining and public employment
for young adults. Second, economists are gravitating toward the belief that the greatest
gains from public supports for work and earnings come from a mixture of carrots and
sticks. For carrots, the emphasis increasingly favors tax credits for earnings such as
America’s EITC or Britain’s WFTC, with only a very limited role for retraining
programs.35 On the stick side, work requirements are as effective as retraining programs
for part of the population receiving public aid and tax credits. It appears that the ALMP
policy bundle has not been sufficient to erase even the small net loss of jobs from the same
countries’ generous unemployment compensation.


B. Childcare Support and Career Investment in Mothers


       Greater returns appear to have come from the welfare states’ stronger support for
career continuity for women, especially for mothers. Having a child necessitates at least
some work stoppage for mothers, and the work time losses are still very unequally shared



                                                                                   Page 24
between mothers and fathers. How much this costs mothers in lifetime earnings potential
depends on how long they are compelled to stay out of work and how much less employers
pay and promote women who are perceived as shorter-term employees not riding the career
escalator.
       We have some hints that the lifetime pay disadvantage of mothers grows in settings
where their child care demands are met only in private markets. First, in the United States
between 1960 and 1986, the pay disadvantage of married women relative to unmarried
women widened for all ages up to about 46.36 That disadvantage of married women was
presumably a muted reflection of the disadvantage of mothers relative to all childless
women. More concretely, the pay-path disadvantage of mothers is estimated to have grown
in Britain between 1980 and 1991.37 Both countries lacked any major government or legal
support for women’s reclaiming their old jobs after a childbirth interval, or any major
subsidy for formal childcare.
       Other countries, however, do have government and legal support for parental leave
without job loss, plus government support for infant care. The extent of such support is a
hidden correlate of social transfers, and a hidden source of their growth benefits. On the
whole, countries that support women’s careers with parental leave laws and with
affordability of child care tend to be those with an overall commitment to social transfer
spending. The countries offering new parents the least support are the United States,
Britain, Canada, and Switzerland.38
       While the gains in women’s work and in GDP from such career supports are hard to
quantify, the hints at strong gains agree with other tendencies we have already noted. First,
women tend to have a more elastic labor supply than men, so that a given percentage
incentive should yield more extra work and earnings if aimed at women than if it is aimed
at the same number of men. A supporting hint of such likely gains from this difference in
elasticities comes from the fact that women’s pay is already closer to men’s in several
European countries than in America, Canada, or Japan. Second, as noted in the previous
section, the payoff from job-retraining and other active labor market policies looks more
hopeful for women, because the women who qualify as needing such programs are less
unreceptive to extra schooling and training than the corresponding group of men. Even




                                                                                 Page 25
though specific numbers still elude us, it makes sense that the more committed welfare
states’ career supports for mothers are likely to have a strong payoff in jobs and GDP.

C. Public Health Care

       People are healthier and live longer in those democracies with a more public and
more centralized approach to health care -- and the superiority of comprehensive public
health care explains part, though only part, of this difference. Here we have an abundance
of evidence. To illustrate the possible pro-growth aspect of a public approach, this section
focuses on the longevity issue, even though it raises GDP per person only indirectly and
modestly.
       With life saving as with economic growth, a simple frontal view shows a positive
correlation between such social benefits and the welfare state. Figure 8 hints that social
transfers correlates negatively with male and female mortality in OECD countries in 1995.
Both for males and for females, premature mortality looks lower in the higher-budget
countries. The correlation is not very strong, of course. Among low-social-budget
countries, the United States stands out as having peculiarly high mortality, while Japan
stands out as being peculiarly healthy.
       How could general social transfers be linked to the length of life? To move beyond
crude correlations like that in Figure 8, we need some systematic way of separating the
effects of public health care spending, the part of social spending most directly relevant to
longevity, from the many other influences that we know will make nations differ in their
average length of life.
       One statistical study is particularly convenient for our present purpose of comparing
nations’ health. Using the new OECD standardized measures of premature mortality and a
pooled cross-section approach, Zeynap Or finds that a greater public-expenditure share, for
given total expenditures, significantly reduces mortality, especially among men, among
OECD countries since 1980.39 In the mortality-change perspective, some familiar factors
lower mortality down toward the world-best Japanese standard. Those factors include
higher income, white-collar occupations, cleaner air, abstention from bad consumption
habits, and greater total spending on health care. On balance, though, a more public
approach to the same health care expenditures also helps significantly. It explains a small



                                                                                  Page 26
part of America’s greater mortality. Even beyond this public-private contrast, however,
America is a high-mortality outlier. Firearms are probably a factor, along with
cheeseburgers, fries, and donuts. Still, the difference is largely unexplained. Similarly,
Uwe Reinhardt, citing a Germany-US comparison for 1990, decomposes the extra US
health cost per capita (PPP$) into higher US administrative costs, higher US prices, less
real use of inputs in US, and so forth.40
       One of the mechanisms linking the average length of life to the public-private
institutional choice is the mixture of types of care. Any medical system mixes basic care
for the entire population, including hygiene assistance and other preventative care, with
high-budget items designed to lengthen life for those middle-age and elderly populations
who can afford it. In this difficult trade-off between broad basic care and sophisticated
high-cost care, two conclusions seem inescapable:


       (1) any health delivery system must choose to let somebody die earlier, but
       (2) those systems that tilt more toward basic and preventative care seem
       to achieve longer average life expectancy.


       Public health systems, like private medicine, must choose to let some kinds of
patients die sooner. That does happen, and there seems to be a pattern to the differences in
how public and private systems ration life. The public systems provide less of the highest-
budget life-extending services and more of the basic health services protecting mothers,
children, and the poor. In the process, the more public systems have implicitly chosen
types of care with a more positive effect on average life expectancy. For example,
experiences with inefficient over-investment in CAT scanners and in (in-hospital) renal
dialysis has forced American authorities to retreat toward rationing a lesser supply of the
relevant equipment, much as the nationalized health systems of Britain, France, and
Sweden have done.41 By contrast, the evidence on basic ground-level health care, featuring
preventative medicine through public clinics, has continued to have such a high return as to
suggest under-investment in such care.42




                                                                                  Page 27
        Still, the efficiency of public health care, and indeed the whole set of factors
entertained by Or, can only explain part of the differences in health and life expectancy
between the welfare state populations and the most market-oriented populations.43
        Thus public health care contributes to longer average life expectancy. The fact that
public health spending, which has been counted here in social transfers, lengthens people’s
lives does not directly add to GDP per person. Yet the odds are that such spending does
help raise productivity per person, especially if it is spent on basic and preventative care for
the young and the poor.44 Reducing sickness and morbidity enhances later productivity.
By contrast, the extra expenditures on high-budget items to extend the lives of the rich and
elderly do not raise GDP per capita. This combination of the favorable average
productivity effect of health investments and the greater productivity enhancement from
basic and preventative care than from high-budget repairs seems to help explain how a
large part of social transfers – here, the public health budget – has been pro-growth.



                             V. How the Keys Were Made:
                             Democracy and Cost Control


        Not wanting to go beyond the simple sermon that more government means less
national income, many have cast welfare states as nations that just don’t see, or feel that the
rich should bear, the soaring national costs of taxes and transfers. Yet the danger of naive
pessimism about public programs should be obvious. The case against social transfers
can’t be that simple, especially in the face of the evidence suggesting no significant net
cost.
        This paper has surveyed some institutional clues pointing toward a non-negative
contribution of social transfer programs toward economic growth and well-being. The list
of clues is eclectic and incomplete. We now have a better understanding of the tax mix
practiced in welfare states, and the limits on the damage done through work disincentives,
both for young adults and for the elderly. These findings can only be suggestive, and we
are a long way from an overall quantitative accounting.
        Much of the story consists of welfare states’ avoiding ruinous patterns of taxation.
In fact, their tax mix even resembles some classic prescriptions from economists’ optimal-


                                                                                   Page 28
taxation literature. The heavy taxes on addictive complements to leisure fit both the growth
prescription and the need to address externalities. The tendency toward universalism rather
than strict means testing imitates economists’ preference for combining a flat consumption
tax with a poll subsidy.
       Behind the eclectic set of clues and the hint of classic fiscal wisdom may lie a
fundamental unity, a single mechanism that explains how welfare states found such an
assortment of safety devices and avoided damaging their economic growth.45


A. The Budget Stakes Principle


       The mechanism is this: The higher the budget, the higher the marginal cost of
making the wrong policy choice, both economically and politically. To see how, suppose
that expanding a budget has a deadweight-cost multiplier of 0.40 under Policy A but only
0.10 under Policy B. So, for example, expanding the budget by 10 percent with Tax-
Transfer Policy A would bring a deadweight cost of 4 percent of the initial budget. The
same expansion by 10 percent of budget using an alternative Tax-Transfer Policy B would
bring a deadweight cost of only 1 percent, we assume, while still delivering the same public
benefits. Let’s just consider these two policy design choices A and B.
       Do we have any assurances that the political process would choose B over A,
saving the nation an unnecessary extra cost? Not if the initial budget was, say, only 1
percent of GDP, so that the expansion of 10 percent of the budget only raises it to 1.1
percent of GDP. The deadweight costs would be only 0.04 percent of GDP under Policy A
and 0.01 percent of GDP under Policy B. A small net return may not overcome the fixed
cost of investigating and campaigning against the more costly choice. There is so much
sand and distortion in the policy machinery that the public might have no way to react to
such small magnitudes. The nation may stumble on with the wrong choice, suffering a loss
of 0.03 percent of GDP without paying attention.
       Suppose, by contrast, that the initial budget were already 25 percent of GDP. In
this second case, people should weigh and debate the same 10-percent choice more
seriously. The transfer, whatever its benefits, would mean a loss of 1.0 percent of GDP




                                                                                 Page 29
from A and 0.25 percent of GDP from B. Getting this choice wrong means a net national
cost of 0.75 percent of GDP.
        To take a more ominous third case, if the whole earlier expansion of the budget
from 1 percent of GDP to 25 percent of GDP had wrongly followed Policy A, the nation
would already be staggering under the burden of a net mistake of 24 percent times (.40 -
.10) = 7.2 percent of GDP. We should expect an outcry from those bearing all of this cost -
- or more than all of it, if others favoring the costly choice actually benefit by it.
        These numerical examples have in fact understated the tendency of the economic
stake to rise with the share of taxes and transfers in GDP. They understated because they
kept applying the same deadweight cost multipliers – 0.40 for Policy A and 0.10 for Policy
B – at all budget levels. Yet we know from conventional economic analysis, and from the
political economy of deadweight costs, that these deadweight cost multipliers rise with the
amount taxed and transferred. People should be much more sensitive to possible extra
deadweight costs when budgets are already bigger.
        In a democracy, the extra economic costs become political costs, as Volume 2 of
this book argues in the spirit of the Becker model of pressure-group competition.46 The
larger the budget, the greater the political risk that large groups will notice and take action
against those who advocate, or implement, the wrong choice. Such a rising “shadow price”
of a wrong policy suggests a reason why it is the high-budget welfare states that got certain
things right. While a low-budget United States could get locked (and still is partly locked)
into the double taxation of dividends, a higher-budget government would run greater
economic and political risks by magnifying the same mix of taxes.


B. Examples


        Does the political process really work that way in democracies? The detailed
budget histories remain to be written. As a small step toward that fuller history, let us turn
first to a case that fits the budget-stakes principle exactly, and then quickly list other
supporting episodes.
        The budget-stakes principle is best illustrated by a history of two proposals for a
hefty flat consumption tax. One proposal arose in a nation where large increases in the



                                                                                     Page 30
social budget were a popular mandate, and the other arose in a setting hostile to any budget
expansion. In the budget-expanding case, the pro-growth consumption tax was chosen
even though every major lobby hated it. In the anti-spending case, the consumption tax
died.
        The need to base huge increases in the social budget on relatively pro-growth hikes
in the consumption tax was grasped by Sweden’s political process after World War II, as
its social transfers rose from under 10 percent to 33 percent of GDP.47 The wisdom of this
choice was imposed not by any major political party or lobby, but by the competitive
political process. Right after the war, nobody wanted the sales tax that later became
Sweden’s huge value added tax (VAT). The dominant Social Democratic Party (SAP) and
the dominant blue collar labor union (the LO) did not want it. Their coalition allies, the
Communists, hated any kind of sales tax, which fell heavily on workers. The bourgeois
parties to the right also opposed the sales tax, or any tax for that matter, and were not
persuaded by promises that it would make cuts in the income tax possible.
        Yet the money had to be raised somehow, if the popular safety nets and pensions
were to be provided. Two LO economists broke ranks early, calling for a sales tax in 1948,
at the same time that their union was winning its temporary repeal. By the end of the 1950s
Finance Minister Sträng had come to agree, and the Social Democrats began to waver,
realizing that raising taxes on capital incomes would risk capital flight from Sweden. They
needed coalition partners to stay in power, however. In the end SAP leaders correctly
guessed that the Communists would not dare to vote no and risk dissolving the government
at a time when they were unpopular. The Communists abstained, and the sale tax was
reinstated. Once in place, it became an escalator that the Social Democrats rode to ever-
higher social budgets. In 1969, as the share of social transfers in GDP was reaching 16
percent of GDP, the sales tax was transformed into the VAT, which avoided double-taxing
intermediate products. Meanwhile, the income tax rates had also crept up, but a rising tide
of complaint won exemptions in the late 1970s and across the 1980s. Sweden’s postwar
tax history seems to show the process of considering and rejecting bad designs for an
expanded budget, in favor of a wiser tax mix, one that no separate interest group
championed.




                                                                                   Page 31
       To spotlight the link between Sweden’s correct tough choice and the size of the
budget, consider the fate of the value added tax, or flat consumption tax, in the United
States. The efficiency of switching to a flat tax has often been emphasized by economists,
especially by those leaning toward the Republican Party.48 Yet state sales taxes remain
limited, and the idea of a federal consumption tax has been shot down every time it has
been launched as a trial balloon, either by a Republican or by a Democrat. If it is proposed
by a Republican, it looks like a transparent Republican call for redistributing from the poor
to the rich, and Democrats would win any political fight over such a proposal. It was
actually proposed once by a Democrat, Congressman Al Ullman of the House Ways and
Means Committee. Ullman’s stillborn Tax Restructuring Act of 1979 offered a 10 percent
VAT as a replacement for social security taxes and for complicated loophole-ridden
income taxes. Other Democrats denounced the shift as regressive, just like their Swedish
counterparts. Tax-revolt conservatives denounced it just because it was a tax proposed by a
Democrat, and any Swedish-style expansion of the welfare state was unthinkable. The bill
died, and Ullman was defeated in the election of 1980.49
       A strong influence on this political outcome is the size of the proposed social
budget. At lower budget levels, the efficiency gains from the right tax design are much
lower. As long as smaller government is both a reality and their wish, America’s
conservatives cannot claim that the efficiency gains from switching to the consumption tax
are great enough to cover up the redistribution from poor to rich. As in our hypothetical
examples above, the gains from switching to a better tax design seem much greater in a
high-budget context like Sweden than in the United States.
       Beyond this tale of two consumption taxes, I shall only briefly list some other
supporting cases. These have the common feature that a mistake was made, but corrected
with a lag under political pressures, though admittedly the correlation between the speed of
correction and the size of the budget is not clear.


       • Dutch disability policy. Starting in 1967, the Netherlands expanded its work
disability compensation beyond any reasonable limit, so that a healthier-than-average
OECD country led the world in the share of workers “disabled.” The mistake remained for




                                                                                 Page 32
some time, before major reforms in the 1990s. The Dutch unemployment rate and
disability rate both plummeted soon thereafter.50
         • Labour’s Selective Employment Tax of 1966-1970. Harold Wilson’s government
mistakenly imposed the Selective Employment Tax in 1966, believing that taxing services
was the key to raising productivity and improving the balance of payments. The tax was
scrapped immediately after his surprise defeat in 1970.
         • The Thatcher poll tax of 1989-1992. Contrary to economists’ usual preference for
a flat consumption tax and a poll subsidy, the Thatcher government imposed a poll tax as a
“community charge” that was supposed to prod local governments into efficiency.
Thatcher and the poll tax exited three years later.
         • German public pensions. Having shifted to dangerously generous retirement
subsidies in 1972, Germany began paring back in 1982, with further tightening a decade
later.
         • Italian public pensions. The huge jumps in the generosity of Italy’s retirement and
disability policies between 1978 and 1983 were stalled after 1984, with further reforms in
1992 and 1995. In this case, however, the correction remains incomplete.
         • Sweden’s wage earners’ fund. Sweden’s most powerful union in the 1970s forced
through a law taxing profits to pay for workers’ takeover of manufacturing firms, a class
attack that was repulsed in stages between about 1983 and 1994.51


Even the look of fiscal wisdom in the tax mix of high-budget countries shows up more
clearly in the 1990s than in the 1970s. In the interim most of these countries improved their
tax mix, even though the share of social transfers in GDP remained much the same.
         Could it be that electoral democracy exercises a crude form of cost control, and
does so more effectively when the budgetary stakes get large? If so, the credit for a large
social transfer budget that doesn’t work badly goes both to its proponents and to its critics.
And the difference between high-transfer welfare states and low-transfer market economies
is not that the former bear any larger costs, but that the two kinds of countries have
different political and social tastes.




                                                                                  Page 33
                                    REFERENCES

Acs, Gregory, Norma Coe, Keith Watson, and Robert I. Lerman. 1998. “Does Work Pay?
        An Analysis of the Work Incentives under TANF.” The Urban Institute, Occasional
        Paper Number 9 (July).
Agell, J., T. Lindh, and H. Ohlsson. 1997. “Growth and the Public Sector: A Critical Review
        Essay.” European Journal of Political Economy 13: 33-52.
Agell, J., T. Lindh, and H. Ohlsson. 1999. “Growth and the Public Sector: A Reply.”
        European Journal of Political Economy 15: 359-366.
Atkinson, A.B. 1999. The Economic Consequences of Rolling Back the Welfare State.
        Cambridge: MIT Press.
Atkinson, A.B. and Gunnar Viby Mogenson. 1993. Welfare and Work Incentives: A North
        European Perspective. New York: Oxford University Press.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
Ballard, Charles L. 1988. “The Marginal Efficiency Cost of Redistribution.” American Economic
        Review 78, 5 (December): 1019-1033.
Barro, Robert J. 1997. Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study.
        Cambridge: MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee. 1993. “Winners and Losers in Economic Growth.”
        Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics.
        Washington, World Bank, pp. 267-314.
Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 3 (August), 371-400.
Becker, Gary S. 1985. “Public Policies, Pressure Groups, and Dead Weight Costs,” Journal of
        Public Economics, 28, 3 (December), 329-48.
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. 1998. “Deadweight Costs and the Size of Government.”
        NBER Working Paper 6789 (November).
Blank, Rebecca M. 2000. “Fighting Poverty: Lessons from Recent U.S. History.” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 14, 2 (Spring): 3-19.
Blank, Rebecca M. 2002. “Lessons for Europe.”
Blöndal, Sveinbjörn and Stefano Scarpetta. 1997. “Early Retirement in OECD Countries: The Role
        of Social Security Systems.” OECD Economic Studies 29, 2.
Brewer, Mike. 2000. “Comparing In-Work Benefits and Financial Work Incentives for Low-
        Income Families in the US and the UK.” Institute for Fiscal Studies, WP 00/16
        (September).
Brock, William A. and Stephen J. Turnovsky. 1981. “The Analysis of Macroeconomic Policies in
        Perfect Foresight Equilibrium.” International Economic Review 22, 1 (February): 179-209.
Browning, Edgar K. 1987. “General Equilibrium Computations of the Marginal Welfare Costs of
        Taxes in the United States.” American Economic Review 77, 1 (March): 11-23.
Browning, Edgar K. and Johnson, William R. 1984. “The Trade-Off between Equality and
        Efficiency,” Journal of Political Economy 92, 175-202.
Burtless, Gary. 1987. “The Work Response to a Guaranteed Income: A Survey of
        Experimental Evidence.” In Alicia H. Munnell (ed.), Lessons from the Income
        Maintenance Experiments, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No.
        30, 22-52.



                                                                            Page 34
Carey, David and Josette Rabesona. 2002. “Tax Ratios on Labour and Capital Income and
        on Consumption.” OECD Economic Studies no. 35 (2002/II).
Carey, David and Harry Tchilinguirian. 2000. “Average Effective Tax Rates on Capital
        Labour, and Consumption.” OECD Economics Department Working Paper no. 258.
        October.
Commander, Simon, Hamid R. Davoodi, and Une J. Lee. 1997. “The Causes of
        Government and the Consequences for Growth and Well-Being.” World Bank
        Policy Research Working Paper 1785. World Bank, June.
Chamley, Christophe P. 1981. “The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation in a Growing
        Economy.” Journal of Political Economy 89, 3 (June): 468-496.
Daunton, Martin. 2002. Just Taxes: The Politics of Taxation in Britain 1914-1979.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Deaton, Angus. 2001. “Inequalities in Income and Inequalities in Health.” In Finis Welch
        (ed.), The Causes and Consequences of Increasing Inequality. Chicago: University
        of Chicago Press, 285-314.
Easterly, William and Sergio Rebelo. 1993. “Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth.” Journal
        of Monetary Economics 32, 417-458.
Feldstein, Martin. 1999. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.”
        Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 4 (November): 674-680.
Fölster, S. and M. Henrekson. 1998. “Growth and the Public Sector: A Critique of the Critics.”
        European Journal of Political Economy 15 (June): 3337-358.
Fölster, S. and M. Henrekson. 2000. “Growth Effects of Government Expenditures in Rich
        Countries.” Stockholm School of Economics, Working Paper no. 391 (June).
Forslund, A. and A. Krueger. 1997. “An Evaluation of the Swedish Active Labor Market
        Policy: New and Received Wisdom.” In Richard B. Freeman, Robert Topel, and
        Birgitta Swedenborg, The Welfare State in Transition: Reforming the Swedish
        Model. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 267-98.
Fuchs, Victor R. 1988. Women’s Quest for Economic Equality. Cambridge: Harvard
        University Press.
Fuchs, Victor R., Alan B. Krueger, and James M. Poterba. 1998. “Economists’ Views
        about Parameters, Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public
        Economics.” Journal of Economic Literature 36, 3 (September): 1387-1425.
Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap. New York: Oxford University
        Press.
Greenberg, David and Harlan Halsey. 1983. “Systematic Misreporting and Effects of
        Income Maintenance Experiments on Work Effort: Evidence from the Seattle-
        Denver Experiment.” Journal of Labor Economics 1, 4 (October): 380-407).
Grubb, David. 2000. “Eligibility Criteria for Unemployment Benefits.” OECD Economic
        Studies no. 31, 147-181.
Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise (eds.). 1999. Social Security Programs and Retirement
        around the World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gustafsson, Björn and N. Anders Klevmarken. 1993. “Taxes and Transfers in Sweden:
        Incentive Effects on Labour Supply.” In A.B. Atkinson and Gunnar Viby
        Mogenson. 1993. Welfare and Work Incentives: A North European Perspective.
        New York: Oxford University Press, 50-134.




                                                                              Page 35
Hansson, Ingemar and Charles Stuart. 1990. “Sweden: Tax Reform in a High-Tax
        Environment.” In Michael J. Boskin and Charles E. McLure, Jr. World Tax Reform:
        Case Studies of Developed and Developing Countries. San Francisco: ICS Press.
Hollingsworth, J. Rogers and Ellen Jane Hollingsworth. 1994. Care for the Chronically
        and Severely Ill: Comparative Social Policies. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Hollingsworth, J. Rogers. 1986. A Political Economy of Medicine: Great Britain and the
        United States. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hollingsworth, J. Rogers, Jerald Hage, and Robert A. Hanneman. 1990. State Intervention
        in Medical Care: Consequences for Britain, France, Sweden, and the United States
        1890-1970. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Joshi, Heather and Pierella Paci, with Gerald Makepeace and Jane Waldfogel. 1998.
        Unequal Pay for Women and Men: Evidence from the British Birth Cohort Studies.
        Cambridge: MIT Press.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1987. “The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect Foresight
        Model.” Journal of Political Economy 95, 4 (August): 675-709.
Kawachi, Ichiro and Bruce P. Kennedy. 1997. “The Relationship of Income Inequality to
        Mortality: Does the Choice of Indicator Matter?” Social Science & Medicine 45, 7
        (October): 1121-1127.
Kennedy, Bruce P. Ichiro Kawachi, Roberta Glass, and Deborah Prothrow-Stith. 1998.
        “Income Distribution, Socioeconomic Status, and Self-Rated Health in the United
        States: Multilevel Analysis.” British Medical Journal 317, 7163 (October 3): 917-
        921.
Killingsworth, Mark R. 1983. Labor Supply. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Koester, R.B. and R.C. Kormendi. 1989. “Taxation, Aggregate Activity and Economic
        Growth: Cross-Country Evidence on Some Supply Side Hypotheses.” Economic
        Inquiry 27: 367-387.
Lindert, Peter H. 1996. “What Limits Social Spending?” Explorations in Economic History
        31, 1 (January): 1-36.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 2003. “Macroeconomic Priorities.” American Economic Review 93, 1
        (March): 1-14.
McLure, Charles E., Jr. 1990. “Appraising Tax Reform.” In Michael J. Boskin and Charles
        E. McLure, Jr. World Tax Reform: Case Studies of Developed and Developing
        Countries. San Francisco: ICS Press, 279-288.
Mehrotra, Santosh and Enrique Delamonica. Forthcoming. Public Spending for the Poor.
        Basic Services to Enhance Capabilities and Promote Growth. Submitted for
        publication
Mendoza, Enrique G., Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Patrick Asea. 1997. “On the Ineffectiveness
        of Tax Policy in Altering Long-Run Growth: Harberger's Superneutrality Conjecture.”
        Journal of Public Economics 66, 1 (October 1997): 99-126.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Assaf Razin, and Linda L. Tesar. 1994. “Effective Tax Rates in
        Macroeconomics: Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and
        Consumption.” Journal of Monetary Economics 34, 297-323.
Mendoza, Enrique G. and Linda L. Tesar. 1998. “The International Ramifications of Tax
        Reforms: Supply-Side Economics in a Global Economy.” American Economic
        Review 88, 1 (March), 226-245.




                                                                             Page 36
Meyer, B.D. 1995. “Lessons from the US Unemployment Insurance Experiments.” Journal
       of Economic Literature 33, 1 (March).
Moffitt, Robert A. 2002a. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program.”
       NBER Working Paper 8749 (February), forthcoming as a chapter in Moffitt (ed.),
       Means-Tested Programs in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.
Moffitt, Robert A. 2002b. “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply.” NBER Working Paper
       9168 (September), forthcoming in a volume of Handbook in Public Economics.
Mogenson, Gunnar Viby (ed.). 1995. Work Incentives in the Danish Welfare State: New
       Empirical Evidence. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.
Murray, Charles. 1984. Losing Ground: American Social Policy, 1950-1980. New York:
       Basic Books.
Or, Zeynap. 2000. “Determinants of Health Outcomes in Industrialised Countries: A
       Pooled, Cross-Country, Time-Series Analysis.” OECD Economic Studies 30, 1: 53-
       77.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 1994. The OECD Jobs
       Study: Evidence and Explanations. Two volumes. Paris: OECD.
_____________. 1998a. The Battle against Exclusion: Social Assistance in Australia, Finland,
       Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Paris: OECD.
_____________. 1998b. The Battle against Exclusion, volume 2: Social Assistance in
       Belgium, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, and Norway. Paris: OECD.
_____________. 1998d. Employment Outlook (June). Paris: OECD.
_____________. 1998e. OECD Economic Surveys: Netherlands.Paris: OECD.
Padovano, Fabio and Emma Galli. 2001. “Tax Rates and Economic Growth in the OECD
       Countries (1950-1990),” Economic Inquiry 39, 1 (January): 44-57.
Prescott, Edward C. 2002. “Richard T. Ely Lecture: Prosperity and Depression.” American
       Economic Review 92, 2 (May): 1-15.
Preston, Samuel, and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late
       Nineteenth Century America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Reinhardt, Uwe E. 2000. “Health Care for the Aging Baby Boom: Lessons from Abroad.”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 2 (Spring): 71-84.
Rodgers, G.B. 1997. “Income and Inequality as Determinants of Mortality An International
       Cross-section Analysis.” in Population Studies 33, 2 (__): ___.
Ross, Nancy A. Michael C. Wolfson, James R. Dunn, Jan-Marie Berthelot, George A.
       Kaplan, and John W. Lynch. 2000. “Relation between Income Inequality and
       Mortality in Canada and in the United States: Cross-sectional Assessment Using
       Census Data and Vital Statistics.” British Medical Journal 320, 7239 (April 1):
       898ff.
Slemrod, Joel. 1995. “What Do Cross-Country Studies Teach about Government
       Involvement, Prosperity, and Economic Growth?” Brookings Papers in Economic
       Activity 2, 373-431.
Steinmo, Sven. 1993. Taxation and Democracy: Swedish, British and American
       Approaches to Financing the Modern State. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 1996. “A Positive Theory of Social Security.” Journal of Economic
       Growth 1, 2 (June): 277-3xx.




                                                                            Page 37
Steckel, Richard H. 1995. “Stature and the Standard of Living.” Journal of Economic
        Literature 33, 4 (December): 1903-1940.
Stuart, Charles. 1984. “Welfare Costs per Dollar of Additional Tax Revenue in the United
        States.” American Economic Review 74, 3 (June): 352-362.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. “Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth
        Model.” American Economic Review 71, 4 (September): 533-544.
Triest, Robert K. 1990. “The Effect of Income Taxation on Labor Supply in the United
        States,” Journal of Human Resources 25, 3 (Summer): 491-516.
Triest, Robert K. 1994. “The Efficiency Cost of Increased Progressivity.” In Joel Slemrod
        (ed.), Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality. New York: Columbia University
        Press, 137-169.
Waldfogel, Jane. 1998. “Understanding the ‘Family Gap’ in Pay for Women and Children.”
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 1 (Winter), 137-156.
Watts, Harold W. and Albert Rees. 1977. The New Jersey Income-Maintenance
        Experiment, Volume II, Labor-Supply Responses. New York: Academic Press.
Wilensky, Harold. 2002. Rich Democracies: Political Economy, Public Policy, and
        Performance. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.
World Bank. 1993. World Development Report 1993. Washington: World Bank.
World Health Organization. 1999. World Health Report. Geneva: WHO.




                                                                             Page 38
Page 39
Page 40
Page 41
Page 42
Page 43
Page 44
Page 45
Page 46
          Table 1. Sources and Non-Sources of Growth in GDP per Capita, 1962 - 1981

                                                            Dependent variable = log-growth of GDP
                                                            per capita (here converted to %/annum)

                                                            Equation (1.)             Equation (2.)

Independent variables:                                         coeff.      |t|           coeff.      |t|
    Shortfall in GDP/capita, 10 years earlier                    3.29     (9.08) **       3.31      (9.13) **
    Capital formation/capita, one yr. earlier                    1.50     (7.14) **       1.51      (7.28) **
    Capital formation/cap., 10 years earlier                    -1.01     (4.51) **      -1.03      (4.59) **
    Prim. + sec. enroll'ts/5-14s, 10 yrs. earlier                2.99     (3.16) **       2.84      (2.95) **
    University enroll'ts/5-14s, 10 yrs. earlier                  3.97     (1.85) a        4.04      (1.87) a

Global demand and supply shocks
   Inflation - unemployment, all OECD                           0.39      (5.39) **        0.39     (5.25) **
   Inflation + unemployment, all OECD                          -0.24      (5.67) **       -0.23     (5.41) **

Effects of raising social transfers by 1% of GDP, starting from their average shares:
                                                             0.043 (2.63) **        0.034           (1.59)

    Functional       form for          transfer costs:      quadratic costs           cubic costs

Source and notes to Table 1:
(** = significant at the 1% level, two-tail; * = significant at the 5% level;
    a = significant at the 7% level; b = significant at the 10% level.)

For a fuller review of these equations, ask the author for Growing Public, Appendix Table E.2.
    The underlying data sources are listed at the start of Appendix E.
The sample: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
    Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and United States.
    The time periods are the four-year averages 1962/65, 1966/69, … , 1978/81. Thus n = 95.
    An index of collective wage bargaining from Allard (2003) is also included in each equation.
The social spending and tax variables are predicted values based on the first-stage regressions.
The equations presented here are the ones without the full set of fixed effects for time periods and countries.
    Including fixed effects (in additional regressions) had no effect on the main conclusions reached here.
The "average" share of total transfers in GDP, used to evaluate the growth effect of 1% more, is
    actually the average for the 1978-1995 sample (18.72% of GDP), for better comparison with Table 2.




                                                                                                      Page 47
          Table 2. Sources and Non-Sources of Growth in GDP per Capita, 1978 - 1995

                     Dependent variable = log-growth of GDP, per capita (here converted to
                     %/annum)

                                                    Equation (1.)        Equation (2.)         Equation (3.)
Independent variables:                               coeff. |t|           coeff. |t|            coeff. |t|
    Shortfall in GDP/capita, 10 years earlier          0.13 (0.20)         1.98 (3.87) **        0.80 (1.48)
    Capital formation/capita, one yr. earlier          0.25 (1.54)         0.08 (0.55)           0.10 (0.26)
    Capital formation/cap., 10 years earlier          -0.24 (1.20)          0.13 (0.72)          0.05 (1.35)
    Prim. + sec. enroll'ts/5-14s, 10 yrs. earlier      3.03 (3.80) **      1.35 (1.96) a         3.68 (2.37) *
    University enroll'ts/5-14s, 10 yrs. earlier       -2.97 (1.20)         0.03 (0.01)           2.14 (1.04)

Global demand and supply shocks
   Inflation - unemployment, all OECD                   0.34 (6.24) **      0.35 (7.24) **           0.31 (7.32) **
   Inflation + unemployment, all OECD                  -0.53 (6.42) **     -0.60 (8.48) **          -0.60 (8.92) **

Effects of raising expenditure shares by 1% of GDP, at sample-average social transfer share (18.72%):
    (a) social transfers, with typical tax mix                             -0.026 (1.13)          0.029 (0.60)
    (b) " , all financed by personal income tax         -0.04 (0.67)
    (c)    "   , all financed by corp. income tax      -5.04 (2.49) *    (far outside the sample
    (d)    "   , all financed by property tax          -6.15 (1.60)      range -- see text)
    (e)   "    , all financed by consumption tax       -0.04 (1.21)

Effect of a permanent tightening of employee
    protection laws, by 1 index point:                                                              -0.13 (0.88)
Effect of raising the unemployment compensa-
    tion support ratio by 1% (when it is 20%)                                                      -0.025 (1.95) a


                                                    quadratic costs      quadratic costs       cubic costs




                                                                                            Page 48
Source and notes to Table 2:
(** = significant at the 1% level, two-tail; * = significant at the 5%
level;
   a = significant at the 7% level; b = significant at the 10% level.)
For a fuller review of these equations, ask the author for Growing
Public,
   Growing Public, Appendix Table E.4, Equations (1.)- (3), and
   (6.).
The sample consists of the 19 countries in Table 1 plus Portugal and Spain,
   over six three-year averages: 1978/80, 1981/83, … , 1993/95 (n = 126).
The social spending and tax variables are predicted values based on the first-stage regressions.
   An index of collective wage bargaining from Allard (2003) is also included in each
   equation.
The equations presented here are the ones without the full set of fixed effects for time periods
and
   countries. As stated in the text, including those effects (in additional regressions) had no
   effect
   on the main conclusions reached here.
Capital formation per capita is measured in thousands of international dollars of 1985 per
person.
   The capital formation has the stated lag in years, but the denominator is current (not
   lagged) population.




                                                                                 Page 49
                       Table 3.       Hurdles in the Path Out of Poverty:
                                      Marginal Net Tax Rates Faced by a Lone
                                      Parent with Two Children
                                      in America and Britain in 2000

                                  Each number is a marginal net tax rate, or change in (taxes
                                  minus benefits), as a percent of change in gross earnings


                                      The change in the parent's work scenario:
If there were no tax                      From              From             From               The whole jump,
credits for low-pay                      no work          part time        min-wage              from no work
work (no EITC in US,                   to part time      to full time,    to $9/hour,       to $9/hour
and no WFTC in UK)                      min-wage         min-wage          full time            full time


                  Median of 12 US          52                 67              27                   51
                             states

                  United Kingdom           141                83              2                    60




With the actual tax                       From              From             From               The whole jump,
credits for low-pay                      no work          part time        min-wage              from no work
work (EITC in US,                      to part time      to full time,    to $9/hour,           to $9/hr
and WFTC in UK)                         min-wage         min-wage          full time            full time


                  Median of 12 US          12                 28              65                   45
                             states

                  United Kingdom           -2                 7               69                   33


                       Sweden 1991                                         <--- Between 30% and 50% --->




                                                                                        Page 50
Sources and notes to Table 3:

The sources are Acs et al. (1998), Brewer (2000), and Gustafsson and Klevmarken 1993.
         EITC = Earned Income Tax Credit on modest wage incomes in the US. EITC
started on a modest scale in 1975 and was expanded in 1986-1994. This calculation based
on October 1997 rates ignores some state supplements to the federal EITC that were being
set up around 2000.
         WFTC = Working Families Tax Credit in the UK, which reached its current levels
in June 2000, after starting more modestly in 1971.
 Part-time work = 20 hours a week, and full-time work = 35 hours a week.
         Min-wage = For the U.S, the national minimum wage as of October 1997, or $5.15
an hour. For comparison with the US, Brewer's calculation for the UK uses £3.65 an hour
as the $5.15 minimum wage and £6.50 as the $9 wage.
         These calculations assume a 30-day month of 4.29 (=30/7) work weeks.
         I have ignored any effect of EITC on other benefits or tax rates.
         I have assumed that the American parent has not yet exhausted her lifetime welfare
eligibility under the US welfare reform of 1996 (PRWORA).
         In the American case, none of these work scenarios receives enough net disposable
income to lift the three-person household out of poverty. Working full time at $9 an hour
brings a net income of only $1351 a month, whereas the official poverty line for such a
household was $1367 in 1997. Each of these calculations ignores consumption taxes.
         The twelve US states analyzed by Acs et al. are Alabama, California, Colorado,
Florida, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, New Jersey, New York, Texas,
and Washington. In all twelve cases, every contrast between rates is in the same direction
as described in the text.
         The Swedish rates are the averages of those generally characteristic of a single adult
student, a couple with children in day care, and an absent parent subject to child support, all
in Stockholm 1991.




                                                                                  Page 51
                                                     ENDNOTES

1
    This paper uses the two terms “social spending” and “social transfers” so as to capture the continuum of
tax-based programs differing in their degrees of progressivity.
            “Social spending” consists of these kinds of tax-based government spending:
                     • basic assistance to poor families, alias “poor relief” (before 1930), “family assistance,”
                               “welfare” (in America), or “supplemental income;”
                     • unemployment compensation, alias “the dole;”
                     • public non-contributory pensions, in which the funds come from persons other than the
                               recipient and his or her employer;1
                     • public health expenditures;
                     • housing subsidies; and
                     • public expenditures on education.


The distinct term “social transfers” shall be reserved for all of the social spending above minus government
expenditures on education.
            These terms, and the list above, are designed to bring order to the blurry differences in redistributive
“progressivity” – the rate of transferring income from rich to poor. In general, social spending categories are
ranked as follows in terms of their progressivity:
(Basic assistance and unemployment compensation) > (pensions and public health) > (housing subsidies) >
(primary public education) > (secondary public education) > (subsidies to higher education).
2
    Lucas (2003, 2-3), citing Prescott (2002) and the sources cited in the next footnote. Emphasis in the
original.
3
    The crucial role of theorizing to get the result is evident enough in the titles of the studies Lucas cited in
support of his first result:


            “The Analysis of Macroeconomic Policies in Perfect Foresight Equilibrium” (Brock and Turnovsky
1981); “The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation in a Growing Economy” (Chamley1981); “Capital
Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model” (Summers 1981); “The Welfare Cost of Factor
Taxation in a Perfect Foresight Model” (Judd 1987); and Dynamic Fiscal Policy (Auerbach and Kotlikoff
1987).


Prescott (2002) used similar material to fashion the second result cited by Lucas.
4
    For surveys of the pre-1995 American literature, see Killingsworth (1983), Burtless (1987), Triest (1990),
and Meyer (1995). For updates featuring the switch to new American welfare rules, see Moffitt (2002a,
2002b).



                                                                                                      Page 52
5
     The median economist opinions were 0.00 - 0.05 for the Marshallian labor supply elasticity for men, 0.18 -
0.20 for men’s Hicks elasticity, 0.30 for women’s Marshall elasticity, and 0.43 for women’s Hicks elasticity
(Fuchs, Krueger, and Poterba 1998, 1392).
6
    As noted in footnote 3 above, Charles Murray’s dramatization of the high elasticity of labor supply from the
Seattle and Denver experiments was based on experiments that gave the highest, but also upward-biased,
elasticities.
7
    Moffitt (2002a, 2002b).
8
     In a follow-up article published by the American Economic Review, Browning (1987) again plumbed for
high estimates.
9
    Charles Stuart (1984), Ballard (1988), and Triest (1994).
10
      Barro and Lee (1993), Easterly and Rebelo (1993), Barro (1997), Padovano and Galli (2001).
11
     Barro and Lee (1993, 279) calculate government consumption by subtracting the available data on national
defense and non-capital educational spending from total government purchases of goods and services (with
some difficulties about price deflators that do not need attention here). Apparently, the only kinds of social
expenditures that could have remained in the measure of government consumption are purchases of health
care services and building of public-education and public-housing structures.
12
     See Koester and Kormendi 1989, Easterly and Rebelo 1993, Slemrod 1995, Commander et al. 1997,
Mendoza et al. 1997, Agell et al. 1997, Agell et al. 1998, and the summary of earlier studies given in
Atkinson (1999, Chapter 2). Others do find negative effects, but with specifications that are hard to interpret.
See, for example, Fölster and Henrekson (1999, 2000), who argue for significant GDP costs on econometric
grounds, in debate with Agell et al. (1997, 1999). FH test for total taxes, not social transfers, and like
previous studies they do not allow for non-linearities in the GDP costs.
           Another recent study finding a significant effect of taxes on growth is Padovani and Galli (2001),
who examined behavior of OECD countries in the 1960s – 1980s. Padovani and Galli identify separate
overall marginal tax rates for each country, with adjustments for known tax reforms. These marginal rates
have negative signs in conventional growth equations. Their procedure is subject to the limitations
mentioned in the text. In particular, their handling of the tax-income relationship is hard to interpret. If an
exogenous raising of tax revenues affects GDP in the same period, as they seem to imply, this feedback
complicates the initial estimation of the marginal tax rate. By the time this possibly-biased tax rate has
competed with prior GDP itself in an equation determining the growth rate of GDP, the true effect of an
exogenous raising of tax revenues or tax rates eludes identification.
13
     Lindert, Social Spending, Chapter 18 and Appendix D, both in Volume 2.
14
     One might suspect that adding the OECD-wide aggregate supply shock would somehow pick up the blame
for GDP losses that should be attributed to the rise of some welfare states within the OECD. Other
regressions reject the suspicion. Even with just country effects, with or without fixed time effects, the social
transfer variables do not have a large or significant effect on GDP.
15
     Easterly (1995).


                                                                                                   Page 53
16
     Mendoza et al. (1994, 1997); Mendoza and Tesar (1998), Carey and Tchilinguirian (2000).
17
      As an alternative to the marginal tax rates on capital shown in Figures 1 and 2, I have also examined the
AETRs on capital income and on property income. The rates shown for these categories by Carey and
Tchilinguirian (2000, Table 4 and annexes) give capital tax rates like those shown here. While the
assumptions of the Carey and Tchilinguirian estimates seem reasonable, the subsequent paper by Carey and
Rabesona (2002) shows that the figures are sensitive to such technical factors as depreciation, or the taxation
of social security, or how one divides self-employment income between “capital income” and “labor income.”
These later estimates show somewhat higher average tax rates on capital income in the welfare states than in
the low-budget countries. Yet a drawback of the newer Carey-Rabesona estimates is that they remove self-
employment income from either the capital or the labor income denominator, implying that self-employment
pays virtually zero taxes. The preponderance of evidence supports the text’s finding that the effective
average or marginal tax rates on capital are not higher in the welfare states than in the low-social-budget
countries.
18
     McLure (1990, 283), Carey and Tchilinguarian (2000, 39-40).
19
     Hansson and Stuart (1990, 135-137). Chapter 11 expands on Sweden’s hidden deductions.
20
     Fuchs, Krueger, and Poterba (1998, 1392-1394).
21
     Steinmo (1993, 213-214).
22
     The advance of anti-smoking campaigns does not correlate easily with the rate of tobacco taxation.
Among the heavy taxers, Sweden was a pioneer in anti-smoking laws and campaigns, but Denmark and
Norway have lagged in cutting down smoking. Among the countries with lower tobacco tax rates, Canada
and the United States were relatively advanced in cutting down on smoking across the 1980s, while Japan
was not (Wilensky 2002: 565-573).
23
     For a good summary chronology of American welfare policy since 1935, see Moffitt (2002a).
24
     The comparison with Sweden calls for two caveats. One is that the Swedish tax rates omit the consumption
tax. Including it would require reading something like “sixty percent” for “fifty percent” in this paragraph.
The other is that a study of Denmark in the same Atkinson-Mogensen volume implies very high marginal tax
rates, such as ninety percent. Yet the rates may not be comparable, and the Danish study goes on to note that
labor supply did not seem to respond to the extremely high tax rate. Either the Danes have discovered secret
improvements in program design, or the Danish marginal tax rate is well below that ninety percent figure.
25
     Blondal and Scarpetta (1998), Gruber and Wise (1999), and Wilensky (2002, 550-8).
26
     The “deadweight” welfare cost of earlier retirement is even smaller than the GDP cost, because the
retirees’ time has a positive value approximated by the foregone wage. This adds a benefit to the retirement
subsidy, one that is missed by GDP calculations.
27
     See, for example, Gruber and Wise (1999, 9) and the sources cited there.
28
     Gruber and Wise 1999, pages 58-64, 94-7, 124-9, 218-20, 259-62, 284-93, 340-42, 385-9, 422-5, and 456-
60.
29
     See Gruber and Wise 277 on the popularity of disability insurance with Dutch employers.


                                                                                                  Page 54
30
     OECD (1998d, 133-141 and 203-205).
31
     See Chapter 19 by Gayle Allard and Peter H. Lindert, in Volume 2.
32
     See Chapter 19 by Allard and Lindert, in Volume 2.
33
     See OECD (1994a, 1994b), and the sources cited by Forslund and Krueger 1997. In Chapter 19 of Volume
2, Gayle Allard and I also find no clear stimulus to jobs from ALMP.
34
     Heckman and Lochner 2000.
35
     See Blank (2000, 2002) and the whole volume 31 of OECD Economic Studies (2000/2) devoted to the
theme of “making work pay.”
36
     Fuchs (1988, 59).
37
     Joshi et al. (1998).
38
     Waldfogel (1998), Joshi et al. (1998).
39
     Or (2000).
40
     Reinhardt (2000, 77).
41
     Hollingsworth et al. (1990, 141-146).
42
     World Bank (1993), Mehrotra and Delamonica (forthcoming).
43
     Or (2000).
44
     Again, there is strong evidence from developing countries linking basic health care for the poor with
productivity gains. Also strong is the evidence that investing in women’s basic schooling promotes their own
and their children’s health and productivity. See World Bank, World Development Report (1993) and
Mehrotra and Delamonica (forthcoming) for surveys of that evidence.
45
     Chapter 12 of the book version actually presents two principles behind the free-lunch result in democratic
welfare states. One is the budget stakes principle described here. The other is the principle that universalism
-- flat tax rates that apply to all -- probably cuts costs.
46
     Becker (1983, 1985), and Becker and Mulligan (1998).
47
     See Steinmo (1993, especially 126-35), and Wilensky (2002, 384-5).
            Daunton (2002b, Chapter 10) describes and explains Britain’s similar reluctant shift to VAT in 1973,
after much debate and with conservative initiative. On the multi-country shift from “visible” direct taxes
toward VAT in the 1970s and 1980s, see Wilensky (2002, 378-83).
48
     For a leading example, see Hall and Rabushka (1985).
49
     Steinmo (1993, 142-4).
50
     Gruber and Wise (1999, Chs. 4, 5, 7), Wilensky (2002, 550-8). OECD (1998e, 77-107).
51
     See Growing Public, Chapter 11.




                                                                                                 Page 55
