                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    WHO GETS HEALTH CARE?

                                            Robert W. Fogel
                                             Chulhee Lee

                                          Working Paper 9870
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9870


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research

©2003 by Robert W. Fogel and Chulhee Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.
Who Gets Health Care?
Robert W. Fogel and Chulhee Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 9870
July 2003
JEL No. I1, I11

                                            ABSTRACT

Around the world, as in the United States, concern is growing about who gets health care.
Individuals from different socioeconomic backgrounds face distressingly different prospects of
living a healthy life. Disparities in various measures of health between the privileged and the

deprived still remain wide, despite the long-term tendency toward a healthier society. Some
investigators believe the shift in the health care system in industrial countries from the principle of

universal access to a more market-oriented system may be one cause of the growing disparities;

rising income inequality is another potential culprit. Policy makers worldwide speak of more

efficiently delivering "essential" health care---but disagree on what counts as essential and on the

optimal mix of private and government components of service. After reviewing the economic and

epidemiological literature on disparities in health and health care systems, the question of how to

define "essential" health care is considered. The paper concludes with a discussion of the policy

implications of the analysis.


Robert W. Fogel                                        Chulhee Lee
Center for Population Economics                        School of Economics
Graduate School of Business                            Seoul National University
1101 East 58th Street                                  San 56-1, Sillim-dong
Chicago, IL 60637-1511                                 Kwanak-ku, Seoul 151-742
and NBER                                               Korea
susan.jones@gsb.uchicago.edu                           clee@prome.snu.ac.kr
                                    Who Gets Health Care?1

       Around the world, as in the United States, concern is growing about who gets health care.

Individuals from different socioeconomic backgrounds face distressingly different prospects of

living a healthy life. As numerous studies confirm, the disparities in various measures of health

between the privileged and the deprived still remain wide, even in rich countries, despite the

long-term tendency toward a healthier society.

       Some investigators believe that the disparities are actually increasing. They suggest that

the shift in the health care system in advanced industrial countries from the principle of universal

access to a more market-oriented system may be one cause of the growing disparities they

observe; rising income inequality is another potential culprit.

       Policy makers worldwide meanwhile speak of more efficiently delivering “essential”

health care, but nobody is certain what this means in practice.

       What counts as “essential” in health care? What is the optimal mix of private and

government components of health care services?

       It is these questions that we wish to explore in more detail. After reviewing the economic

and epidemiological literature on disparities in health and health care systems, we will tackle

directly the question of how to define “essential” health care—and then explore the policy

implications of our analysis.

                                               ***

       In the United States, substantial socioeconomic differences in illness and death rates have

been observed.2 Pappas et al. found that these disparities not only vary widely by the level of

education but that they increased between 1960 and 1986 for both men and women.3

       Growing inequalities in well-being and access to health care have been reported for other




                                                                                                  1
nations, too. In Britain, recent surveys of individuals have provided extensive evidence of

socioeconomic disparities in the prevalence of illness, the probability of long-term limiting

illness, perinatal deaths, low birth weight, and stillbirth risk.4 In Denmark, it was observed that

illness and death due to cardiovascular disease was promoted by inequalities in income.

Moreover, this disparity rapidly increased between the early 1980s and 1990s.5 Socioeconomic

differences in death rates in Rome rose during the early 1990s.6 In China, Liu et al. found that

gap in levels of health between urban and rural residents widened between 1985 and 1993 in

spite of rapid economic growth.7 Disparities have also increased in less serious conditions. Thus,

while overall oral health had improved in Norway, the disparities in the treatment of cavities by

socioeconomic group had increased from 1983 to 1994.8

       In recent years, with growing public attention to the problem of health inequalities, a

huge literature has accumulated regarding the link between socioeconomic factors and health.

Among various lines of recent research, the influence of income inequality on health is perhaps

the most popular area. Over the last decade, a series of studies have provided evidence that the

extent of income inequality in society is negatively associated with the health status of citizens,

based on cross-sectional comparisons between and within countries.9

       These empirical findings led to a controversy over the pathway through which income

inequality affects individual health status. Wilkinson and his collaborators largely focus on the

negative effect of psychosocial stress resulting from the perceptions of relative deprivation and

the disruption in social cohesion that are more prevalent in unequal societies.10 This hypothesis is

substantiated by the finding that more egalitarian societies exhibit more cohesion, less violence,

lower homicide rates, more trust, lower hostility scores, and more involvement in community

life.11 On the other hand, Lynch and his colleagues emphasize that the effect of income




                                                                                                  2
inequality on health reflects a combination of high levels of exposure to disease, combined with

systematic underinvestment in education, housing, income, and public and private sanitation.12

       A number of studies have raised concerns about the validity of the empirical relationship

between income inequality and health.13 Deaton recently suggested that there is no evidence that

income inequality affects individual health.14 According to his study, previous evidence on

international comparisons is weakened by the lack of adequate data on health for some countries

and of comparable data for others. The link between income inequality and health that is

observed in cross-sectional U.S. data becomes insignificant once various effects of population

composition, especially the effect of race, are considered. Deaton argues that it is the level of a

country’s income, rather than the degree of inequality, that is crucial.

       Inequality in health care is regarded as another potential determining factor of disparities

in health status. Many blame the rising inequality in health care for the trend toward a greater

inequality in health. A large number of studies suggest that the extent of inequalities in access to

and quality of health care is large. Gabel notes that the coverage of job-based health insurance in

the U.S. declined between 1977 and 1998, particularly among low-skilled, marginal workers,

because of the decline in real wages among low-skilled workers, a 2.6-fold real increase in the

cost of health insurance, and a 3.5-fold nominal increase in the cost of health insurance.15 A

survey by Fiscella et al. suggests that, even among those with health insurance, lower

socioeconomic position is associated with receiving fewer mammograms, childhood and

influenza immunizations, and diabetic eye examinations, later enrollment in prenatal care, and

lower quality of ambulatory and hospital care.16

       Inequality in health care is also widely observed outside the United States. In Britain,

doctors serving poor populations had significantly lower rates of utilization of more advanced




                                                                                                  3
technologies such as angiography and revascularization in coronary artery surgery.17 There is

substantial inequality of access to Occupation Health (OH) service provisions in the National

Health Service (NHS).18 In Australian dentists’ offices, uninsured patients and those visiting for

emergencies had less favorable service patterns, such as higher rates of extractions but lower

rates of preventive and crown and bridge services.19 In eight developing countries, including

Burkina Faso, Guatemala, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, South Africa, Thailand, and

Zambia, Makinen et al. found that richer groups were more likely to obtain care when sick, to be

seen by a doctor, and to receive medicines when they are ill, than poorer groups.20 An interesting

exception to these usual patterns of health care disparities is New Zealand, where the poor were

found to receive either appropriate or slightly excessive use of services given their estimated

health needs. This may be explained by the effects of a continued restructuring of the New

Zealand public health system that focuses on providing decent minimum care.21

       Some investigators believe that disparities in health delivery are increasing.22 Since the

demand for health care has a relatively large income elasticity (defined as the percentage

increase in health expenditures brought about by a 1-percent increase in income), a widening of

the income gap between rich and poor would produce an even greater disparity in expenditure on

health delivery. Additionally, as implied by the finding of Shi et al., a rise in income inequality

in a locality may undermine primary healthcare provisions, especially for its poorer residents.23

Finally, advances in medical technologies could produce a greater extent of inequalities in health

care as well as health status. Because more educated people tend to take better care of

themselves and more shrewdly utilize the health care system, according to a recent study by

Goldman and Lakdawalla, reductions in the price of health care or expansions in the overall

demand for health inputs may disproportionately benefit the well educated.24




                                                                                                 4
                                               ***

       As this review of the literature on health reveals, economists and epidemiologists are

primarily focused on empirical issues: establishing the facts on differences in health and health

care by socioeconomic status, and measuring the impact of inequality on health outcomes.

Discussions of such normative issues as how much of national resources ought to be devoted to

health care or how these resources ought to be distributed within the population are left largely to

legislatures and to various specific-interest organizations and think-tanks.

       International organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) have called on all countries

to guarantee delivery of “high-quality essential care to all persons, defined mostly by criteria of

effectiveness, cost and social acceptability.”25 Cost has become a controlling issue since the

health care systems established in most OECD countries after World War II, which sought to

guarantee complete health care for all through government-run health or insurance systems, have

become too expensive, and now threaten the fiscal stability of governments. As incomes rose,

the public demand for health services increased much more rapidly than income (because of the

high income elasticity of the demand for health care), making the cost of operating such systems

unsustainable.

       The new systems of “essential care,” now in the course of construction in OECD

countries, recognize the necessity of explicitly establishing priorities among health interventions

(rather than unlimited coverage), which means that it has become necessary to ration health care

services much more tightly than was previously conceded. In order to guarantee that the health

of the poor is not neglected under the new system, WHO proposes three principles: health care

services should be prepaid (i.e., taxes for health care should be collected throughout the working




                                                                                                  5
life, even though the need for services is relatively low during young adult and middle ages);

those who are healthy should subsidize those who are sick (which means that taxes should not be

adjusted to reflect differential health risks, as policy rates often are under private insurance); and

the rich should subsidize the poor (which means both that the rich should pay higher health taxes

than the poor and that the quality of service in government-run programs should be no better or

more comprehensive for privileged groups).26

       This recommended standard explicitly recognizes that privately funded health programs

and private insurance will need to provide a major part of a nation’s health services. Since

persons in the upper half of income distributions tend to spend more on health services than

poorer people do, the distribution of health services is bound to be unequal. In fact, all OECD

countries currently have mixed private and governmental systems, ranging from about 85 percent

of total expenditures made by the government in Great Britain to about 45 percent in the United

States.27 It is likely that the reforms now in progress will generally increase the private share of

health care services.

       There is no clear agreement currently on the optimal mix of private and government

components of health care services? There is not much of a literature on this question, nor is

there a consensus on the criteria that should be invoked to resolve the issue.             Moreover,

conditions vary so much from country to country that the optimal mix cannot be the same for all

countries.

       In very poor countries, where the need for health care services is great, the average

annual level of per capita expenditures from both sources is shockingly low. In such countries as

Ethiopia, Haiti, Indonesia, and Nepal, annual per capita expenditures range between $20 and $56

(using international dollars, which adjust exchange rates for the domestic purchasing power of a




                                                                                                    6
country’s currency). In India, the figure is a still a very low $84 and in China it is $74. By

contrast, the figures for the five largest countries of Western Europe are: France $2,135,

Germany $2,365, Italy $1,824, Spain $1,211, and the United Kingdom $1,193. Annual per

capita expenditures in the United States on health care, $3,724, are more than three times the

British figure and more than 1.5 times the German figure. The spending of the typical American

in 10 days exceeds the average annual expenditures of people living in countries with more than

three-fifths of the world’s population.

       The fact that the Europeans spend so much less on health care than Americans has led

some critics to argue that the American system is wasteful. This contention is often buttressed

by the fact that American disability-adjusted life expectancy at birth is less than that of France,

Spain, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Germany. If all those extra dollars spent by Americans

are not buying better health and longer lives, what are they buying?

       It is not yet possible to provide an adequate answer to that question. It is often assumed

that the increase in longevity over the past two or three decades is due primarily to the increased

amount and quality of health care services. These is no doubt that medical interventions have

saved many lives, especially in such areas as infectious diseases, cancer, and heart disease.

However, we cannot yet say how much of the six or so years of increase in life expectancy since

1970 is due to medical interventions and how much is due to better levels of education,

improvements in housing, and other factors that contribute to the increase in life expectancy.

       Some recent findings suggest that most of the huge increase in life expectancy since 1900

is due to the large investment in public health programs between 1880 and World War II that

cleaned up the water and milk supplies, developed modern waste disposal systems, reduced air

pollution, and improved nutritional status.28 Of course these public health programs were made




                                                                                                 7
possible by advances in medical knowledge.         But the research behind these public health

advances represents a relatively small part of what is included in the category of “health

expenditures.” In the United States, for example, medical research (not including R&D of drug

companies and providers of medical equipment and supplies) adds up to just 1.7 percent of U.S.

national health expenditures.

       Since deaths due to infectious diseases are now a small proportion of total deaths, it

might seem that environmental improvements that were so important in reducing health risks

before 1950 have been exhausted. Such a conclusion is premature. A series of recent studies has

reported a connection between exposure to stress (biological and social) in early life, including

insults in utero and during infancy, with the onset of chronic diseases at middle and late ages,

and with life expectancy. The strongest evidence for such links that has emerged thus far is with

respect to hypertension, coronary heart disease, and type II diabetes.29 A review by Law and

Shiell of 32 papers dealing with the relationship between birthweight and hypertension showed a

tendency for middle-aged blood pressure to increase as birthweight declined.30 Evidence of a

connection between birth size and later coronary heart disease has been found in England, Wales,

Sweden, India, and Finland.31 The volume of studies confirming the impact of insults during

developmental ages on health in later life has increased substantially since 1994.32

       One of the strongest recent confirmations of the impact of early life events on longevity

is a study reporting a statistically significant relationship between longevity after age 50 and

week of birth for cohorts born between 1863 and 1918. In the northern hemisphere, average

length of life is shortest for those born in the second quarter of the year and longest for those

born in the fourth quarter. In Australia, the relationship between birth month and longevity

exists but the peak and trough are the mirror image of that in the northern hemisphere.33 This




                                                                                               8
result, which is apparently related to seasonal variations in nutritional status, has also been found

in the Union Army data for cohorts born between 1820 and 1850.34 Consequently, we cannot

rule out the proposition that one of the biggest factors influencing the prevalence rates of the

chronic diseases among the elderly in 2001 (and which accounts for a huge slice of national

medical expenditures), was their exposure to environmental insults half a century, or more, ago.

       These new scientific findings are directly relevant to the problem of how to define

“essential” health care and how to divide the national budget for health (regardless of how it is

financed) among competing needs. It may well be that a very large increase in expenditures on

antenatal care and pediatric care in infancy and early childhood is the most effective way to

improve health over the entire life cycle, by delaying the onset of chronic diseases, alleviating

their severity if they do occur, and increasing longevity.

       Whatever the virtues of such a strategy, it raises the issue of intergenerational bias. This

strategy gives a preference to the unborn and the very young over the immediate needs of the

elderly. It is a kind of double blow to needs of the elderly, who are now suffering from the early

onset of chronic conditions and premature disability because of environmental insults they

incurred in utero and early childhood. Yet, under a strategy that emphasizes antenatal and early

childhood care, in order to make new generations better off throughout their life cycles, the

elderly of today will be asked to restrain their demand for relief.

       It is much easier to define “essential care” in the impoverished nations of the world,

because their alternatives are so stark. They are still suffering from deadly killers and cripplers,

virtually eliminated from OECD nations, that can be vanquished at quite modest costs compared

to the expensive procedures routinely used to deal with more moderate complaints in rich

countries. The prospects of the poorest billion in the Third World can be “radically improved by




                                                                                                       9
targeting a relatively small set of diseases and conditions.”35

       The urgent needs include the distribution of drugs to combat tuberculosis, malaria, and

acute gastrointestinal and respiratory infections; vaccines to prevent measles, tetanus and

diphtheria; and improved nutrition in order to revitalize immune systems, reduce perinatal

deaths, lower death rates from a wide range of infectious diseases, and improve the functioning

of the central nervous system. The Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (CMH) of the

World Health Organization has estimated that 87 percent of deaths among children under age 5,

71 percent of deaths between ages 5 and 29 and 47 percent of deaths between ages 30 and 69 can

be avoided by making use of available drugs and vaccines, by the delivery of vital nutrients, and

by public health programs aimed at producing safe water supplies, improved sanitation, and

improved health education. CMH estimates that donations from private and public sources in

OECD countries, amounting to just 0.14 percent of their combined GDP, will be enough to

realize these opportunities rapidly.

       Defining “essential care” for the United States is more problematic because the

technologies needed for rapid and dramatic improvements in health and longevity are still on the

drawing board, in contrast to poor countries where the problem is how to deliver effectively

known health technologies. To clarify the issue of “essential care” in a country where per capita

expenditures on health exceed those of poor nations by 50 to 150 times, it is necessary to

consider exactly what it is that our luxurious (even by European standards) expenditures are

buying.

       Saving lives, as important as it is, and as effective at it as modern medicine has become,

is not the main activity of physicians and other health professionals. As I have already indicated,

it is likely that past public health reforms, improvements in nutrition and other living standards,




                                                                                                10
and the democratization of education have done much more to increase longevity than has

clinical medicine. The main thing that physicians do is to make life more bearable: to relieve

pain, to reduce the severity of chronic conditions, to postpone disabilities or even overcome

some of them, to mend broken limbs, to prescribe drugs, and to reduce anxiety, overcome

depression, and instruct individuals on how to take care of themselves.

       Europeans are much more willing than Americans to stint on “unnecessary” services, on

procedures that are “optional” rather than “vital,” on conveniences rather than necessities, on

small rather than large reductions in risk, and on wide choice rather than limited choice or no

choice (take it or leave it). Consider the issue of queuing, one of the principal devices employed

by public health systems in Europe to keep demand from exceeding politically negotiated

budgets. Americans are unwilling to wait two years or more for a hernia operation, as is now the

case in Britain, but demand that such a service be available quickly, in a few weeks in most

cases. Americans chafe at another favorite European device to control costs: rationing. They do

not want to be told that they are too old or too fit or not fit enough to be eligible for some course

of treatment. Nor are they willing to have their access to specialists sharply curtailed, and so the

ratio of specialists to primary care physicians is much higher in the U.S. than elsewhere. They

also resist hasty impersonal examinations and denial of access to inpatient hospital care.36 And

the rich insist on being allowed to spend as much on health care as they desire, even if some of

these expenditures are wasteful.

       And so the United States has some 6,000 hospitals, while Britain’s National Health

Service has only 430 very large hospitals (beds per capita are similar in both countries).37 Every

substantial suburban community in the U. S. demands its own facility with a wide range of

services.   Today, not just research hospitals, but many community hospitals have on staff




                                                                                                  11
physicians who specialize in heart bypass surgery and other high-tech procedures.            Since

Americans like to save a buck as much as Europeans, they are willing to join HMOs, but HMOs

have found that to be competitive they have to offer numerous options on co-payments, access to

physicians outside of the primary network, and self-referral to specialists. Americans also

demand the option to change health plans if they are dissatisfied. Such options cost money,

among other things because they increase the cost of administration, even if they do not improve

health outcomes.38

       The American passion for such individually tailored health services may be attributed to

American culture: the wide-open spaces, evangelical religion, and hostility to government. But it

also reflects income. The average American, after all, is fifty percent richer than the average

British person. Hence, it is not strange that they are willing to consume services that are too

expensive for poorer people. Americans are no more self-indulgent in their purchases of health

care than they are in their purchases of appliances or cars.39

       And so, what is viewed as “essential” health care in the United States includes items that

in other cultures would be regarded as wasteful luxuries.         This misunderstanding of the

American system is relevant to the proposition that 15 percent of Americans are “uncovered” by

health insurance. “Uncovered” does not mean that they are untreated. The uninsured see doctors

almost as frequently as the insured. Nor is it clear that the effectiveness of their care is always

less than those who have insurance. The uninsured are treated in public clinics and in emergency

rooms, which (although they lack the conveniences of insured care and may have long queues)

provide competent services, both standard and high tech.40

       Although access to health care matters, insurance does not guarantee adequate access.

Moreover, while some of the uninsured in the U. S. system are in poorer health than the insured,




                                                                                                12
others are in prime ages, have relatively good health, and prefer to self-insure. An important but

poorly addressed issue is how different attitudes toward risk influence the insured and the

uninsured in deciding when and where to seek health care. This issue is important when

considering solutions to those who are under-served in health care, since under-service of the

poor also exists in countries with universal health insurance.41 If the poor and the young are

willing to accept higher health risks than are the rich and the elderly, merely extending

entitlements may not be adequate. An aggressive outreach program, targeted at those who fail to

take advantage of entitlements, may be required.

                                                   ***

       The most effective way to improve the health system for the poor is by identifying their

most urgent needs and designing an effective way of ministering to those specific needs. This

goal will not be met merely by equalizing the annual number of visits to doctors (since the rich

often waste medical services) or the annual expenditures on drugs (since the rich often

overmedicate). Focusing on the specific needs of the poor may not save money but it will insure

that whatever is spent is properly targeted.

       In this spirit, the most cost-effective way to help the poor would be an expansion of

prenatal and postnatal care targeted particularly at young single mothers.        The priority is

suggested by the new evidence that proper nutrition, including supplements of such key nutrients

as folate and iron, can reduce perinatal deaths and birth defects, including damage to the central

nervous system. This would include counseling pregnant women on the dangers to the fetus

from smoking and consumption of alcohol, on the benefits from proper diets, regular and early

examinations, and exposing the fetus to a stimulating environment (music and conversation). A

focus on young, single mothers makes sense not only because they are among the most needy,




                                                                                               13
but also because there is now persuasive evidence that insults in utero that reduce birth weight

and length, as well as inadequate weight gains in infancy, greatly increase health risks

throughout the life cycle.

       A second priority is improved health education and mentoring to enable poorly educated

people, both young and old, to identify their health problems, to be able to follow instructions for

health care, to properly use medication, and to involve them in social networks conducive to

good health. It not enough to wait for such individuals to seek out available service. Outreach

programs can be developed to identify the needy individuals and this can be done in the most

cost-effective way by organizations already experienced in outreach, so that they can include

health screening and counseling among their services. Systems for monitoring the effectiveness

of such community organizations also need to be established.

       Another priority is the reintroduction into public schools, particularly those in poor

neighborhoods, from nursery school through the twelfth grade of periodic health screening

programs, using nurses and physicians on a contract basis. Personnel could be employed to

insure that parents understand the nature of their children’s problems and who can direct the

parents to public health facilities that can provide appropriate services.

       A fourth initiative is the establishment of public health clinics in underserved poor

neighborhoods that can supplement the emergency rooms of regular hospitals, which are a

frequent source of routine health care services for the poor and near poor.42 Convenient access is

a key issue, because even individuals with insurance, such as those on Medicaid, fail to take

advantage of available facilities because they are inconvenient. Time is a cost to the poor as well

as the rich, and lack of convenient facilities may cause individuals to accept higher health risks

than they would otherwise choose. The mission of community clinics could include health




                                                                                                 14
education in addition to treatment. Community clinics need to be regularly monitored to insure

their effectiveness. Basements of churches, and space in public schools after normal teaching

hours can be good locations for community clinics both because they help to stretch available

funds and because they provide familiar settings.

        Readers may be surprised that we have not emphasized the extension of health insurance

policies to the 15 percent of the population not currently insured. The flap over insurance has

more to do with taxation than with health services. Keep in mind that a large portion of the poor

are already entitled to health care under Medicaid and that the near poor often receive free health

care through county or city hospitals and emergency rooms. What they do not do is pay taxes for

those services. Most proposals for health insurance imply the taxation of their wages for services

they already receive. Such insurance may relieve the pressure on the public purse but it will not

guarantee better health care. We believe that health screening in schools and community clinics

has a better chance at success than unexercised theoretical entitlements.

        Finally, any consideration of how to reduce health inequality must involve a

reconsideration of America’s obligation to increase its contribution to the international campaign

to bring vaccines and other products to children and adults whose lives can be saved, if there is

the international will to do so. The lack of access to such products in the poorest fifty or so

countries is the most glaring instance of inequality in the global health system and a lingering

threat to the health of those in rich countries.

        The large advances in life expectancy in China and other emerging economies show that

it is not necessary to wait for industrialization to be completed before making major advances in

health and longevity. Modern methods of sanitation and other public health programs can be

introduced at modest cost. Cleaning up the water supply, improving the distribution of basic




                                                                                                15
nutrients, draining swamps and otherwise disrupting vectors of disease, and improvements in

waste disposal can be achieved quickly and cheaply, as has been demonstrated by China,

Indonesia, and Malaysia.43 OECD nations can help speed up the process in countries still

lagging behind by training public health officials, helping to supply vital nutrients to pregnant

mothers and infants, and by helping to supply antibiotics and other vital drugs and vaccines.

       A particularly urgent issue is posed by the worldwide pandemic of HIV/AIDS. Although

death rates from AIDS have recently declined in the United States and other OECD nations,

AIDS is ravaging Africa.44 Of the three million individuals worldwide who died of AIDS in

2000, more than two million lived in Sub-Saharan Africa. Although rates of infection are still

relatively low in India and China, they are at risk of a rapid escalation in the spread of the

infection. Public campaigns to inform the populations of these countries of the threat of this

disease, of means of reducing the odds of infection, and of available treatment for those already

infected can be effective. OECD and international agencies can provide both money and skilled

personnel to confront AIDS and other deadly infectious diseases, and to help provide vaccines

and other drug therapies to those who need them. One important way to help is by increasing the

R&D budgets of the OECD nations into diseases that afflict the poor countries of the world. It is

not only morality but also self-interest that argues for these measures. Epidemics in the Third

World can spread to OECD nations.




                                                                                                16
                                                NOTES

1. We have benefited from the insightful suggestions of Bernard Harris and David Meltzer. Parts

  of the research for this paper were supported by a grant from the National Institute of Aging.


2. Youlian Liao, Daniel L. McGee, Jay S. Kaufman, Guichan Cao, and Richard S. Cooper,

  “Socioeconomic Status and Morbidity in the Last Years of Life,” American Journal of Public

  Health 89 (4) (April 1999): 569–572; James P. Smith, “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets,”

  Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (2) (Spring 1999): 145-166; Vincent Lorant and René

  Tonglet, “Obesity: Trend in Inequality,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 54

  (8) (August 2000): 637–638.


3. Gregory Pappas, Susan Queen, Wilbur Hadden, and Gail Fisher, “The Increasing Disparity in

  Mortality between Socioeconomic Groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986,” New

  England Journal of Medicine 329 (2) (8 July 1993): 103–109.


4. Russel Ecob and George Davey Smith, “Income and Health: What Is the Nature of the

  Relationship?” Social Science & Medicine 48 (5) (March 1999): 693–705; Vani K. Borooah,

  “Occupational Class and the Probability of Long-Term Limiting Illness,” Social Science &

  Medicine 49 (2) (July 1999): 253–266; S. Bambang, N. J. Spencer, S. Logan, and L. Gill,

  “Cause-Specific Perinatal Death Rates, Birth Weight, and Deprivation in the West Midlands,

  1991–93,” Child: Care, Health and Development 26 (1) (January 2000): 73–82; S. Pattenden,

  H. Dolk, and M. Vrijheid, “Inequalities in Low Birth Weight,” Journal of Epidemiology and

  Community Health 53 (6) (June 1999): 355–358; T. J. B. Dummer, H. O. Dickinson, M. S.

  Pearce, M. E. Charlton, L. Parker, “Stillbirth Risk with Social Class and Deprivation,”

  Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 53 (2) (February 2000): 147–155.



                                                                                               17
5. Finn Tüchsen and Lars A. Endahl, “Increasing Inequality in Ischaemic Heart Disease

  Morbidity among Employed Men in Denmark 1981–1993,” International Journal of

  Epidemiology 28 (4) (August 1999): 640–644; Merete Osler, Lars-Ulrik Gerdes, Michael

  Davidsen, Henrik Brønnum-Hansen, Mette Madsen, Torben Jørgensen, and Marianne Schroll,

  “Socioeconomic Status and Trends in Risk Factors for Cardiovascular Disease in the Danish

  MONICA Population, 1982–1992,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 54 (2)

  (February 2000): 108–113.


6. Paola Michelozzi, Carlo A. Perucci, Francesco Forastiere, Danilo Fusco, Carla Ancona, and

  Valerio Dell’Orco, “ Inequality in Health: Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality in Rome,

  1990–95,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 53 (11) (November 1999): 687–

  693.


7. Yuanli Liu, William C. Hsiao, and Karen Eggleston, “Equity in Health and Health Care: The

  Chinese Experience,” Social Science & Medicine 49 (10) (November 1999): 1349–1356.


8. A. Schuller, “Better Oral Health, More Inequality,” Community Dental Health 16 (3)

  (September 1999): 154–159.


9. R. G. Wilkinson, “Income Distribution and Life-Expectancy,” British Medical Journal 304

  (6820) (18 January 1992): 165–168; I. Kawachi and B. P. Kennedy, “The Relationship of

  Income Inequality to Mortality: Does the Choice of Indicator Matter?” Social Science &

  Medicine, 45 (7) (October 1997): 1121–1127; J. Lynch, G. Kaplan, E. Pamuk, R. D. Cohen,

  K. E. Heck, J. L. Balfour, and I. H. Yen, “Income Inequality and Mortality in Metropolitan

  Areas of the United States,” American Journal of Public Health 88 (7) (July 1998): 1974–



                                                                                           18
  1980; Mah-Jabeen Soobader and Felicia B. LeClere, “Aggregation and Measurement of

  Income Inequality: Effects on Morbidity,” Social Science & Medicine 48 (6) (March 1999):

  733–744.


10. R. G. Wilkinson, Unhealthy Societies (London: Routledge, 1996); idem., Mind the Gap:

  Hierarchies, Health, and Human Evolution (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2000); Ichiro

  Kawachi, Bruce P. Kennedy, and Richard G. Wilkinson, eds., The Society and Population

  Health Reader, vol. 1, Income Inequality and Health (New York: New Press, 1999).


11. R. D. Putnam, Making Democracy Work (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993);

   Wilkinson, Unhealthy Societies; I. Kawachi, B. P. Kennedy, K. Lochner, and D. Prothrow-

   Stith, “Social Capital, Income Inequality, and Mortaltiy,” American Journal of Public Health

   87 (9) (September 1997): 1491–1498.


12. John W. Lynch, George Davey-Smith, George A. Kaplan, and James S. House, “Income

   Inequality and Mortality: Importance to Health of Individual Income, Psychological

   Environment, or Material Conditions,” British Medical Journal 320 (7243) (29 April 2000):

   1200–1204.


13. K. Fiscella and P. Franks, “Poverty or Income Inequality As a Predictor of Mortality,” British

   Medical Journal 314 (7096) (14 June 1997): 1724–1728; H. Gravelle, “How Much of the

   Relation between Population Mortality and Unequal Distribution of Income is a Statistical

   Artefact?” British Medical Journal 316 (7128) (31 January 1998): 382–385.


14. Angus Deaton, Health, Inequality, and Economic Development. NBER Working Paper 8318.




                                                                                               19
15. Jon R. Gabel, “Job-Based Health Insurance, 1977–1998,” Health Affairs 18 (6)

   (November/December 1999): 62–74.


16. Kevin Fiscella, Peter Franks, Marthe R. Gold, and Carolyn M. Clancy, “Inequality in

   Quality: Addressing the Socioeconomic, Racial, and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care,”

   Journal of the American Medical Association 283 (19) (17 May 2000): 2579–2584.


17. Julia Hippisley-Cox, “Inequality in Access to Coronary Angiography and Revascularisation:

   The Association of Deprivation and Location of Primary Care Services,” British Journal of

   General Practice 50 (455) (June 2000): 449–454.


18. A. Hughes, Robin Philipp, and Kit Harling, “Provision and Staffing of NHS Occupational

   Health Services in England and Wales,” Occupational and Environmental Medicine 56 (10)

   (October 1999): 714–717.


19. D. S. Brennan, A. J. Spencer, and F. S. P. Szuster, “Service Provision Patterns by Main

   Diagnoses and Characteristics of Patients,” Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology 28

   (3) (June 2000): 225–233.


20. M. Makinen, H. Waters, M. Rausch, N. Almagambetova, R. Bitran, L. Gilson, D. McIntyre,

   S. Pannarunothai, A. L. Prieto, G. Ubilla, and S. Ram, “Inequalities in Health Care Use and

   Expenditures,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 78 (1) (2000): 55–65.


21. David Peacock, Nancy Devlin, and Rob McGee. “The Horizontal Equity of Health Care in

   New Zealand,” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health 23 (2) (April 1999):

   126–130.




                                                                                           20
22. Louise J. Gunning-Schepers, and Karien Stronks. “Inequality in Health—Future Threats to

    Equity,” Acta Oncologica 38 (1) (1999): 57–61; David Coburn, “Income Inequality, Social

    Cohesion, and the Health Status of Populations: The Role of Neo-Liberalism,” Social Science

    & Medicine 51 (1) (July 2000): 135–146.


23. Leiyu Shi, Barbara Starfield, Bruce Kennedy, and Ichiro Kawachi, “Income Inequality,

    Primary Care, and Health Indicators,” Journal of Family Practice 48 (4) (April 1999): 275–

    284.


24. Dana Goldman and Darius Lakdawalla, “Understanding Health Disparities across Education

    Groups,” NBER Working Paper 8328.


25. World Health Organization, The World Health Report 2000: Health Systems: Improving

    Performance (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2000), xiii.


26. Ibid., xviii.


27. Ibid.; Jeremy Hurst, “Challenges for Health Systems in Member Countries of the

     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,” Bulletin of the World Health

     Organization 78 (6) (2000): 751–760.


28. Kenneth G. Manton, Eric Stallard, and Larry Corder, “Changes in the Age Dependence of

    Mortality and Disability: Cohort and Other Determinants,” Demography 34 (1) (February

    1997): 135–157; F. van Poppel and C. van der Heijden, “The Effects of Water Supply on

    Infant and Childhood Mortality: A Review of Historical Evidence,” Health Transition

    Review: The Cultural, Social, and Behavioural Determinants of Health 7 (2) (October 1997):




                                                                                            21
   113–148; D. J. P. Barker, Mothers, Babies, and Health in Later Life, 2d ed. (Edinburgh and

   New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1998); Robert W. Fogel, The Fourth Great Awakening

   and the Future of Egalitarianism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).


29. J. L. Cresswell, P. Egger, C. H. D. Fall, C. Osmond, R. B. Fraser, and D. J. P. Barker, “Is the

   Age of Menopause Determined In Utero?” Early Human Development 49 (2) (19 September

   1997): 143–148; D. J. P. Barker, “Fetal Nutrition and Cardiovascular Disease in Later Life,”

   British Medical Bulletin 53 (1) January 1997): 96–108; Jan A. Henry, Manjeet Bolla, Clive

   Osmond, Caroline Fall, David J. P. Barker, and Steve E. Humphries. “The Effects of

   Genotype and Infant Weight on Adult Plasma Levels of Fibrinogen, Factor VII, and LDL

   Cholesterol Are Additive,” Journal of Medical Genetics 34 (7) (July 1997): 553–558; A. C.

   J. Ravelli, J. H. P. van der Meulen, R. P. J. Michels, C. Osmond, D. J. P. Barker, C. N. Hales,

   and O. P. Bleker, “Glucose Tolerance in Adults after Prenatal Exposure to Famine,” Lancet

   351 (9097) (17 January 1998): 173–177; Nevin S. Scrimshaw, “More Evidence That Foetal

   Nutrition Contributes to Chronic Disease in Later Life,” British Medical Journal 315 (7112)

   (4 October 1997): 825–826; D. J. P. Barker and C. N. Martyn., “The Fetal Origins of

   Hypertension,” Advances in Nephrology from the Necker Hospital 26 (1997): 65–72; Swen-

   Olof Andersson, Alicja Wolk, Reinhold Bergström, Hans-Olov Adami, Göran Engholm,

   Anders Englund, and Olof Nyrén, “Body Size and Prostate Cancer: A 20-Year Follow-Up

   Study among 135006 Swedish Construction Workers,” Journal of the National Cancer

   Institute 89 (5) March 1997): 385–389.


30. Catherine M. Law, and Alistair W. Shiell. “Is Blood Pressure Inversely Related to Birth

   Weight? The Strength of Evidence from a Systematic Review of the Literature,” Journal of



                                                                                                22
   Hypertension 14 (8) (August 1996): 935–941.


31. Ibid.; Stephen Frankel, Peter Elwood, Peter Sweetnam, John Yarnell, and George Davey

   Smith, “Birthweight, Body-Mass Index in Middle Age, and Incident Coronary Heart

   Disease,” Lancet 348 (9040) (30 November 1996): 1478–1480; Ilona Koupilová, David A.

   Leon, and Denny Vågerö, “Can Confounding by Sociodemographic and Behavioural Factors

   Explain the Association between Size at Birth and Blood Pressure and Age 50 in Sweden?”

   Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 51 (1) (February 1997): 14–8; David A.

   Leon, Hans O. Lithell, Denny Vågerö, Ilona Koupilová, Rawya Mohsen, Lars Berglund,

   Ulla-Britt Lithell, and Paul M. McKeigue, “Reduced Fetal Growth Rate and Increased Risk

   of Death from Ischaemic Heart Disease: Cohort Study of 15 000 Swedish Men and Women

   Born 1915–29,” British Medical Journal 317 (7153) (25 July 1998): 241–245; T. Forsén, J.

   G. Ericksson, J. Tuomilehto, K. Teramo, C. Osmond, and D. J. Barker, “Mother’s Weight in

   Pregnancy and Coronary Heart Disease in a Cohort of Finnish Men: Follow-Up Study,”

   BMJ: British Medical Journal 315 (7112) (4 October 1997): 837–840; C. E. Stein, C. H. Fall,

   K. Kumaran, C. Osmond, V. Cox, and D. J. Barker, “Fetal Growth and Coronary Heart

   Disease in South India,” Lancet 348 (9037) (9 November 1996): 1269–1273; C. E. Stein, K.

   Kumaran, C. H. Fall, S. O. Shaheen, C. Osmond, and D. J. Barker, “Relation of Fetal Growth

   to Adult Lung Function in South India,” Thorax 52 (10) (October 1997): 895–899.


32. Nigel Paneth, and Mervyn Susser, “Early Origin of Coronary Heart Disease (the ‘Barker

   Hypothesis’),” British Medical Journal 310 (6977) (18 February 1995): 411–412; Ivan J.

   Perry, D. G. Beevers, P. H. Whincup, and D. Bareford, “Predictors of Ratio of Placental

   Weight to Fetal Weight in Multiethnic Community,” British Medical Journal 310 (6977) (18



                                                                                           23
   February 1995): 436–439; Scrimshaw, “More Evidence.”


33. Gabriele Doblhammer and James W. Vaupel, “Life Span Depends on Month of Birth,”

   Science 98 (5) (27 February 2001): 2934–2939.


34. Tayatat Kanjanapipatkul, The Effect of Month of Birth on Life Span of Union Veterans,

   typescript, Center for Population Economics, University of Chicago, 2001.


35. World Health Organization, Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, “Macroeconomics

   and Health: Investing in Health for Economic Development,” draft of final report to be

   presented by the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health to the World Health

   Organization (2001).


36. Hurst, “Challenges”; Neelam K. Sekhri, “Managed Care: The US Experience,” Bulletin of

   the World Health Organization 78 (6) (2000): 830–844.


37. U. S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 120th ed. (Washington, D. C.:

   U. S. Census Bureau, 2000), table 194; World Health Organization, Regional Office for

   Europe, “Highlights on Health in the United Kingdom,” (draft), April 1997, 35 (available on

   the web at http://www.who.dk/country/unk01.pdf); OECD, Society at a Glance: OECD

   Social Indicators, 2001 ed. (Paris: OECD, 2001).


38.Sekhri, “Managed Care.”


39. Fogel, Fourth Great Awakening.


40. Marc L. Berk and Claudia L. Schur, “Access to Care: How Much Difference Does Medicare

   Make?” Health Affairs 17 (30 (May-June 1998): 169–180; H. E. Freeman, L. H. Aiken, R. J.


                                                                                              24
   Blendon, and C. R. Corey, “Uninsured Working-Age Adults: Characteristics and

   Consequences,” Health Services Research 24 (6) (February 1990): 811–823.


41. Norman Beale, “Unequal to the Task: Deprivation, Health and UK General Practice at the

   Millennium,” British Journal of General Practice 51 (467) (June 2001): 478–485; Marianne

   Malmström, Jan Sundquist, and Sven-Erik Johansson, “Neighborhood Environment and Self-

   Reported Health Status: A Multilevel Analysis,” American Journal of Public Health 89 (8)

   (August 1999): 1181–1186.

42. D. Shah-Canning, J. J. Alpert, and H. Bauchner, “Care-Seeking Patterns of Inner-City

   Families Using an Emergency Room. A Three-Decade Comparison,” Medical Care 34 (12)

   (December 1996): 1171–1179; P. Fronstin, “The Working Uninsured: Who They Are, How

   They Have Changed, and the Consequences of Being Uninsured—with Presidential

   Candidate Proposals Outlines,” EBRI Issue Brief 224 (August 2000): 1–23; R. L. Douglass

   and R. E. Torres, “Evaluation of a Managed Care Program for the Non-Medicaid Urban

   Poor,” Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 5 (2) (1994): 83–98; D. B.

   Wallihan, T. E. Stamp, and C. M. Callahan, “Accuracy of Self-Reported Health Service Use

   and Patterns of Care among Urban Older Adults,” Medical Care 37 (7) (July 1999): 662–

   670; H. E. Freeman and C. R. Corey, “Insurance Status and Access to Health Services among

   Poor Persons,” Health Services Research 28 (5) (December 1993): 531–541.


43. Nathan Keyfitz and William Flieger, World Population Growth and Aging: Demographic

   Trends in the Late Twentieth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990); World

   Bank, World Development Report 1997: The State in a Changing World (New York: Oxford

   University Press, 1997).



                                                                                         25
44. World Health Organization, Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, “Macroeconomics

   and Health.”




                                                                                    26
