                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ENTRY DETERRENCE IN
                             HOSPITAL PROCEDURE MARKETS:
                         A SIMPLE MODEL OF LEARNING-BY-DOING

                                           Leemore S. Dafny

                                          Working Paper 9871
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9871


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




I thank David Cutler, Glenn Ellison, Jonathan Gruber, and James Poterba for exceptional guidance. I am
grateful to Julian Jamison, Michael Mazzeo and Scott Stern for helpful comments. Support from the National
Science Foundation, the National Bureau of Economic Research, and the National Institute on Aging is
gratefully acknowledged. The MedPAR data are confidential and cannot be released. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Leemore S. Dafny. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Entry Deterrence in Hospital Procedure Markets: A Simple Model of Learning-By-Doing
Leemore S. Dafny
NBER Working Paper No. 9871
July 2003
JEL No. L1, I2

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the strategic behavior of hospitals in one of their primary output markets:
inpatient surgical procedures. High levels of learning-by-doing in surgical fields may act as a barrier
to entry. I investigate whether incumbent hospitals facing prospective entry in a procedure market

manipulate their procedure volumes to produce such a barrier. I derive straightforward empirical
tests from a model of patient demand, procedure quality, and differentiated product competition.

Using hospital data on electrophysiological studies, an invasive cardiac procedure, I find evidence
of entry-deterring investment in procedure volume. These findings suggest that competitive
motivations may play a role in treatment decisions.

Leemore S. Dafny
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-dafny@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1     Introduction


The hospital industry that has emerged after nearly two decades of cost-containment is both

more eﬃcient and more competitive. The survivors of the industry shakedown have adopted

many traditional business practices, ranging from strict budgeting and heavy marketing to

explicit collusion through aﬃliations with competitors. Whether hospitals engage in more

sophisticated strategic decisionmaking, as well as the implications of such behavior, remain

open questions. This paper investigates the use of one such practice: strategic investment

for the purpose of entry deterrence.

    The setting for this analysis is an inpatient surgical procedure market, such as the market

for open heart surgery. Research has shown that providers with more experience produce

better outcomes, and as this research has disseminated, information about physician and

hospital experience levels has become more accessible. The high degree of learning-by-doing

in many of these markets raises the possibility that learning-by-doing may act as a barrier

to entry, as noted by Ho (2002) in a recent study of the diﬀusion of coronary angioplasty.

I investigate whether incumbent hospitals facing prospective entry in a procedure market

increase their procedure volume to produce such a barrier. Perhaps by creating a “center

of excellence” in a given procedure market, hospitals can forestall new entrants, whose

comparative lack of experience is unattractive to patients, physicians, and insurers alike.

    The theory of strategic investment, in which an incumbent firm (the “first mover”)

adjusts its investment in period 1 because its choice aﬀects play in period 2, originates in

Stackelberg (1934) and is extended by Spence (1977, 1979), Dixit (1979, 1980), and others.

Several of these authors, notably Spence (1984) and Fudenberg and Tirole (1983, 1986),

                                               1
note the possibility of using experience for strategic eﬀect. The opportunity to squeeze or

even eliminate competitors by moving quickly along a firm-specific learning curve has not

eluded businesses in several key industries; for example, it is widely reported that airplane

manufacturers price below cost for the first several hundred units of a new design, a strategy

that often succeeds in deterring or severely handicapping the entry of competing aircraft

(Newhouse 1982).

       Although inpatient surgical procedures are a primary output of the hospital industry,

research on competition within surgical procedure markets — or even the concept of a surgical

procedure market - is not well-developed. Several papers have explored the relationship

between a hospital’s decision to oﬀer a particular service or surgery and the competitive

environment in which it operates, but few have oﬀered a structural interpretation of this

relationship or provided a model of competitive play.1               In addition, the role of learning-

by-doing in surgery, though well-documented, has only been linked anecdotally to market

structure. This paper formalizes these relationships by explicitly modeling the demand

and supply for surgical procedures, incorporating the role of learning-by-doing into the

production function, and positing a diﬀerentiated-products game that governs play among

market participants. I use this model to illustrate the incentives for strategic investment

in learning-by-doing, focusing on incumbents’ ability to deter entry through this channel.

To develop testable predictions, I use an approach presented in Ellison and Ellison (2000).

Ellison and Ellison demonstrate that investment by incumbents facing entry should increase

monotonically with market potential unless entry deterrence incentives are present. These

   1
    Exceptions include Chernew, Gowrisankaran, and Fendrick (2002), who model entry into bypass surgery
as a function of expected patient flows, and Vogt (1999), who considers preemption motives for acquisition of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines in duopoly hospital markets.

                                                     2
incentives are strongest in markets of intermediate attractiveness, where potential entrants

are “on the fence” and are likeliest to be swayed by incumbents’ actions.      In the context

of surgical procedure markets, where the investment is volume, the testable implication is

that procedure growth should be strongest in markets of intermediate potential if hospitals

attempt to deter entry.

   Using nationwide data from MedPAR, the Medicare claims database, I investigate the

relationship between the probability of entry and volume growth in local markets for electro-

physiological studies (EP). I focus on incumbents’ growth following the announcement of

a reimbursement increase for EP in 1989.       I find the strongest volume response among

incumbent providers in markets facing intermediate ex-ante threats of entry.      This cross-

sectional finding is confirmed in a panel analysis using data from 1985-1989. Controlling for

incumbent fixed eﬀects, year fixed eﬀects, and time trends that vary by the probability of

entry, I find that volume growth between 1988 and 1989 is statistically larger for incumbents

in intermediate markets than for incumbents in markets with low or high ex-ante entry

probabilities (48 and 44 percentage points larger, respectively).     These point estimates

imply a substantial impact of entry deterrence motives on hospital volumes for procedures

characterized by a high degree of learning-by-doing.

   The following section describes prior research on learning-by-doing in surgical procedures

and strategic entry deterrence. In section 3, I draw on these literatures to develop a dynamic

model of competition, and to derive empirically testable predictions that discern between

strategic and non-strategic investment patterns. In Section 4, I test these predictions using

hospital-level data on electrophysiological studies from 1985-1989. Section 5 concludes.



                                              3
2        Background

The model presented in Section 3 is based on two distinct literatures: medical research

on learning-by-doing in surgery, and theoretical and empirical economic research on entry

deterrence.       I combine the results from these literatures, together with observations on

hospital markets, to build a model of entry deterrence through learning-by-doing in surgical

procedure markets.


2.1       Learning-by-Doing in Surgery

Since the late 1970s, medical researchers have published hundreds of articles investigating

the relationship between surgical volume and patient outcomes. Although the strength of

this relationship diﬀers across studies, procedures, and outcome measures, the resounding

conclusion from this research is that, for many procedures, there is a strong, positive correlation

between procedure-specific hospital volume and outcomes, and this correlation is robust to

detailed controls for patient risk factors, hospital characteristics, surgeon volume, and local

sociodemographics.

        Procedures with strong hospital volume/outcome relationships include coronary artery

bypass surgery (CABG), cardiac catheterization, prostatectomy, total hip replacement, and

resectioning of abdominal aortic aneurysms, to list only a few. Examples of procedures with

weak or insignificant associations include cholecystectomy (gall bladder removal), inguinal

hernia repair, and femur fraction reduction; these are all procedures that require less technical

expertise to obtain successful outcomes.2 Although this evidence is suggestive of learning-

    2
     The evidence on the relationship between surgeon volumes and outcomes is less conclusive, although there
is consensus that a positive correlation is present for select procedures (e.g. carotid endarterectomy), and


                                                     4
by-doing in surgery, there are a number of limitations of the medical literature that render

such a conclusion premature. First, the outcome measures used in most studies − inpatient

mortality, length of stay, and post-surgery complications − are extremely limited. Hospitals

with low volumes are at greater risk for extremely high levels of these variables simply

because of statistical chance. Second, although the studies attempt to control for patient

risk factors, the potential for omitted variables is clearly problematic. Third, these studies

cannot distinguish between two alternate hypotheses for the volume/outcome phenomenon:

the “practice makes perfect” or learning-by-doing hypothesis, and the “selective referral”

hypothesis, which maintains that hospitals with good outcomes generate high volumes, rather

than vice-versa.

    The few studies that have attempted to separate these eﬀects have found support for

both. Simultaneous-equation estimates of the outcome-volume relation and the volume-

outcome relation by Luft, Hunt, and Maerski (1987) reveal a significant, positive bilateral

relationship for total hip replacement and hysterectomy.                   The “practice makes perfect”

eﬀect dominates for some acute conditions such as heart attack, where referral is less likely

due to the emergency nature of the incident, as well as other conditions such as stomach

and intestinal operations, which are usually managed by family physicians who may be

insuﬃciently informed to guide patients to the best facilities.3                   The “selective referral”

eﬀect dominates for aneurysms, prostatectomy, and CABG, procedures which are likely to be

preceded by specialty consultations. Mukamel and Mushlin (1998) find that facilities with

there is substantial evidence that very low-volume operators obtain extremely poor results across a range of
surgical procedures (e.g. Hughes, Hunt and Luft 1987, Cebul et al. 1998).
   3
     Note that Hunt, Luft, and Maerski (1987) use data gathered in 1972 for the Professional Activities Study
by the Commission on Professional and Hospital Activities (CPHA), as do many of the studies described in
this section. Thus, hospital choice was far less restricted during the period explored in this body of literature
than is the case today.
                                                       5
superior CABG outcomes increased their market share relative to other facilities following

the release of outcome data by the New York State Department of Health beginning in 1990.

Finally, recent work by Ho (2002) extends the instrumental variables approach to hospital

costs as well as industry learning-by-doing eﬀects. Using data on angioplasties performed in

California between 1984 and 1996, Ho finds evidence of hospital-specific as well as industry-

wide learning-by-doing, both for outcomes and for costs.

   This paper does not attempt to enter the debate described above; however, the model

outlined in section 3 borrows heavily from this literature. First, I use volume as an indicator of

hospital quality, an assumption that reflects the “practice makes perfect” hypothesis. Second,

I assume that patient demand responds to quality, the “selective referral” hypothesis. Finally,

I require that hospitals are aware that volume begets volume, so they may consider strategies

to increase their volume for competitive eﬀect.

   The prominence of procedure volume data in hospital marketing communications suggests

that hospitals are indeed cognizant of this link. For example, the Cleveland Clinic website

boasts, “ [The] Cerebrovascular Center has one of the highest stroke-related patient volumes in

North America. The Center treats over 2,000 cerebrovascular patients annually. High patient

volumes provide our specialists with extensive experience, resulting in a team that routinely

treats common problems and manages rare disorders much more frequently than smaller

centers.” A 2002 ad for Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in The New York Times

implores patients to “consider how much experience the hospital staﬀ has in performing the

specific procedures you need. Studies have demonstrated that, for many cancers, hospitals

with a high volume of surgical cases had lower patient mortality and more positive patient

outcomes than hospitals with lower volume.” Organ transplant programs, cardiac surgery
                                                6
centers, and joint replacement services, among others, also emphasize procedure volumes in

communications materials. In addition, medical associations, surgical accreditation boards,

and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) provide procedure-specific volume guidelines

for surgeons and/or hospitals. For example, Medicare will only cover liver transplants in

centers that have performed 12 or more procedures per year for 3 consecutive years.4 The

American College of Surgeons recommends at least 200 open-heart surgeries per hospital in

order to “function eﬃciently” and attain quality goals. Finally, the growing body of volume-

outcome research and the resulting interest in regionalizing specialized procedures suggest

that hospitals are likely to be aware of the volume-outcome-volume link.


2.2    Strategic Entry Deterrence

The theoretical literature on entry deterrence is well-developed (see Wilson (1992) in The

Handbook of Game Theory for a good review). Within this literature, works on strategic

preemption, characterized by incumbents’ eﬀorts to retain market dominance through irrever-

sible investments, are most pertinent to the topic at hand.5 The critical insight from these

models is that a sunk investment, be it in cost-cutting, capacity, advertising, or experience,

credibly commits the incumbent to a particular course of action and therefore gives it an

edge in strategic play. For example, an existing auto-assembly firm that builds a large new

plant credibly commits to producing more vehicles in the event of entry (and perhaps in

the absence of entry as well), thereby reducing the potential profits of an entrant and the

   4
     Approval is site-specific, so a hospital cannot gain immediate approval by hiring a team of experienced
surgeons.
   5
     Wilson describes two additional broad categories of entry-deterrence models: signaling (or signal-jamming)
models, in which incumbents convey (or block) information about their markets with the purpose of
discouraging entry or promoting exit, and predation models, in which incumbents price aggressively to destroy
the viability of an entrant.

                                                      7
likelihood of entry.

   Spence (1984) demonstrates the role of the learning curve, or accumulated experience,

in erecting barriers to entry. Specifying a unit cost function that decreases in accumulated

experience, Spence illustrates the cost advantage that accrues to early entrants. Spence and

subsequent authors (e.g. Fudenberg and Tirole 1986) emphasize the diﬀerence between simple

precommitment (“open loop”) equilibria, in which the first mover recognizes the future cost

savings associated with increased output in the current period, and perfect (“closed loop”)

equilibria, in which the first mover also considers the eﬀect of current output on competitors’

actions.   In any given period, strategic considerations may lead firms to produce more or

less than the open-loop optimum, depending on the exact nature of competition. In section

3, I present a simple model of quality competition among hospitals in which the closed-loop

optimum implies overinvestment in production relative to the open-loop optimum.

   The empirical literature on entry deterrence is rather sparse, with most studies documenting

competitive responses to investment decisions rather than identifying strategic motives for the

investments. Examples of such papers include Lieberman (1987), who finds that incumbents

in concentrated chemical processing industries reduce investment in response to expansions

by rivals, and Chevalier (1995), who finds that leveraged buyouts of supermarket chains

are followed by softer product-market competition. Such studies suggest that capacity and

capital structure are eﬀective vehicles for strategic investment, but do not constitute prima

facie evidence that such investment is taking place.

   Two recent papers, Vogt (1999) and Ellison and Ellison (2000), construct specific tests for

strategic preemption. Using data on adoption dates of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

technology in 31 duopoly hospital markets, Vogt finds evidence of preemption through early
                                              8
adoption by a rival.   Ellison and Ellison study the advertising, product presentation, and

pricing behavior of pharmaceutical firms facing an immediate threat of generic entry due to

patent expiration. Because the strategic incentive to deter entry is greatest in markets where

entry is probable, as compared to markets where it is eﬀectively blockaded (i.e. the drug has

extremely small revenues) or extremely likely (e.g. Prozac), the authors look for investment

behavior that is nonmonotonic in entry probability. They find evidence supportive of entry

deterrence: incumbents in medium-sized markets are more likely than incumbents in small

or large markets to decrease advertising and increase the variety of product presentations

immediately prior to patent expiration.     Both behaviors reduce the expected profits of an

entrant, and should increase monotonically with market potential if entry deterrence motives

are absent. This reasoning underlies the empirical tests I conduct in Section 4.

   To summarize, the theoretical concepts tested in this paper are well-founded in the

industrial organization literature.   My contribution is to reformulate the models to reflect

the unique features of the hospital industry, and in so doing to uncover a critical relationship

between investment and volume that enables an empirical test of entry deterrence without

data on the investments themselves. This paper also contributes to the fledgling empirical

literature on strategic entry deterrence, applying a recently-developed identification strategy

to a vital industry.




                                               9
3        A Model of Entry Deterrence Through Learning-by-Doing


3.1       Assumptions

In standard learning-by-doing models, firms that produce beyond the single-period optimum

acquire more experience at the expense of current profits, since the increased production

drives market price down.           In hospital markets, however, supply and demand do not

equilibrate contemporaneously via a price mechanism. The nation’s largest insurer, Medicare,

dictates a fixed price for each of roughly 500 Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs), and private

insurers negotiate reimbursement amounts with individual hospitals.                 Moreover, insured

patients do not typically bear the marginal costs of treatment, as hospital stays generally

exhaust deductibles and co-payment caps. A hospital seeking to expand current production

in one of its product lines (say, cardiac surgery) must attract patients through other means:

advertising, referral networks, amenities, and quality of care. Thus, price P is not considered

a choice variable for hospitals in this model; hospitals may, however, adjust any of the other

variables.6

        A hospital can manipulate the other factors mentioned above, however, and I will aggregate

these choices into a variable called quality, denoted by L. Quantity demanded for a given

procedure in hospital i at time t, denoted Qit , is assumed to be an increasing function of

hospital i’s quality, and a decreasing function of the quality of its competitors (−i):


                                                       ∂q           ∂q
                           Qit = q(Lit , L−i
                                          t ), where     i > 0 and      <0
                                                       ∂Lt         ∂L−i
                                                                     t

    6
    Note that the model is tested on Medicare data, and since Medicare beneficiaries face the same out-of-
pocket price at all hospitals, a hospital cannot increase volume by lowering price.


                                                   10
Although I have omitted procedure subscripts, all variables are at the procedure level, so

that L and Q refer to quality and quantity for a particular procedure, respectively.

      Learning-by-doing is incorporated in the production function for quality by including a

term for accumulated experience. The other inputs into quality are jointly measured by the

variable K, which can be loosely interpreted as current expenditure (on equipment, extra

nurses, advertising, etc.).       For simplicity, K is not durable and expires at the end of each

period. The production function for quality can therefore be written


                                   i            i                 ∂l            ∂l
                      Lit = l(Kti , Qt ), where Qt = Σt−1  i
                                                      j=0 Qj ,       i > 0 and     i >0
                                                                 ∂Kt           ∂Qt


The second argument in l captures the “practice makes perfect” eﬀect discussed in section

2, as procedure quality is assumed to increase in a hospital’s experience with the procedure.

The “selective referral eﬀect” is reflected in the function for quantity demanded, in that a

hospital acquires more patients if it oﬀers a higher quality level. Thus, volume begets more

volume. The role of K should not be understated, however, as it is the means by which a

hospital produces quality upon entry, and also the only factor a hospital can adjust to rapidly

                                                                                                 ∂2l
increase quality, say in the face of an entry threat by a competitor. I further assume          ∂K 2   <0

         ∂2q
and    (∂Li )2
                 < 0 to ensure a unique equilibrium.

      For simplicity, the cost per procedure is fixed at c and the cost per unit of K is fixed at

r. Finally, I assume the entrant incurs a cost E upon entry, where E is stochastic and its

cumulative distribution function F (E) is known to all parties.7



  7
    Were E not stochastic, the model would be deterministic: the K1M needed to deter entry would be known,
and entry-deterring investment would either be successful or would not be undertaken at all.
                                                     11
3.2      Model

I begin with a standard 3-period strategic investment model, summarized in the following

diagram:


        t=1                             t=2                                       t=3


                                                                                                       ∗
Incumbent monopolist              Potential entrant                   Monopoly payout π ∗M  M    M
                                                                                        2 (K1 , K2 )
chooses K1M and                   observes QM   M
                                            1 (K1 )                   or duopoly payouts
                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                      DE       ∗
                                                                                              DM
earns   πM   M
         1 (K1 )                  and the realization of E            π∗D
                                                                       2
                                                                          M
                                                                            (K1M , K2      , K2    )
                                  and decides whether                           and
                                                                                   D∗     D∗
                                  to enter                            π∗D
                                                                       2
                                                                         E
                                                                           (K1M , K2 E , K2 M )



where the superscript M refers to the monopolist when she is the sole supplier, and DM

and DE to the former monopolist and the entrant, respectively, if entry occurs. The profit

functions are assumed to be concave in K, and the payoﬀs in the event of entry result from

a unique Nash equilibrium in the second-period game.

     Assuming no discounting, the monopolist’s maximization problem is simply



                                           DE       DE   DM       DM       DE   DM
        max        E(π) = π M   M              M                      M
                            1 (K1 ) + F (π 2 (K1 , K2 , K2 )) · π 2 (K1 , K2 , K2 ) +
            D
 K1M ,K2M ,K2 M
                             ³                                        ´
                              1 − F (π DE  M    DE   DM       M   M    M
                                       2 (K1 , K2 , K2 )) · π 2 (K1 , K2 )




The solution for K2 is straightforward: the incumbent simply picks the optimal amount given
                                                      ∗        ∗
                                                              DM
the competitive environment, spending K2M or K2                    . The first-order condition for K1M is


    dπ M                         D∗     ∗
                                       DM           ∂π D M   ³                       ∗
                                                                                    DE      ∗
                                                                                           DM
                                                                                                ´ ∂π M
−      1
              = F (π DE  M     E
                     2 (K1 , K2 , K2         )) ·      2
                                                           +   1 − F (π DE
                                                                        2  (K1
                                                                              M
                                                                                , K2   , K2   )) ·   2
                                                                                                        +
    dK1M                                            ∂K1M                                           ∂K1M
                                                                 D∗
                                  ∗
                                 DE    ∗
                                      DM            ∂π D M
                                                               dK2 E
                   F (π DE  M
                        2 (K1 , K2 , K2 )) ·
                                                       2
                                                             ·       +
                                                    ∂K2DE      dK1M
                                                       12
                            D∗     ∗
                                  DM                      ∗                          D∗       ∗
                                                                                             DM
              (π DM  M     E
                 2 (K1 , K2 , K2         ) − πM   M    M           DE  M     E
                                              2 (K1 , K2 )) · f (π 2 (K1 , K2 , K2                )) ·
                                         ∗
                                              
                                         DM
              
                  ∂π D
                     2
                       E
                           ∂π D
                              2
                                E
                                    dK2 
                      M
                         +    D
                                  ·
                  ∂K1      ∂K2  M    dK1M


The term on the left-hand-side measures the cost associated with investment beyond the

single-period optimum; because this investment pays oﬀ in future periods as well as in the

current period, this term should be positive. The first two terms on the right-hand-side

constitute the “open loop” or non-strategic first-order condition, in which the incumbent

takes the entrant’s behavior, including the probability of entry, as given. The third term is

the “strategic entry accommodation” term, which incorporates the eﬀect of the incumbent’s

investment decision in the first period on the entrant’s choice of K2DE .                   If it is greater

(less) than zero, an incumbent that is accommodating entry in its market will overinvest

(underinvest) in K1M relative to the open-loop optimum. My focus is on the fourth term,

the “strategic entry deterrence” eﬀect.

   The magnitude of the entry deterrence eﬀect increases in the diﬀerence between monopoly

and duopoly profits in the second period, as well as in the probability mass of E at π DE
                                                                                       2 .

Intuitively, this means that the incentive to deter entry is greatest when substantial profits

are at stake, and when the entrant is likely to be “on the fence” in terms of its entry decision.

Under these circumstances, a bit of overinvestment has a large payoﬀ.                     Because (π D
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                         −
                                                                           "                                     #
                                                                                 D            D            D∗
                                                                               ∂π 2 E       ∂π2 E        dK2 M
πM
 2 ) is always negative and   f (π DE
                                   2 )   is always positive, the sign of       ∂K1M
                                                                                        +     DM    ·     dK1M
                                                                                            ∂K2

determines whether the incumbent will overinvest or underinvest in order to deter entry.

Under a broad set of conditions derived in Appendix A, this term is unambiguously negative,

implying that the entry deterrence eﬀect increases investment.



                                                  13
3.3      Generating Testable Predictions

Using first-order conditions to discern the eﬀect of entry deterrence motives on hospital

investment decisions would be prohibitively diﬃcult; not only would the researcher need

exact profit, demand, and quality functions, she would also require hospital investment data

at the procedure level.       This section describes the two elements needed to transform the

first-order condition into an empirically testable relationship.

      First, I use a result derived in Ellison and Ellison (2000).           The authors introduce a

variable z into the profit and cost functions for the incumbent and the potential entrant,

where z reflects market size or other characteristics associated with the probability of entry,
            ∗
and    d DE
       dz π   (K1M , K2DE , K2DM , z)   > 0.   They illustrate that, under certain conditions, the

incumbent’s investment is monotone increasing in z in the absence of the entry-deterrence

eﬀect.     (This situation would prevail, for example, if the incumbent’s investment were

not revealed to the entrant prior to the entry decision.)8               The conditions under which

this proposition holds are not demanding, and a more thorough discussion is presented in

Appendix B. Intuitively, this result simply means that in the absence of entry-deterrence

motives, incumbents’ investments will increase monotonically with market potential.

      Having established monotonicity of investment in z when entry-deterrence objectives are

absent, the authors then illustrate nonmonotonicity when entry-deterrence objectives are

present.     This follows intuitively from an examination of the entry-deterrence term, now



  8                                                ∗
    The first-order condition used to obtain K1M        in this case does incorporate the strategic entry
accommodation term described above.




                                                   14
                   ³                    D∗          ∗
                                                   DM                                 ∗
                                                                                               ´
                     πDM  M        E
                      2 (K1 (z), K2 (z), K2             (z), z) − π M   M       M
                                                                    2 (K1 (z), K2 (z), z) ·
                                                                                                  
                                                                                              D∗
                                     ∗
                                    DE       ∗
                                            DM            ∂π DE                 ∂π D E
                                                                                            dK2 M 
                   f (π DE  M
                        2 (K1 (z), K2 (z), K2 (z), z)) ·
                                                          2                +      2
                                                                                          ·         .
                                                          ∂K1M                  ∂K2DM        dK1M


f (π DE
     2 ), the probability density of entrants who are indiﬀerent between entering and not

entering the market, does not increase monotonically in market attractiveness. When the

market is extremely attractive or unattractive, few entrants will be indiﬀerent; f (π DE
                                                                                      2 ) will


be largest when z has an intermediate value. Because f (π DE
                                                          2 ) is multiplied by the diﬀerence

between duopoly and monopoly profits, the strategic entry deterrence eﬀect can be rather

large, generating an investment curve that is nonmonotonic in z. In the surgical procedure

setting, the prediction is that investment in K1M will be greatest in markets where incumbents

perceive entry to be possible, as compared to markets where entry is unlikely or likely. Figure

1 provides an illustration of such a pattern.

      The second component needed to transform the incumbent’s first-order condition into

a testable relationship concerns K1M .             Although K1M is unobservable, the end product of

the investment, first-period procedure volume (QM
                                                1 ), can be measured.                         Thus, changes in

procedure volume, after controlling for covariates, can proxy for investment in quality. This

result is a feature of the model sketched above; a profit-maximizing hospital would only spend

money to boost quality if the quality improvement generated more business at the fixed price

P .9 It is important to recognize, however, that learning-by-doing is the strategic investment

vehicle in this model.         An incumbent seeking to deter entry invests in quality in the first

  9
      The result would be unaﬀected if quality itself had a positive weight in the hospital’s objective function.

                                                         15
period because the resulting increase in first-period volume increases quality in the second

period.

    To summarize, the prediction of interest is that incumbents with strong motives to

deter entry will spend money to boost their quality in period 1.       This will increase the

number of procedures they perform in period 1, raising their cumulative procedure volume

and depressing the profits of a potential entrant in all subsequent periods.        Because an

increase in expenditure in period 1 translates directly into an increase in volume, I will use

volume increases to study incumbents’ investment behavior; I need not observe quality or

expenditures. I will investigate whether incumbents in markets of intermediate attractiveness,

where entry-deterring investment can have the greatest impact on the entry decision, exhibit

the strongest volume growth in the face of shocks that increase industry profits.




4     Testing the Model: The Market for Electrophysiological
      Studies

4.1   Market Selection

To test these predictions empirically, I sought a surgical procedure that satisfied the key

conditions dictated by the model: (1) a high degree of learning-by-doing; (2) a large fixed

investment upon entry; (3) demand that is increasing in the quality of the procedure. In order

to conduct a more rigorous test of the model, I further restricted my search to procedures

that experienced positive profitability shocks. This setting enables me to explore both the

cross-sectional prediction that markets with intermediate entry probabilities will demonstrate

stronger volume growth than markets with low or high entry probabilities, and the time-

                                             16
series prediction that such markets will exhibit the most aggressive responses to a shock that

heightens the threat of entry.       Lastly, the procedure had to be well-represented among the

elderly, as Medicare’s inpatient database (MedPAR) is the only source of national longitudinal

data with a suﬃciently large sample size for my purposes.              The procedure that best fulfills

these criteria is electrophysiological study, or EP.10

       Introduced in the early 1980s, EP is a highly-specialized invasive procedure to identify and

possibly treat cardiac arrhythmias. The heart is stimulated at various rates and cadences,

and electrode catheters placed within veins or arteries record the responses. Therapeutic

ablation, in which tissue is destroyed using high-frequency currents, may also be performed.11

The Manual of Cardiovascular Medicine stresses the importance of a highly experienced

operator in obtaining a successful outcome (criterion 1). Residents must complete 8 years

of training before being permitted to assist in an EP. EP is performed in a specially-

equipped cardiac catheterization lab, which entails a large fixed entry cost (criterion 2).

Patients are referred to EP by cardiologists, who should be aware of quality diﬀerentials

among area hospitals (criterion 3).          In addition, the procedure is well-represented in the

Medicare population. Tabulations using California’s census of hospital discharges (OSHPD)

indicate that roughly half of EP procedures are performed on Medicare beneficiaries.

       Although EP is extremely costly (hospitals reported expenses of $5,000 to $21,000 in 1988

  10
     After identifying a comprehensive list of surgical procedures that experienced a sudden technological
change or a large increase in Medicare reimbursement between 1984 and 1996, the period for which I
have the MedPAR data, I reviewed medical literature and interviewed physicians to establish how well
each procedure satisfies the technical criteria listed above. As a final screen, I used MedPAR data and
data from California’s state inpatient database to identify providers for each candidate procedure, rejecting
those procedures that were performed in only a small number of markets during the pre-shock period (e.g.
extracorporeal photopheresis, a cancer treatment in which a patient’s blood is passed through an external
device and exposed to ultraviolet light) or on a small number of Medicare patients (e.g. bone marrow
transplants).
  11
     The Miller-Keane Medical Dictionary; Manual of Cardiovascular Medicine (2000).


                                                     17
dollars), it did not aﬀect DRG assignment for several years. Patients undergoing EP were

typically placed in DRGs 138 and 139 for cardiac arrhythmias, with 1988 reimbursements of

roughly $1800 and $2700, respectively. At the beginning of 1989, HCFA announced it was

considering a reimbursement increase and established a new procedure code to determine

the correct amount. Beginning in 1990, EP was designated a “non-OR procedure,” placing

recipients in higher-paying surgical DRGs. Reimbursements for these DRGs (104, 106, 108,

and 112) ranged from $6,500 to $26,700.12                Thus, the attractiveness of entry increased

dramatically in 1990.      In the context of the 3-period model, 1988 represents t=1, 1989 is

t=2, and 1990 is t=3. An incumbent’s EP volume growth between 1988 and 1989 serves as

a proxy for K1M .

       Hospitals entering in 1990 (t=3) observe K1M prior to making their entry decisions.

Unfortunately, the real world operates in continuous time, so entry can and does occur in

t=2; this is a problem I address in the empirical analysis below.

4.2      Data

I obtain estimates of annual hospital EP volumes using a 20% sample of the 1985-1989

Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MedPAR) files. This comprehensive data source

contains information on all hospitalizations of Medicare enrollees, including surgical procedure

codes and hospital identification numbers.13 The 20% sample comprises 2.1 to 2.8 million

individual records per year. After aggregating the procedure data to the hospital level, each

hospital is matched to a record from the 1988 Annual Survey of Hospitals by the American

  12
     Estimates calculated by multiplying DRG weights by the standard hospital amount for large urban
hospitals (Sources: 53 FR 38476, 54 FR 19636, 54 FR 36452). All years refer to HCFA’s fiscal years,
which begin in October of the preceding calendar year.
  13
     Inpatient stays by HMO enrollees, who accounted for 5.2 percent of Medicare beneficiaries in 1990, are
not included in the data.

                                                    18
Hospital Association (AHA). This survey provides detailed information on virtually all US

hospitals, including service oﬀerings and utilization statistics.

    Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for incumbent providers, defined as hospitals perform-

ing EP in 1988 and 1989.14           Between 1985 and 1989, the average incumbent’s volume

increased four-fold, reaching 35 procedures per year (recall that the data in Table 1 is a 20%

sample).    The mean value for the dependent variable, ln(1989 volume) - ln(1988 volume),

is .27, with substantial variation around this mean. Compared to the average US hospital,

incumbent EP providers are more than twice as large and six times more likely to oﬀer cardiac

catheterization and open heart surgery.

    Table 1 also reports market characteristics for the Hospital Service Areas in which incum-

bents are located, as defined by the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care (1996). These HSAs

were constructed by assigning each zip code to the HSA where the greatest proportion

of its Medicare residents was hospitalized in 1992 and 1993.                There are 3,436 HSAs in

the United States, with population ranging between 866 (Hoven, South Dakota) and 2.7

million (Chicago); of these, 149 had EP incumbents in 1988.                  On average, incumbents

faced 1.5 competitors in 1988. There were 96 HSAs with monopolist incumbents (therefore

contributing 96 hospital-level observations), 28 with two incumbents (56 hospital-level obser-

vations), and 25 with three or more incumbents (95 hospital-level observations).




  14
     Of the 252 incumbent providers, I exclude four that stopped performing EP in 1989, and one that could
not be matched to a Hospital Service Area.



                                                   19
4.3      Empirical Analysis

4.3.1      Cross-sectional analysis


To investigate whether volume growth is nonmonotonic in entry probability, I begin with

a cross-sectional analysis, in which I regress ln(1989 volume) - ln(1988 volume) for every

incumbent on a measure of the ex ante entry probability in that incumbent’s HSA. While

the ex post entry probability for HSAs with similar characteristics can be calculated from the

data, it is endogenous to incumbents’ investment decisions. For example, if hospitals facing

an intermediate ex ante threat of entry succeed in increasing volume and deterring entrants,

the ex post entry probability for such hospitals would be lower than the actual ex ante threat.

As a result, I estimate ex ante entry probability as the number of potential entrants in the

incumbent’s HSA, rather than using actual entry data to predict these probabilities, as is

done in Ellison and Ellison (2000). I define a potential entrant as a non-incumbent hospital

with cardiac catheterization and open heart surgery facilities.15              A catheterization lab is a

prerequisite to establishing an EP service, while open heart surgery is a complement and

safety backup for EP.

       Table 2 reports descriptive statistics on the number of potential and actual entrants.16

103 out of 247 incumbent providers are located in HSAs without any potential entrants

(as defined above), and the ex-post probability of entry for hospitals in these markets is

correspondingly low (9 percent). The ex-post probability of entry reaches nearly one-half for

  15
     Children’s hospitals and federal government hospitals are not counted as potential entrants; none of the
incumbents falls into these categories.
  16
     Of the 423 providers that performed EP for the first time in 1989 or 1990, I exclude 5 due to missing data
and 11 that exited in 1989. I also drop 91 providers that performed fewer than 3 procedures during the entire
period for which I have the data, 1985-1996. This restriction minimizes the number of hospitals labeled as
entrants solely due to coding errors.


                                                      20
hospitals facing one potential entrant, jumps to 85 percent for hospitals with two potential

entrants, and declines slightly for hospitals in markets with three or more potential entrants.

Thus, the ex-ante measure of entry probability accords well with the ex-post realization, and

if hospitals are behaving strategically, investment should peak in markets with one potential

entrant.   Indeed, Figure 2, which graphs unadjusted incumbent growth rates against the

number of potential entrants, mirrors the theoretical pattern in Figure 1.

   To control for other factors that may be contributing to this pattern, I estimate specifications

of the following form:




                                                         P4
    ln(1989 volume)mh − ln(1988 volume)mh = α +             i=1 β i I(potential   entrants=i)m

                                                     + [ϕZm + νXh ] + εmh .



   The dependent variable is the continuous growth rate for hospital h in market m. Using

the growth rate rather than the absolute change in volume accounts for diﬀerences in the size

of individual hospitals’ programs; an increase of 5 procedures represents a larger investment

for a program initially performing 10 procedures per year than for a program performing 50.

The independent variables of interest are the indicator variables for the number of potential

entrants, with zero as the omitted category. Because these variables vary at the HSA level,

all standard errors are corrected for correlation within HSAs.                       b > β
                                                                        A finding of β   b
                                                                                       1   4+


constitutes conclusive evidence of entry deterrence; as Figure 1 illustrates, such a result

requires an extremely strong entry deterrence eﬀect. If the underlying monotonic relationship

between volume growth and entry probability is steep or convex, hospitals facing intermediate

                                              21
entry probabilities will not exhibit significantly higher growth than hospitals subject to high

entry probabilities, even in the presence of entry-deterring investment. Because the omitted

                                                                                          b
category represents a low entry probability, absent any controls all of the coeﬃcients in β

should be greater than zero.

   Caution must be exercised when including additional controls, as these controls may be

collinear with market attractiveness, precisely the factor the potential entrant indicators are

meant to capture. Xh is a vector of hospital-level controls, consisting of all of the variables

reported in Table 1: years of EP experience, ownership status, teaching status, indicator for

catheterization lab and open heart surgery facilities, annual number of surgical operations,

and number of beds. Zh is a vector of market-level controls, including population and its

square, the EP penetration rate (=number of EP procedures/population), the EP “access

rate” (=number of incumbents/population), and an indicator for entry in 1989 (t=2).          If

a market experiences entry in 1989, incumbents did not have a full year to expand their

programs prior to the entry decision, so their investment levels may be depressed relative to

those of hospitals in markets that did not experience such entry. Because entry at any time

is likeliest in markets with multiple potential entrants, the results may be biased in favor of

nonmonotonicity in the absence of a control for such entry. All other control variables are

measured as of 1988, with the exception of population, which is only available for 1990.

   Column 1 of Table 3 presents estimates of β from the most parsimonious specification,

which excludes all control variables.   Column 2 adds hospital controls, column 3 adds the

indicator for entry in 1989, and column 4 adds all the remaining market control variables.

In all four specifications, a nonmonotonic investment pattern is evident, with the largest

coeﬃcient on I(potential entrants=1). Incumbents in these markets increased their procedure
                                              22
volumes approximately 30 percentage points more than did incumbents in markets with no

potential entrants, and 21 to 45 percentage points more than incumbents in markets with 4

or more potential entrants. As predicted, all coeﬃcients are positive in the first specification.

b is statistically significant at p<.05 in columns 1 and 2, and p<.10 in column 3.
β                                                                                           The
  1


coeﬃcient on entry in 1989 is positive rather than negative, implying that early entry does

not bias the results in favor of nonmonotonicity. While the hospital control variables have

                 b the full set of HSA controls reduces the magnitude of these estimates, and
little impact on β,

                               b −β
in particular the magnitude of β   b . Because the potential entrant indicators vary at the
                                 1  4+


HSA level, the HSA controls are likely collinear with these regressors. Regardless, the general

nonmonotonic pattern of the point estimates is robust to this full set of controls. Overall,

                                                                b >β
the results in Table 3 are suggestive of entry deterrence, with β   b in all specifications.
                                                                  1  4

                                                             b =β
However, the coeﬃcient estimates are too imprecise to reject β   b
                                                               1   4+ at conventional levels


of significance for 2 of the 4 specifications.

   As with all cross-sectional analyses, a primary concern is the possibility that omitted

factors are driving the results.    These concerns are mitigated in this setting because the

omitted factors would have to vary nonmonotonically with volume growth or market attractive-

ness in order to produce a bias.      Nevertheless, the possibility remains that markets with

one potential entrant are fast-growing for reasons other than entry-deterring investment.

To address this possibility, I reformulate the regression specification to control for diﬀerent

growth trends across market types (where “type” refers to the number of potential entrants)

prior to the profitability shock in 1989.




                                                 23
4.3.2   Panel Analysis


To control for preexisting diﬀerences in growth rates across market types, I assemble a panel

dataset of EP volumes for each provider between 1985 and 1989, and estimate



                                       P4
             ln(volume)mht = α +           i=1 β i I(potential   entrants=i)m + δ t +

                                  P4
                                      i=1 µi I(potential    entrants=i)m • yeart +

                                  P4
                                      i=1 γ i I(potential   entrants=i)m • I(1989)t +

                                  ρI(entrant)mt + ϕZm + νXh + εmht ,


                                      P4
where δ t is a set of year dummies,     i=1 µi I(potential    entrants=i)m •yeart is a set of trends

for each market type, I(1989)t is an indicator variable for the “treatment” year, 1989, and

I(entrant)mt is an indicator variable for entry in an incumbent’s HSA in year t (with this

exception, all the variables in Xh and Zm are unchanged from the cross-sectional analysis).

γ captures the extra growth in 1989 by market type, controlling for trends by market type,

time-invariant diﬀerences associated with hospital and market characteristics (of which type

is one), and any shock associated with a new entrant.            Column 1 of Table 4 presents the

estimates of γ from this specification.      The specifications in columns 2 and 3 are more

stringent, with market fixed eﬀects in place of Zm in column 2 and hospital fixed eﬀects in

place of Zm and Xh in column 3. (Hospital fixed eﬀects obviate the need for market fixed

eﬀects, as the latter consist of groups of the former.)

   The coeﬃcient estimates in Table 4 reveal that incumbents in markets with a single

potential entrant increased their volume 46-48 percentage points more between 1988 and 1989

                                                24
than did incumbents in markets with no potential entrants, after controlling for diﬀerences

in growth trends across market types. This finding is robust to the inclusion of market or

                                                                          b =β
hospital fixed eﬀects. Moreover, in the specifications with fixed eﬀects, β   b
                                                                            1   4+ can now

                        b >β
be rejected in favor of β   b
                          1   4+ at the α<.10 level.


   Because the incentive to invest strategically existed in all years, these results constitute

strong evidence of entry deterrence: even controlling for pre-1989 diﬀerences in market growth

rates, hospitals in markets with intermediate entry probabilities boosted their procedure

volumes following the reimbursement announcement more than did hospitals of any other

market type.


4.3.3   Monopolist Incumbents


The analyses presented thus far include all incumbents, regardless of market structure.

Theoretically, the results should be stronger if the sample is restricted to monopolist incumbents.

First, monopolist incumbents do not have the incentive to free-ride oﬀ the entry-deterring

investments of rivals.   Second, monopolists stand to lose more rents from private payers

if entry occurs than do incumbent duopolists or oligopolists (the eﬃciency eﬀect).        Table

2 contains descriptive statistics on the number of potential and actual entrants in these

markets. Tables 5 and 6 present the cross-sectional and panel analyses, respectively, for the

96 monopolist incumbents.

   The results are strongly consistent with a priori expectations.      For each specification,

b is larger in this sample than in the sample of all incumbents. Due to the small sample
β 1

                                                                                     b for
sizes and correspondingly large standard errors, however, the diﬀerences between the β 1


the two samples are not statistically significant.   Direct comparisons between estimates of

                                               25
β 1 − β 4+ cannot be made because the small number of monopolist markets with multiple

                                                            b −β
potential entrants necessitates a single category (2+), but β   b
                                                              1   2+ is consistently large and


positive, and occasionally statistically significant.


4.3.4   Did It Work?


Although the volume growth I document need not have succeeded in deterring entry in order

to have been ex ante optimal, evidence of this kind would vindicate the strategy. One naive

test for examining the eﬀectiveness of this strategy is to compare the actual entry incidence

experienced by hospitals with strong 1988-89 growth (i.e. those that attempted to deter

entry) with that by hospitals with weaker 1988-89 growth, focusing exclusively on markets

with one potential entrant. Unfortunately, the hospitals that made large investments during

this period are not randomly selected; it is likely that these are the most successful and

aggressive providers, and hence entry into their markets may be lower for this reason.

   This bias notwithstanding, the data imply that strong growth is associated with a higher

probability of entry. Table 8 reports data on the 1989 residuals from the panel regression

with hospital fixed eﬀects (Table 4, column 3). These residuals measure the extent to which

individual hospitals departed from the growth trends within their respective potential entrant

categories, controlling for year and hospital fixed eﬀects as well as the eﬀect of new entry

within the HSA. The data indicate that in markets with one potential entrant — where entry-

deterring investments appear to have been made — hospitals with unusually strong growth

experienced more entry than did hospitals with weaker growth.       Thus, entrants appear to

have interpreted incumbents’ volume growth not as a barrier to entry but rather as a signal

of market potential.

                                                26
    Although this naive test suggests entrants were undeterred by incumbents’ actions, such a

conclusion is premature. In addition to the binary entry decision, entrants’ choice of product

characteristics must be considered.     To the extent that entrants diﬀerentiated themselves

from incumbents (i.e. by becoming low-quality, low-cost providers) as a result of incumbents’

investments, entry deterrence may have succeeded.



5    Conclusion

Hospital behavior is diﬃcult to study using traditional methods. The obfuscation of the

pricing mechanism and the diﬃculty in measuring quality necessitate a creative approach to

uncovering all actions, let alone strategic ones. Entry into new services is one of the few clear

indicators of hospital decisions, and has therefore attracted attention in the health economics

and industrial organization literatures. Although several researchers have investigated the

reduced-form relationship between Herfindahl-type measures of hospital competition and

service oﬀerings (e.g. the “medical arms race” literature), few have studied strategic interactions

among players in local hospital markets.

    In this paper, I focus on one of the most important and accessible measures of quality

at the procedure level, hospital volume, and ask whether hospitals invest in volume for the

purpose of deterring entry. The recent proliferation of self-proclaimed “centers of excellence”

may be a formalization of this strategy.     By combining simple models of patient demand,

quality production, and diﬀerentiated product market competition, I am able to generate

clear theoretical predictions regarding entry deterrence through volume growth. The main

result is that procedure growth rates should increase monotonically in market attractiveness


                                               27
unless hospitals engage in entry-deterring investment.      Such investment should be largest

where entry deterrence is likeliest to impact entry decisions: in markets of intermediate

attractiveness. When the entry deterrence incentive is suﬃciently strong, these markets will

grow at significantly faster rates than markets with either low or high market potential,

simply because incumbents in these markets have a greater expected payoﬀ for investments

that are observed by potential entrants prior to making their entry decisions.

   I test this model using hospital-level data on electrophysiological studies (EP), an invasive

cardiac procedure developed in the 1980s.        I find that hospitals facing an intermediate

probability of entry generated the strongest volume growth in the year following an announced

reimbursement increase for EP. This increase cannot be attributed to time-invariant omitted

variables, as it is present even after controlling for hospital fixed eﬀects, nor to pre-existing

diﬀerences in growth trends, as it is robust to the inclusion of trends for each probability

group. In the most stringent specifications, the volume growth in intermediate markets is

statistically significantly greater than that in low and high markets.

   This research provides support for the hypothesis that hospitals manipulate surgical

volume for strategic eﬀect. In addition to revealing the sophistication of hospital decisionmaking,

this result contributes to the mounting evidence that the Hippocratic oath does not suﬃce

to protect patients from undergoing unnecessary but profitable treatments. One mitigating

factor in this case is that entry deterrence through learning-by-doing will result in greater

specialization across hospitals and superior outcomes for patients, ceteris paribus.       More

generally, stronger competition in quality will reduce the need for regulatory interventions

such as “certificates of need,” which are designed to constrain the number of providers of

a given service in order to improve quality and reduce duplicative costs.       However, these
                                               28
benefits must be weighed against the increased market power that remaining providers will

be able to exercise in the private market. A more thorough analysis of the welfare eﬀects of

entry deterrence in surgical procedure markets, while beyond the scope of this paper, is an

important next step for future research.




                                            29
References

Cebul, Randall et al., 1988, “Indications, Outcomes, and Provider Volumes for Carotid
Endarterectomy,” JAMA 279 (16): 1282-1287.

Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences, Dartmouth Medical School, 1996, The Dartmouth
Atlas of Health Care(Chicago: American Hospital Publishing).

Chernew, Michael, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Mark Fendrick, 2002, “Payer Type and the
Returns to Bypass Surgery: Evidence from Hospital Entry Behavior,” The Journal of Health
Economics 21 (3): 451-474.

Chevalier, Judith, 1995, “Capital Structure and Product Market Competition: Empirical
Evidence from the Supermarket Industry,” American Economic Review 85: 415-435.

Dixit, A., 1979, “A Model of Duopoly Suggesting a Theory of Entry Barriers,” Bell Journal of
Economics 10: 20-32.

Dixit, A., 1980, “The Role of Investment in Entry Deterrence,” Economic Journal 90: 95-106.

Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole, 1983, “Learning by Doing and Market Performance,” Bell Journal
of Economics 14: 522-530.

Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole, 1986, Dynamic Models of Oligopoly (London:Harwood).

Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison, 2000, “Strategic Entry Deterrence and the Behavior
of Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior to Patent Expiration,” mimeo, MIT Department of
Economics.

Henkel, John, 1998, “Prostate Cancer: No One Answer for Testing or Treatment,” FDA
Consumer September-October.

Ho, Vivian, 2002, “Learning and the Evolution of Medical Technologies: The Diﬀusion of
Coronary Angioplasty,” The Journal of Health Economics 21 (5): 873-885.

Hughes, Robert, Sandra Hunt, and Harold Luft, 1987, “Eﬀects of Surgeon Volume and
Hospital Volume on Quality of Care in Hospitals,” Medical Care 25 (6).

Lieberman, Marvin, 1987, “Post Entry Investment and Market Structure in the Chemical
Processing Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics 18: 533-549.

Luft, Harold, Sandra Hunt, and Susan Maerski, 1987, “The Volume-Outcome Relationship:
Practice-Makes-Perfect or Selective-Referral Patterns?” Health Services Research 22 (2):
157-182.

Mukamel, Dana, and Alvin Mushlin, 1998, “Quality of Care Information Makes a Diﬀerence,”
Medical Care 36, No. 7: 945-954.
                                          30
Newhouse, John, 1982, The Sporty Game (New York: Knopf).

Smiley, Robert, 1988, “Empirical Evidence on Strategic Entry Deterrence,” International
Journal of Industrial Organization 6: 167-180.

Spence, A. M., 1977, “Entry, Capacity, Investment and Oligopolistic Pricing,” Bell Journal
of Economics 8: 534-544.

Spence, Michael, 1979, “Investment Strategy and Growth in a New Market,” Bell Journal
of Economics 10: 1-19.

Spence, Michael, 1981, “The Learning Curve and Competition,” Bell Journal of Economics
12: 49-70.

Spence, Michael, 1984, “Cost Reduction, Competition, and Industry Performance,”
Econometrica 52: 101-122.

Stanford, J.L., et al., 1999, “Prostate Cancer Trends 1973-1995,” SEER Program, National
Cancer Institute, NIH Publication No. 99-4543. Bethesda, MD, 1999.

Steinwald, Bruce and Laura A. Dummit, 1989, “Hospital Case-Mix Change: Sicker Patients
or DRG Creep?” Health Aﬀairs 8: 35-47.

Tirole, Jean, 1997, The Theory of Industrial Organization (Cambridge: The MIT Press).

U.S. Census Bureau, Administrative and Customer Services Division, Statistical Compendia
Branch, 2001, Statistical Abstract of the United States.

Wilson, Robert, 1992, “Strategic Models of Entry Deterrence,” in R.J. Aumann and S. Hart,
eds., The Handbook of Game Theory (Elsevier Science Publishers), Chapter 1.

Vogt, William B., 1999, “Detecting Strategic Behavior in Technology Adoption: the Example
of Magnetic Resonance Imaging,” mimeo, Heinz School, Carnegie Mellon University.

von Stackelberg, H., 1934, Marketform und Gleichgewicht (Vienna: Julius Springer).

Zwanziger, Jack and Glenn A. Melnick, 1988, “The Eﬀects of Hospital Competition and
the Medicare PPS Program on Hospital Cost Behavior in California,” The Journal of Health
Economics 7: 301-320.




                                           31
                               Figure 1. Predicted Incumbent Investment Patterns


 Incumbent Investment

                                                                   investment with entry deterrence motive
                                                                   investment without entry deterrence motive




                                low          medium            high
                                       Probability of Entry




                               Figure 2. Actual Incumbent Volume Growth,
                                                EP Market

                         .50
Mean ln(1989 volume) -




                         .40
  ln(1988 volume)




                         .30
                         .20
                         .10
                         .00
                                   0         1          2             3         4+
                                          Number of Potential Entrants




                                                              32
    Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, EP Incumbents (N=247)



                                                   Mean        Standard Deviation

Hospital Characteristics
 1985 volume                                        1.56              (3.54)
 1986 volume                                        2.01              (3.72)
 1987 volume                                        2.91              (4.12)
 1988 volume                                        5.11              (5.35)
 1989 volume                                        6.99              (7.14)
 ln(1989 volume) - ln(1988 volume)                    .27               (.87)
 Years of EP experience by 1988                     2.67              (1.21)
 For-proft                                           .05                (.22)
 Government-owned                                     .13               (.34)
 Not-for-profit                                       .82               (.39)
 Teaching hospital                                    .53               (.50)
 Cath lab and open heart surgery                      .87               (.34)
 Annual surgical operations                         7852             (4458)
 Beds                                                517               (250)

Market (HSA) Characteristics
 Number of incumbents                               2.47             (1.76)
 Number of potential entrants                       1.34             (1.70)
 Entry in 1989                                       .22              (.42)
 Entry in 1990                                       .28              (.45)
 Entry in 1989 or 1990                               .43              (.50)
 Population                                         7.49             (6.24)
 EP penetration rate                               17.68            (23.07)
 EP access rate                                      .60              (.52)

Notes:
(1) Markets are Health Service Areas (HSAs) as defined in the Dartmouth Atlas (1996).
(2) Potential entrants are non-incumbent hospitals with catheterization labs and
open heart surgery facilities, located in the incumbent's HSA.
(3) Population isgiven for 1990 and measured in 100,000s.
(4) EP penetration rate =(number of 1988 procedures in the HSA*5)/population.
(5) EP access rate =number of incumbents in HSA/HSA population

Sources: 20% MedPAR sample 1985-1989, AHA 1988, Dartmouth Atlas (1996).




                                           33
     Table 2. Ex-Ante and Ex-Post Entry Measures, All Incumbents

Number of Potential Entrants                    N        Ex-post probability of entry
            0                                  103                   .09
            1                                   61                   .49
            2                                   34                   .85
            3                                   26                   .77
            4+                                  23                   .78
           All                                 247                   .43

Notes:
(1) The unit of observation is the hospital.
(2) Number of potential entrants is the number of non-incumbent hospitals with
catheterization labs and open heart surgery facilities in the incumbent's HSA.
(3) Ex-post entry probability is the mean value of an indicator for entry in the incumbent's
HSA.




                                                34
                          Table 3: Cross-Sectional Results, All Incumbents

                                         Dependent Variable is ln(1989 volume)-ln(1988 volume)
Number of Potential Entrants
  1                                     .330 **            .354 **         .299 *          .170
                                      (.150)            (.149)          (.157)          (.157)
    2                                   .218               .138            .038          -.082
                                      (.163)            (.178)          (.191)          (.224)
    3                                   .173               .176            .062          -.018
                                      (.219)            (.230)          (.236)          (.249)
    4+                                  .120             -.006           -.149             .012
                                      (.221)            (.208)          (.196)          (.237)
Test of H 0 : coeff(pot. entrants=1) = coeff(pot. entrants=4+); H 1 :coeff(pot. entrants=1) >
coeff(pot. entrants=4+). P-values are reported.
                                          .19                .05             .02             .26
Control Variables
  Hospital Controls                         N                  Y               Y               Y
  [F-test]                                                [.00]           [.00]           [.02]
  HSA Controls                              N                  N               N               Y
  [F-test]                                                                                [.00]
  Entry in 1989                                                            .288            .152
                                                                        (.168)          (.159)
N                                        247                245             245             245

Notes
(1) Hospital controls include ownership type, teaching status, cath lab/open heart surgery dummy, number of beds,
number of surgical operations, and years of EP experience (between 1985 and 1988).
(2) HSA controls include population, population squared, EP penetration rate, and EP access rate.
(3) Robust standard errors corrected for correlation within HSAs are in parentheses.
(4) * signifies p<.10, ** signifies p<.05, *** signifies p<.01




                                                       35
                         Table 4. Panel Results, All Incumbents, 1985-89

                                                                Dependent Variable is ln(volume)
Number of Potential Entrants*I(1989)
  1                                                             .455 ***           .459 **            .483 **
                                                              (.172)             (.189)             (.201)
    2                                                           .264               .189               .248
                                                              (.171)             (.199)             (.221)
    3                                                           .247               .220               .208
                                                              (.268)             (.294)             (.320)
    4+                                                          .110               .023               .047
                                                              (.294)             (.315)             (.323)
Test of H 0 : coeff(pot. entrants=1)*I(1989) = coeff(pot. entrants=4+)*I(1989);
H 1 :coeff(pot. entrants=1)*I(1989) > coeff(pot. entrants=4+)*I(1989). P-values are
reported.
                                                         .13             .10         .10
Year Fixed Effects                                         Y               Y           Y
Number of Potential Entrants Fixed Effects                 Y           N/A          N/A
Number of Potential Entrants Trends                        Y               Y           Y
Hospital Controls                                          Y               Y        N/A
[F-test]                                               [.00]           [.00]
HSA Controls                                               Y            N/A         N/A
[F-test]                                               [.00]
Entry dummy                                             .034          -.026         .031
                                                     (.057)          (.060)       (.068)
HSA Fixed Effects                                          N               Y        N/A
Hospital Fixed Effects                                     N               N           Y
N                                                        849            849          856

Notes
(1) Hospital controls include ownership type, teaching status, cath lab/open heart surgery dummy, number of
beds, number of surgical operations, and years of EP experience (between 1985 and 1988).
(2) HSA controls include population, population squared, EP penetration rate, and EP access rate.
(3) Entry dummy equals 1 in any year in which there is entry in the incumbent's HSA (except
when the incumbent is the entrant)
(4) Robust standard errors corrected for correlation within HSAs are in parentheses.
(5) * signifies p<.10, ** signifies p<.05, *** signifies p<.01




                                                      36
    Table 5. Ex-Ante and Ex-Post Entry Measures, Monopolist Incumbents

Number of Potential Entrants                N                 Ex-post probability of entry
            0                               58                           0.09
            1                               22                           0.36
            2+                              16                           0.94
           All                              96                            .29
Notes:
(1) The unit of observation is the hospital, which is the same as the HSA in this case.
(2) Number of potential entrants is the number of non-incumbent hospitals with catheterization labs
and open heart surgery facilities in the incumbent's HSA.




                                                   37
                 Table 6: Cross-Sectional Results, Monopolist Incumbents

                                     Dependent Variable is ln(1989 volume)-ln(1988 volume)
Number of Potential Entrants
  1                                     .421 *          .542 **     .518 **           .210
                                      (.237)         (.256)      (.258)            (.287)
    2+                                  .302            .350        .120            -.394
                                      (.209)         (.233)      (.225)            (.376)
Test of H 0 : coeff(pot. entrants=1) = coeff(pot. entrants=2+); H 1 :coeff(pot. entrants=1)
> coeff(pot. entrants=2+). P-values are reported.
                                         .33             .24         .06               .01
Control Variables
Hospital Controls                          N               Y           Y                 Y
[F-test]                                               [.07]       [.02]             [.03]
HSA Controls                               N               N           N                 Y
[F-test]                                                                             [.00]
Entry in 1989                                                       .531 **           .359
                                                                 (.255)            (.234)
N                                         96              95          95                95

Notes
(1) Hospital controls include ownership type, teaching status, cath lab/open heart surgery dummy, number of
beds, number of surgical operations, and years of EP experience (between 1985 and 1988).
(2) HSA controls include population, population squared, EP penetration rate, and EP access rate.
(3) Robust standard errors corrected for correlation within HSAs are in parentheses.
(4) * signifies p<.10, ** signifies p<.05, *** signifies p<.01




                                                    38
           Table 7. Panel Results, Monopolist Incumbents, 1985-89

                                                             Dependent Variable is
                                                                 ln(volume)
Number of Potential Entrants*I(1989)
  1                                                            .530 *            .627 *
                                                             (.278)            (.330)
    2+                                                         .291              .275
                                                             (.245)            (.289)
Test of H 0 : coeff(pot. entrants=1)*I(1989) = coeff(pot.
entrants=2+)*I(1989); H 1 :coeff(pot. entrants=1)*I(1989) > coeff(pot.
entrants=2+)*I(1989). P-values are reported.
                                                         .22       .17
Year Fixed Effects                                         Y         Y
Number of Potential Entrants Fixed Effects                 Y      N/A
Number of Potential Entrants Trends                        Y         Y
Hospital Controls                                          Y      N/A
[F-test]                                               [.00]
HSA Controls                                               Y      N/A
[F-test]                                               [.00]
Entry dummy                                             .096      .080
                                                     (.143)     (.151)
Hospital=HSA Fixed Effects                                 N         Y
N                                                               326               331

Notes
(1) Hospital controls include ownership type, teaching status, cath lab/open heart surgery
dummy, number of beds, number of surgical operations, and years of EP experience (between
1985 and 1988).
(2) HSA controls include population, population squared, EP penetration rate, and EP access
(3) Entry dummy equals 1 in any year in which there is entry in the incumbent's HSA (except
when the incumbent is the entrant)
(4) Robust standard errors corrected for correlation within HSAs are in parentheses.
(5) * signifies p<.10, ** signifies p<.05, *** signifies p<.01




                                             39
   Table 8. Incidence of Entry In Markets With One Potential Entrant



Quartile of Investment                       Range of Investment
       Residual                    N              Residual       Incidence of Entry
           1                       16           (-1.07, -.42)           .25
           2                       15            (-.42, -.02)           .47
           3                       15             (-.02,.39)            .60
           4                       15            (.39, 1.22)            .66

Note:
Investment residuals are 1989 residuals for hospitals facing one potential entrant, calculated
using the model reported in column 3, Table 4.




                                               40
Appendix A

To sign the entry deterrence term,
                                                                                         "                                       #
             ∗    ∗                                 ∗    ∗                                     D          D                 D∗
            DE   DM             M∗                 DE   DM    ∂π2 E                                    ∂π 2 E          dK2 M
(π DM  M               M   M              DE  M
   2 (K1 , K2 , K2 )−π 2 (K1 , K2 ))·f (π 2 (K1 , K2 , K2 ))· ∂K M                                 +      DM       ·    dK1M
                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                 1                                     ∂K2

                                                              ³                                                             ´
I begin with the entrant’s problem: max [P − c] q l(K2DE , 0), l(K2DM , Q0 + q(l(K1M , Q0 ))) −
                                               DE
                                             K2

rK2DE , where 0 reflects the entrant’s cumulative experience upon entry and Q0 reflects

the incumbent’s cumulative experience prior to period 1.                            The first-order condition is
      ³   D∗
                                                    ´         D∗
q1 l(K2 E , 0), l(K2DM , Q0 + q(l(K1M , Q0 ))) ·l1 (K2 E , 0) =               r
                                                                           [P −c] , where q1   denotes the derivative

of q with respect to the first argument, and l1 is similarly defined. Given the assumptions
                      D∗                                       D∗
                 ∂π 2 E                                      ∂π2 E
in the text,     ∂K1M
                            = [P − c]q2 l2 q1 l1 < 0 and       DM      = [P − c]q2 l1 < 0. The intuition for
                                                           ∂K2



these signs is simply that better quality on the part of a competitor erodes profits in a

diﬀerentiated-products setting.
                   D∗
                dK2 M
      To sign    dK1M
                           , I solve the incumbent’s second-period problem in the face of entry,
                  ³                                                    ´                                  ∗
                                                                                                         DM
max [P − c] q l(K2DM , Q0 + q(l(K1M , Q0 ))), l(K2DE , 0) − rK2DM . The optimal K2                                 satisfies
    DM
K2
      ³    ∗
          DM
                                                    ´          ∗
                                                              DM
q1 l(K2        , Q0 + q(l(K1M , Q0 ))), l(K2DE , 0) ·l1 (K2          , Q0 +q(l(K1M , Q0 ))) =         r
                                                                                                   [P −c] .   The total
                                                                   "                                                   #
                                                                               D∗                               D∗
                                                                            dK2 M                        dK E
diﬀerential of this expression with respect to          K1M   is q11 (l    1 dK M   + l2 q1 l1 ) + q12 l1 dK2M             ·l1 +
                                                                               1                             1
"                           #
          D∗                                                                                                       D∗
    dK M                                                                                                      dK2 M
 l11 dK2M      + l12 q1 l1 · q1 = 0. Thus, the set of additional conditions under which                        dK1M
                                                                                                                            >0
        1


is:

(1) Inputs into quality are complementary (l12 > 0) and
                                                                                                              D∗
                                                                                                        dK2 E
(2a) Demand is separable in own quality and competitor’s quality: q12 = 0 and                            dK1M
                                                                                                                       = 0 or
                                                                                   D∗
                                                                                dK2 E
(2b) Quality choices are strategic complements (q12 > 0) and                     dK1M
                                                                                        > 0 or
                                                                                D∗
                                                                             dK2 E
(2c) Quality choices are strategic substitutes (q12 < 0) and                  dK1M
                                                                                      < 0.

                                                        41
                      D∗
                    dK2 M
The intuition for    dK1M
                            > 0 is that the marginal product of K2DM increases with first-period

volume, which in turn is an increasing function of K1M .

   Under the above conditions, the entry deterrence term is unambiguously negative, implying

that the monopolist will overinvest in K1M to deter entry.


Appendix B

   This appendix summarizes the monotonicity result presented in Ellison and Ellison (2000),

as applied to the model outlined in section 3. A more precise exposition can be found in the

original source.
                                                                                            ∗
   Without entry-deterrence motives, the first-order condition for K1M (z) is


                                                D∗
                                         ∂π 2 M ³                          ´ ∂π M                           ∗
          dπ M       D∗                                   DE∗
         − 1M = F (π 2 E (K1M (z), z)) ·       + 1 − F (π 2   (K1
                                                                 M
                                                                   (z), z)) ·   2
          dK1                            ∂K1M                                 ∂K1M


The strategic entry accommodation eﬀect is already incorporated in the choice of K1M (z)
                                                                              D
                                                                            ∂π 2 M          ∂π M
(compare with the first-order condition in section 3.2, where               ∂K1M
                                                                                      are      2
                                                                                            ∂K1M
                                                                                                     used).

Diﬀerentiating this expression with respect to z yields
                                                                                                       
                                   ∗                            D∗                ∗             D∗
      d2 π M
           1    d2 π M
                     1    dK1M                  D∗          ∂ 2 π 2 M dK1M   ∂ 2 π2 M 
   −         −          ·              =   F (π 2 E ) ·              ·    +
     dzdK1M    d(K1M )2    dz                               ∂(K1M )2    dz   ∂z∂K1M
                                                                      Ã           ∗             ∗               ∗
                                                                                                                    !
                                                         D∗                ∂ 2 πM
                                                                                2    dK1M   ∂ 2 πM
                                                                                                 2
                                           + (1   − F (π 2 E ))   ·                ·      +
                                                                          ∂(K1M )2    dz    ∂z∂K1M
                                                                                                   
                                                               D∗           DM∗                ∗
                                                    ∗
                                                   DE       dπ 2 E       ∂π               ∂π M
                                                                                             2 
                                           + f (π 2 ) ·               ·    2
                                                                                      −
                                                             dz          ∂K1M             ∂K1M




                                                  42
                     ∗
              dK1M
Solving for    dz        produces

                            "               Ã              !                                  µ                 ¶                 #
                                                    D∗                                                      ∗
                                  D∗            ∂ 2 π2 M                   D∗                     ∂ 2 πM                 d2 π M
                             F (π 2 E ) ·       ∂z∂K1M
                                                               + (1 − F (π 2 E )) ·                    2
                                                                                                  ∂z∂K1M
                                                                                                                    +   dzdK1M
                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                 "                          #
                                                                      D∗               D∗               ∗
                                                      D∗            dπ 2 E           ∂π 2 M       ∂π M
                 ∗                              +f (π 2 E )     ·    dz      ·       ∂K1M
                                                                                              −      2
                                                                                                  ∂K1M
             dK1M
                  =                                                      D∗
              dz                   d2 π M            D∗      ∂2π M                                  D∗              ∂ 2 πM
                                                                                                                             ∗
                                − d(K M1 )2   − F (π 2 E ) · ∂(K2M )2                − (1 − F (π 2 E )) ·                2
                                                                                                                    ∂(K1M )2
                                      1                         1




   Due to the concavity assumptions for the profit functions, the denominator of this expression
                                                                                 D∗
                                                                             dπ 2 E                 ∗
is always positive. Given the earlier assumption of                           dz        > 0, K1M (z) is monotone nondecreasing

(nonincreasing) in z if both bracketed terms in the numerator are nonnegative (nonpositive).
                                                                                                                         ∗
Ellison and Ellison label the first term the “direct eﬀect” of z on K1M ; it is positive if

increasing z raises marginal profits more than it raises marginal investment costs.                                                   The

second bracketed term is the “competition eﬀect,” which is nonnegative if the marginal
                                                                                              ∗
duopoly profits associated with an additional unit of K1M exceed or equal the marginal

monopoly profits. Note that if demand is separable in Li and L−i , the competition eﬀect

drops out.




                                                                    43
