                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ANALYZING THE DETERMINANTS OF THE
                   MATCHING OF PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS TO JOBS:
                     ESTIMATING COMPENSATING DIFFERENTIALS
                          IN IMPERFECT LABOR MARKETS

                                             Donald Boyd
                                           Hamilton Lankford
                                             Susanna Loeb
                                            James Wyckoff

                                          Working Paper 9878
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9878


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Donald Boyd, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Analyzing the Determinants of the Matching of Public School Teachers to Jobs: Estimating
Compensating Differentials in Imperfect Labor Markets
Donald Boyd, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff
NBER Working Paper No. 9878
July 2003
JEL No. I2, J2, J3, J4, J6, H3, H4, H7

                                           ABSTRACT

       Although there is growing recognition of the contribution of teachers to students' educational
outcomes, there are large gaps in our understanding of how teacher labor markets function. Most
research on teacher labor markets use models developed for the private sector. However, markets
for public school teachers differ in fundamental ways from those in the private sector. Collective
bargaining and public decision making processes set teacher salaries. Thus it is unlikely that wages
adjust quickly to equilibrate the supply and demand for worker and job attributes. The objective of
this paper is to develop and estimate a model that more accurately characterizes the institutional
features of teacher labor markets. The approach is based on a game-theoretic two-sided matching
model and the estimation strategy employs the method of simulated moments. With this
combination, we are able to estimate how factors affect the choices of individual teachers and hiring
authorities, as well as how these choices interact to determine the equilibrium allocation of teachers
across jobs. Even though this paper focuses on worker-job match within teacher labor markets, many
of the issues raised and the empirical framework employed are relevant in other settings where
wages are set administratively or, more generally, do not clear the pertinent markets for job and
worker attributes.

Donald Boyd                    Hamilton Lankford              Susanna Loeb
University at Albany           University at Albany           Stanford University
SUNY                           SUNY                           224 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
1400 Washington Avenue         1400 Washington Avenue         Stanford University
Albany, NY 12222               Albany, NY 12222               Stanford, CA 94305
boydd@rockinst.org             hamp@albany.edu                and NBER
                                                              sloeb@stanford.edu
James Wyckoff
University at Albany
SUNY
1400 Washington Avenue
Albany, NY 12222
wyckoff@albany.edu
I. Introduction

        The 2.8 million elementary and secondary public school teachers in the United States

make up 8.5 percent of all college-educated workers 25 to 64 years old.1 Even though there is

growing recognition of the contribution of these teachers to students’ educational outcomes and

later economic success, large gaps exist in our understanding of how teacher labor markets

function. Most research on teacher labor markets has used models developed for the private

sector. However, markets for public school teachers, as well as markets for many other public

employees, differ in fundamental ways from those in the private sector. The objective of this

paper is to develop and estimate a model that more accurately characterizes the institutional

features of teacher labor markets. The approach is based on a game-theoretic two-sided

matching model and the estimation strategy employs the method of simulated moments. With

this combination, we are able to estimate how factors affect the choices of individual teachers

and hiring authorities, as well as how these choices interact to determine the equilibrium

allocation of teachers across jobs.

        Low-income, low-achieving and non-white students, particularly those in urban areas,

often are taught by the least skilled teachers, a factor that likely contributes to the substantial

gaps in academic achievement among income and racial/ethnic groups of students. Such sorting

of teachers across schools and districts is the result of a range of decisions made by individual

teachers and school officials. Inefficient hiring and district assignment may contribute to the

disparities in teacher qualifications across schools, however teacher preferences are likely to be

particularly influential.2 Teachers differ fundamentally from other school resources. Unlike


1
  Digest of Education Statistics 2002 and U.S Census Bureau Educational Attainment in the United States 2000
Detailed Tables.
2
  Few studies have explored district-hiring practices, though Pflaum & Abramson (1990), Ballou (1996) and Ballou
and Podgursky (1997) do provide evidence that many districts are not hiring the most qualified candidates. Schools


                                                                                                                1
textbooks, computers, and facilities, teachers have preferences about whether to teach, what to

teach, and where to teach. Potential teachers prefer one type of district to another; and within

districts, they prefer one school to another. Salaries are one job attribute that likely affects

sorting, but non-pecuniary job characteristics, such as class size, preparation time, facilities, or

characteristics of the student body, are important as well.3 A large literature suggests that

teachers respond to wages, yet research on the compensating wage differentials needed to attract

teachers with particular attributes to schools with particular characteristics has not produced

consistent results.4

         The inconsistencies in the estimation of compensating differentials for teachers are not

surprising given that the estimates have been based on hedonic wage models which maintain that

wages adjust to equilibrate the supply and demand for worker and job attributes. This

assumption is unlikely to hold for public school teaching, given that salaries are set by collective

bargaining and public decision making processes, not directly as a result of market forces. In

this context, some jobs may simply be “better jobs” than others, and teachers will sort into these

jobs based on their ability to obtain offers from the hiring authorities.

         Non-price rationing in the market for public school teachers will result in complex

interdependencies in the choices made by job candidates and employers. In particular, a

candidate’s willingness to accept a particular job will depend upon her own preferences as well


also vary in the political power they exert, which may lead to differences in teacher qualifications among schools
within the same district. Bridges (1996) found that when parents and students complained about poor teachers, the
teachers were likely to be transferred to schools with high student transfer rates, large numbers of students receiving
free or reduced-price lunches, and large numbers of minority students.
3
  In Texas, Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (1999) found teachers moving to schools with high-achieving students and,
in New York City, Lankford (1999) found experienced teachers moving to high-socioeconomic status schools when
positions became available.
4
  As a group, these studies show that individuals are more likely to choose to teach when starting teacher wages are
high relative to wages in other occupations (Baugh and Stone, 1982; Brewer, 1996; Dolton, 1990; Dolton and van
der Klaaw, 1999; Dolton and Makepeace, 1993; Hanushek and Pace, 1995; Manski, 1987; Mont and Reece, 1996;
Murnane, Singer & Willett, 1989; Rickman and Parker, 1990; Stinebrickner, 1998, 1999, 2000; Theobald, 1990;



                                                                                                                     2
as her “effective” choice set, i.e., the set of schools willing to hire her given their own “effective”

alternatives. In turn, whether employers make the candidate an offer will depend upon whether

they prefer to employ alternative candidates who are willing to fill their positions, and so on. We

can analyze such an environment in a relatively straightforward manner using the standard two-

sided matching model extensively studied by game theorists (Roth and Sotomayer, 1990). The

contributions of this paper are to clarify issues regarding the applicability of the standard hedonic

model, to note the conceptual applicability of the game-theoretic, two-side matching model and

to show how the underlying preferences of job candidates and employers in such a model can be

estimated using the method of simulated moments.

        Our long-term goal is to identify policies that are effective for attracting and retaining

teachers in low-performing or otherwise difficult-to-staff schools. As we discuss further below,

such identification has many difficulties, not the least of which is the endogeneity of any district-

level policy we observe. The goal of this paper is more limited. We introduce our model for the

matching of teachers to schools and estimate this model with a limited set of school and teacher

measures. We focus on the initial match of teachers to schools in their first job both to simplify

the first implementation of the model and because, as we discuss later, the initial match appears

particularly important, in comparison to transfers and quits, in determining the disparities in the

qualifications of teachers across schools.

        The following section of the paper briefly summarizes the data we employ and some key

features of teacher labor markets. Section III contrasts the hedonic wage approach with two

alternative models of job match. We outline our conceptual framework and empirical approach

in section IV and present estimates of several models in section V. Estimates of hedonic wage


Theobald and Gritz, 1996). Baugh and Stone (1982), for example, find that teachers are at least as responsive to
wages in their decision to quit teaching, as are workers in other occupations.


                                                                                                                   3
equations are reported in section VI and simulation results are discussed that help to clarify

issues pertaining to the limitations of the hedonic wage model when used to analyze teacher

labor markets. Section VII concludes.



II. Data

       The data we use for this analysis comes from a larger database of teachers and schools

that links seven administrative datasets and various other information characterizing districts,

communities, and local labor markets in New York State. It includes information for every

teacher and administrator employed in a New York public school at any time from 1969-70

through 1999-2000. (See the table in Appendix A.) The core data comes from the Personnel

Master File (PMF), part of the Basic Education Data System of the New York State Education

Department. In a typical year there are approximately 200,000 teachers identified in the PMF.

We have linked these annual records through time, yielding detailed data characterizing the

career history of each individual.

       Several other databases that contain a range of information about the qualifications of

prospective and actual teachers, as well as the environments in which these individuals make

career decisions, substantially enrich this core data. For teachers this information includes age,

gender, race/ethnicity, salary, experience (in the district, in NYS public schools, and total), years

of education and degree attainment, and teacher certification exam scores of individual teachers

and whether they passed on their first attempts. In addition, we identify the institutions from

which individual teachers earned their undergraduate degrees and combine it with the Barron’s

ranking of college selectivity to construct variables measuring the selectivity of the college from

which each teacher graduated and the location of the institution. Measures for schools and




                                                                                                     4
districts include enrollment, student poverty, racial composition, and district salary schedules, as

well as many other measures. Using information on the zip code of residence when the teacher

applied for certification and the zip code of each school, we create a “distance from home”

measure for each school-teacher combination in our sample. For a sub-sample of teachers we

know where they lived while in high school.

        Our data is richer in its descriptions of teachers than other administrative datasets used to

date, including teachers' test scores and undergraduate institutions. It also allows us to match

teachers to characteristics of the schools in which they teach in a way that most national

longitudinal surveys, such as High School and Beyond or the National Longitudinal Survey of

Youth, do not. In a series of papers, we have used the data to document various characteristics

of teacher labor markets, a number of which are pertinent here.

        First, as noted above, there is a marked sorting of teachers across schools. For example,

in schools in the highest quartile of student performance on the New York State 4th Grade

English Language Arts Exam only three percent of teachers are uncertified, only ten percent

earned their undergraduate degree from least competitive colleges, and only nine percent of those

who have taken a general knowledge teacher certification exam failed.5 In contrast, in schools in

the lowest quartile of student performance, 22 percent of teachers are uncertified, 26 percent

come from least competitive colleges, and 35 percent have failed a general-knowledge

certification exam (Lankford, Loeb and Wyckoff, 2002). Similar patterns are found when

schools are grouped based on student poverty, race/ethnicity and limited English proficiency.

These differences reflect urban-suburban differences in the qualifications of teachers as well as

meaningful differences across schools within urban areas.


5
 Teachers in New York have had the option of taking the NTE General Knowledge Exam or the NYSTCE Liberal
Arts and Science Exam. Throughout the paper “failure” refers to failing one of these exams on the first attempt.


                                                                                                                   5
       Differences in the qualifications of teachers are the result of the decisions of individuals

and school officials that determine initial job matches and subsequent decisions that affect job

quits, transfers and terminations. Of these, initial job matches appear particularly important in

that they account for almost all of the urban-suburban differences in teacher qualifications as

well as a substantial portion of the differences between schools within urban districts. To

illustrate this, we track a cohort of entering teachers and assess the spread of teacher

qualifications across groups in the first year and then in each following year for that same cohort.

We define groups either by urban-suburban-region-status or by quartiles of student

characteristics (race/ethnicity or achievement). On the initial match of the 1995 cohort, New

York City urban schools had 17.1 percentage points more teachers who had failed a teacher

certification exam than did non-NYC suburban schools. This difference had increased by 5.2

points by the end of six years, implying that the initial match accounted for 77 percent of the

disparity after six years, when most transfers had already taken place. Within urban areas, the

contributions of initial match and exits are roughly equal in determining the overall

qualifications of teachers. When we compare the proportion of teachers failing the certification

exam in New York City between schools in the top and bottom quartiles of percentage of

students who are non-white, the initial gap for the 1995 cohort is 11.3 percentage points. As this

cohort ages to the year 2000, the gap enlarges to 19.7 percentage points, implying that quits and

transfers have added 8.4 percentage points and that the initial match accounts for 58 percent of

the total gap by 2000 (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff, 2002a). Given the relative

importance of the initial matches of teachers to schools and the need to simplify the first

implementation of our empirical model, we focus on these initial job matches and the sorting of

teachers within the local labor markets.




                                                                                                      6
         A final characteristic of teacher labor markets worth noting is the surprisingly large

number of individuals who take their first teaching job very close to where they grew up. Over

60 percent of teachers first teach within 15 miles of the district from which they graduated high

school and 85 percent teach within 40 miles. Even of those who travel over 100 miles to college,

most return home to teach (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff, 2002b).6 This proximity has

two important implications for modeling the sorting of teachers across jobs. First, most teachers

make job choices within a very limited geographic area. Because of this, our empirical analysis

of job match presented below, focuses on the matching of teachers to jobs within relatively small

geographic areas (metropolitan areas) instead of across the entire State. Second, even within

each of these local labor markets, work proximity is likely to affect teachers’ rankings of

alternative job opportunities. Teachers will rank otherwise identical jobs differently because of

differences in the relative proximity of jobs to the teachers’ own locations. These ranking

differences suggest that an accurate model of teacher labor markets will need to incorporate

potential preference heterogeneity.



III. Common Approaches for Modeling Sorting

         Before describing our empirical sorting model in detail, it is worth reviewing several

literatures pertinent to the study of the sorting of teachers across jobs. These include the hedonic

wage literature and at least two literatures concerned with two-sided matching.


6
  Information regarding home location is drawn from either College Board data for all individuals who attended a
NYS high school and took the SAT since 1980 or SUNY data for all individuals who applied to a SUNY campus
anytime since 1990. Thus, this analysis does not include individuals who did not apply to a SUNY school over this
period and (1) attended high school out of state, (2) attended a NYS high school prior to 1980 or (3) attended a NYS
high school but did not take the SAT. How the above statistics would be affected by including these individuals in
the calculations is not clear as the longer distances traveled by out-of-state students could be more than offset by the
many students in New York City who did not take the SAT because they planned to attend CUNY which did not
require the test.



                                                                                                                      7
       Hedonic Wage Models: Most previous studies of teacher labor markets, such as Antos

and Rosen (1975), employ a hedonic wage framework, which can be illustrated using a relatively

simple example. Suppose that teachers’ preferences over job attributes are reflected in the utility

function U = U ( S , z q ) where S is the salary paid and z is a non-pecuniary job attribute. q is a

scalar measure of some teacher attribute which might affect his/her preferences for S and z. In a

similar way, V = V (S , q z ) is assumed to characterize each employer’s preferences with respect

to the salary paid and the teacher attribute conditional on the employer’s own attribute, z. For

example, suppose that z measures the innate ability of the students in the school and q measures

                                          ∂U         ∂V
the qualifications of teachers where         > 0 and    > 0 . Furthermore, assume that U( ) is an
                                          ∂z         ∂q

increasing function of S and V( ) decreases in S.

       In the case where salaries clear the market, let S = S ( z , q) represent the equilibrium wage

function showing the salary a teacher having qualification q would be paid when working in a

job having non-pecuniary attribute z. The above assumptions imply that S will be a decreasing

function of z and an increasing function of q.

       When salaries have adjusted so as to clear the market, each teacher is able to choose the

school in which to teach only subject to his/her budget constraint, which would be S = S(z,q).

                                                                                 ∂ S (z , q )
He/she will choose to teach in a school having the value of z such that −                     = MRS U
                                                                                                    zS where
                                                                                    ∂z

            ∂U
                 ∂z
MRS U
    zS ≡    ∂U
                      is a teacher’s marginal evaluation of z measured in terms of forgone salary.
                 ∂S


Similarly, subject only to its budget constraint, each employer will choose a teacher of quality q

            ∂ S (z, q )                    V
                                                     ∂V
                                                          ∂q
such that               = MRS qS
                              V
                                 where MRS qS ≡                is the employer’s marginal evaluation of q
               ∂q                                   − ∂V ∂ S




                                                                                                           8
measured in terms of it’s willingness to pay a higher salary. The pertinent second-order

conditions are assumed to hold.

       The equilibrium wage function, S = S ( z , q) , and the equilibrium allocation of teachers to

jobs, here represented by q = q(z), are implied by the preferences of teachers and employers

together with the distributions of z and q. For example, in addition to the above assumptions

regarding preferences, suppose that more qualified teachers have relatively higher marginal

                            U
evaluations of z (i.e., MRS zS is increasing in q) and that employers having relatively larger

                                                             V
values of z have greater willingness to pay for q (i.e., MRS qS is increasing in q). In such a case,

the equilibrium allocation of teachers to jobs, q(z), will be characterized by positive assortative

            d q( z )
matching;            > 0 so that schools having higher values of z will employ the teachers having
             dz

higher values of q. The exact functional form for q(z) will depend upon the distribution of z

across jobs and the distribution of q across teachers.

       Figures 1a and 1b illustrate such a model. S ( z, q1 ) in Figure 1a reflects the salary

constraint faced by a teacher having qualification q1. Her ability to choose any point on this S-z

locus together with her preferences imply that he/she will choose to teach in a school having (S1,

z1) corresponding to point m on indifference curve I q' 1 . Similarly, an individual having

qualification q 0 (< q1 ) would face the salary constraint S = S ( z, q 0 ) and choose the salary-job

attribute bundle represented by point n on indifference curve I q' o . In Figure 1b, an employer

having z = z 0 would face the salary constraint S = S ( z 0 , q ) and choose to employ a teacher

having qualification q = q o and, correspondingly, pay S0. As the location of S ( z1 , q) in the

figure indicates, an employer having z1 (> z0 ) would be able to pay a relatively lower salary at



                                                                                                        9
each level of q and would choose (S1, q1).7 Note that the choices of the teachers in Figure 1a are

internally consistent with the choices of employers in 1b; q 0 = q ( z 0 ) and q1 = q( z1 ) where q(z)

is the equilibrium matching function defined above.8


     Figure 1: The Salary, Job Attribute, and Worker Attribute Relationship Used as a Basis
               for the Hedonic Approach to Estimating Compensating Differentials

                                        (a)                                                                  (b)
                                         I'q1
            14                                                                   14
                                                                                                             S(z0 , q)
            12                                                                   12                                        H'z0
            S0                                                                                           b
                                    n                                            S0
            10                                                                   10
            S1                                           m                                                               a
                                                                                 S1
             8
S, salary




                     S(z, q1 )                                                    8

                                                                     S, salary
             6                             S(z, q0 )         I'q0
                                                                                 6
                                                                                          S(z1 , q)
             4                                                                   4

             2                                                                   2                H'z1

             0                                                                   0
                                  z                    z                                                 q               q
                 0                100                  201                            0                  100             201
                         z , nonpe cuniary job attribute                                        q, qualification of te ache r




                 The above model can be generalized to include vectors of job (Z) and worker (Q)

attributes and, in turn, provide a theoretical basis for the empirical analysis of worker-job match.

For example, the assumed equilibrium wage equation, S = S ( Z , Q) , could be approximated using

the function S kj = Z k θ + Q j β + Z k Λ Q 'j + η kj where θ and β are vectors of parameters, Λ is a


7
 Even though it is not the case here, note that different preferences could have resulted in the employer with z = z1
having chosen a high value of q and a corresponding salary that was higher than S0. This would result in a positive
correlation between z and S in equilibrium, the opposite of what is shown in figures 1a and 1b.
8
      The indifference curves in Figures 1a and 1b correspond to the case where U ( S , z q ) = S + z 0.23 q ,

V (S , q z ) = − S + q 0.4 z 0.5 , q 0 = 10 , q1 = 20 , z 0 = 10 and z1 = 20 . Furthermore, in deriving the hedonic wage
equation, it is assumed that there is an equal number of candidates and employers and that the distributions of q and
z are identical which, with positive assortative matching, implies that q = q(z) = z. Following steps similar to those
employed by Sattinger (1979), it can be shown that S ( z , q ) = 0.4444 q 0.90 − 0.1869 z1.23 + C where C is a constant




                                                                                                                                  10
matrix of parameters and η kj is a random disturbance. If the dependent variable were the log

wage, the ith element of the column vector θ + Λ Q 'j would be the percent change in the wage

needed to attract a worker having attributes Q j when the value of the ith element in Z k increased

by one unit. Note that parameter estimates for such an equilibrium wage equation, by

themselves, typically do not imply estimates of the underlying preference parameters for workers

and employers (e.g., the parameters in U( ) and V( ) ). Inferences regarding such preference

parameters typically require a second-stage estimation (Rosen, 1974, 1986).

        Even though some labor market studies have carried out such two-stage estimation, there

are far more studies that have focused on the first-stage estimation of empirical wage equation

parameters. However, estimates of such wage equations in a wide range of settings, including

teacher labor markets, have proven inconsistent. Researchers have posited a number of reasons

for the inconsistencies including omitted variables (Brown, 1980; Lucas, 1977), simultaneity

(McLean,1978), measurement error, and labor market frictions (Hwang, Mortensen and Reed,

1998; Lang and Majumdar, 2001). In the case of teacher labor markets, omitted variables

characterizing schools, students and teachers and the endogenous determination of pertinent

school policies have been offered as possible explanations for counterintuitive hedonic wage

results. However, there are other problems with hedonic models in the context of the market for

public school teachers, as well as public-sector labor markets more generally.

        First, contradicting a basic assumption of the hedonic wage model, public-sector salaries

are unlikely to clear their respective markets and, as a result, do not fully adjust for differences in

both the attributes of workers and the non-pecuniary attributes of their jobs. Salaries in the

public sector often are inflexible because they are set through a combination of political,


of integration that could be determined by specifying the reservation wage associated with alternative employment


                                                                                                                11
administrative and collective bargaining processes, rather than as a result of direct market forces.

In the case of teacher labor markets, union contracts often set teacher salaries for three or more

years and social decision-making practices limit both the variation and the flexibility of the

wage. Furthermore, district wage schedules typically dictate that all teachers in the district with

the same number of years of education and experience earn the same salary, regardless of their

other attributes or the characteristics of the schools in which they teach. This limitation is

especially restrictive in large urban districts and large countywide districts in which there is

considerable within-district variation in the non-wage attributes of schools.

        In a setting where teacher salaries do not clear the labor market, those salaries will not

reflect compensating differentials for non-pecuniary job characteristics. Consider a modification

of the above model where S = S * (z ) reflect a predetermined pattern of wages. Even though

S * ( ) also could be a function of q, we consider the simpler case since it is roughly consistent

with the institutional feature that salaries do not vary with any of a range of teacher

qualifications, other than educational attainment and experience. In this setting, each employer’s

                 (             )
value of V = V S * ( z ), q z will be increasing in q over its entire range so that every employer

will want to hire the highest quality teacher possible – a result which differs from that in the

hedonic wage model. Whether teachers will prefer higher or lower values of z (i.e., whether

        (            )
U = U S * ( z ), z q is increasing or decreasing in z) will depend upon whether MRS U
                                                                                    zS is larger


                     d S*
or smaller than −         . The general point is that with salaries being predetermined, some jobs
                      dz

simply will provide more utility to workers than other jobs.




in another occupation or home production. In the example, C was arbitrarily set to equal 10.


                                                                                                     12
                Figure 2a illustrates the case where the salary reductions teachers are willing to give up in

exchange for an increase in z are everywhere smaller in magnitude than the actual salary

reduction needed. In such a case, all teachers will prefer the lowest level of z possible so that

there will be an excess supply for jobs having low values of z. Figure 2b illustrates the reverse

case where S*( ) is such that all workers prefer jobs having higher values of z, leading to those

jobs having an excess supply of teachers.9

                          Figure 2: The Salary, Job Attribute, and Worker Attribute Relationship
                                      When Wages Do Not Clear the Market

                                     (a)                                                    (b)

                14                                                         14
                S4
                12                                                         12                           I" q1
                                                                           S2
                10                                                         10                                          Sa(z )
                                                      I'''q1
                                                                           S3
                 8                           Sb (z)                         8
    S, salary




                                                               S, salary




                            I'''q0
                 6                                                          6                                        I" q0

                S45                                                         4

                 2                                                          2

                 0                                                          0
                                                                                0            z0
                                                                                             10                 z1
                                                                                                                20
                      0                z10
                                         0               z1
                                                         20
                          z , nonpe cuniary job attribute                           z , nonpe cuniary job attribute



                With price not adjusting so as to equilibrate demand and supply at each level of q and z, a

non-price rationing mechanism will be needed to determine the matching of teachers to jobs. We

maintain a deferred acceptance mechanism in the game-theoretic, two-sided matching model that

underlies our empirical analysis. Here we will leave the mechanism unspecified, but note that

there is a fairly obvious outcome when all agents on each side of the market have the same rank


9
 Rather than S*( ) being a dercreasing function of z as assumed in figure 2, the salary paid could be higher in those
schools having higher values of the desirable attribute z; dS*/dz > 0. The New York City is one such example
where both salaries and working are relatively more attractive in the surrounding suburbs. (Lankford, Loeb and
Wyckoff (2002)).


                                                                                                                                13
ordering of the alternatives on the other side. In such a case, the employer having the job all

teachers agree is most attractive would be able to hire its top choice. In turn, the employer

having the second most attractive job will be able to hire the individual it ranks highest among

the remaining individuals, and so on.

       In Figure 2a, S*( ) is such that all teachers prefer lower values of z. With all employers

preferring higher values of q, non-price rationing would result in an allocation characterized by

negative assortative matching. In Figure 2b, S*( ) is such that the resulting allocation would be

characterized by positive assortative matching, the same allocation as in the hedonic wage

                                                                                      ∂S
equilibrium. In neither case will the change in salary associated with a change z,    ∂z
                                                                                           , reflect

teachers’ marginal evaluations of z. This results from the fact that teachers are not able to

choose jobs subject only to their individual budget constraints. In particular, there is non-price

rationing that results from the choices made by the most attractive job candidates and their

employers affecting the available alternatives and, thereby, directly constraining the choices

available to others. The implications of non-price rationing would be the same when preference

heterogeneity or the properties of S*( ), or a combination of the two, results in MRS U
                                                                                      zS being


                 d S*
greater than −        for some values of z and q, with the inequality reversed for other values.
                 dz

       In summary, even if salaries are an important condition of work affecting the allocation

of teachers across jobs, there is little reason to believe that those salaries would imply a set of

implicit prices that reflect teachers’ marginal evaluations of various job attributes. Insufficient

price flexibility results in excess demand for the jobs that are relatively more attractive so that

the job choices of workers will be constrained by more than just their individual budget

constraints. The non-price rationing brought about by insufficient price flexibility will prevent



                                                                                                       14
workers from choosing bundles of job attributes for which their marginal evaluations mirror the

implicit prices for those attributes in the market. Thus, the applicability of the standard hedonic

model is limited in settings where the choice set for each job candidate is affected directly by the

choices made by others beyond the effects of those choices on the candidate’s budget constraint.

In such settings, there is little reason to think that the wage locus will reflect marginal valuations

on either side of the market. While true for teacher labor markets, this will also be the case in

other setting where wages are set administratively or for some other reason do not clear the

market for job and worker attributes.

       The applicability of the hedonic wage model to teacher labor markets is also affected by

the apparently small geographic scope of these markets. When labor markets are small, there

may not be sufficient numbers of jobs and candidates in each local market to assure that the

distributions of employer and employee attributes are continuous. In this setting, discrete choice

models such as random utility models are likely to be more pertinent in the analysis of job choice

(Freeman 1979; Palmquist 1991).

       The importance of distance to teachers making job choices implies not only that labor

markets are limited geographically but also that there is likely to be heterogeneity of preferences

within each labor market. Teachers may rank the same job differently because of their location

relative to the school. Some hedonic models have included distance measures; rent-gradient

models, for example, have assumed that individuals prefer living as close as possible to the

central city. However, the importance of distance more generally implies that each job candidate

has a different assessment of the value of a particular job because the assessment depends upon

his/her own location. Such extreme heterogeneity is difficult to incorporate into traditional

hedonic models, as the geographical distributions of jobs and job candidates typically will be




                                                                                                    15
quite idiosyncratic from application to application. Yet the implicit prices of various attributes

can vary by location depending upon the relative proximity of candidates and jobs having

different attributes. Estimates that do not account for the heterogeneity are likely to be biased.

        In light of the limitations of applying hedonic wage models to the teacher labor market,

we propose to develop and estimate structural models drawing upon the game-theoretic two-

sided matching literature. These models will account for pertinent features of teacher labor

markets, including wage rigidities and the resulting non-price rationing of jobs and teachers, as

well as for factors affecting the separate, but interdependent, choices made by job candidates and

school officials. Preferences with respect to distance and other sources of preference

heterogeneity enter in a straightforward manner. Furthermore, our estimation strategy allows the

underlying preference parameters to be estimated in one step rather than the two-steps required

when using the hedonic approach.

        Two-sided matching: The two-sided matching literature is applicable to a broad range of

settings having the common feature that individuals in one group are matched with individuals,

agents or firms in a separate, second group. Examples include models of marriage, employment

and college attendance.10 In all of these cases, the matching is two-sided in that whether a

particular match occurs depends upon separate choices made by the two parties. Furthermore,

these choices are not made in isolation. “A worker’s willingness to accept employment at a firm

depends not only on the characteristics of the firm but also the other possible options open to the

worker. The better an individual’s opportunities elsewhere, the more selective he or she will be

in evaluating a potential partner” (Burdett and Coles, 1999).



10
  These cases differ from the roommate problem where those being matched come from the same group. In two-
sided match models all agents fall into one of two distinct groups and seek a match with one or more agents in the
other group.


                                                                                                                 16
         Within the two-sided matching literature, there are now a large number of papers that

build upon the work of Gale and Shapley (1962) and are concerned with the allocation

(matching) of fixed numbers of agents from two disjoint sets. This game-theoretic research has

considered both one-to-one matching such as marriage and many-to-one matching such as

employment and college-admission, the former being a special case of the latter.11 While a

growing number of papers allow utility to be transferable so that the division of match surplus is

determined endogenously at the time partners match, most game-theoretic models have assumed

that utility is nontransferable; that is, how the surplus from any given match is split between the

matching pair is predetermined. This more traditional assumption is applicable to teacher labor

markets since salaries (set through collective bargaining), other conditions of work12, and the

attributes of teacher candidates are fixed in the short-run.

         In addition to the game-theoretic studies, there is a large literature in labor economics

employing two-sided matching models with search. This research distinguishes itself in a

number of respects. First, whereas almost all the game-theoretic models assume full information

and no market frictions, such frictions are central to the labor-search models of marriage and job

match. A second difference is that the demand side of the labor-search models often is

characterized by free entry of profit maximizing firms, so that the number of jobs to be filled is

not fixed as in the game-theoretic match literature. A third difference that is especially pertinent

for our empirical analysis concerns the extent and nature of agent heterogeneity allowed in the


11
   In addition to the papers focusing on decentralized allocation mechanisms, extensive research has addressed
centralized mechanisms such as those used to assign medical interns to hospitals. Roth and Sotomayer (1990)
provide a clear synthesis of both the theoretical literature to date and how the theoretical findings provide important
insights regarding implications of the institutional features characterizing the centralized matching algorithms used,
as well as factors that have contributed to the evolution of those features.
12
    In teacher labor markets, many conditions of work are inflexible, including the location of the school and student
body characteristics. Job attributes such as class size and teacher preparation time, while not completely inflexible,
are constrained by the political process and collective bargaining.



                                                                                                                    17
models. Game-theoretic two-sided match models typically only require that each agent’s

ranking of match partners is complete and transitive, with no restrictions regarding the extent of

preference heterogeneity. In contrast, the search models either maintain homogeneity of

preferences or allow for only limited heterogeneity. Some models maintain match

heterogeneity, where agents in each group are ex-ante identical but some matches are relatively

more productive, with the productivity of each possible match determined by a random draw

from some known distribution. Other models maintain ex-ante heterogeneity where there are

systematic differences across agents independent of the partners to whom they are matched, with

all agents in one group having the same ranking of the potential partners in the other. For

example, some workers may be more productive than others and some jobs may be more or less

attractive. Limitations on the degree of heterogeneity are needed in order to solve for the search

equilibriums (Burdett and Coles, 1999). Such limited heterogeneity would be quite restrictive if

maintained in our analysis, in part because teachers’ rankings of school alternatives are likely to

differ reflecting their own proximity to those schools. For this reason, our model builds on the

game-theoretic approach, with the hope of incorporating market frictions into later work.



IV. The Model

       Consider an environment in which C = {c1 ,L , cJ } represents the set of J individuals

seeking teaching jobs and S = {s1 ,L , sK } represents the set of K schools having jobs to be filled,

J ≥ K . For now assume that each school has one job opening though this is relaxed in the

empirical analysis. We assume that each agent has a complete and transitive preference ordering

over the agents on the other side of the market and that these orderings arise from job candidates’




                                                                                                   18
preferences over job attributes and hiring authorities’ preferences over the attributes of

candidates.

        Let u jk represent the utility of working in the kth school as viewed from the perspective

of the jth candidate where u jk = u ( z1k , d jk q 2j , β ) + δ jk . z1k is a vector of observed attributes of the

kth school pertinent to the jth individual and d jk is the distance to the kth job for the candidate.

Vector q 2j represents observed attributes of the jth candidate that affect the individual’s

assessment of the kth alternative and β is a vector of parameters. δ jk is a random variable

reflecting unobserved heterogeneity in the attractiveness of a particular school for different

individuals. If no job match is entered, the individual’s utility is uj0 which depends upon

observed and unobserved attributes of the individual. Thus, the individual will always turn down

a job offer if uj k < uj0. Here we assume that ujk > uj0 for all k and j but plan to allow for the

more general case when we extend the model to consider all candidates, not just those actually

obtaining jobs.

        The hiring authority for the kth school is assumed to have preferences over the attributes

of job candidates. Let v jk = v(q1j zk2 ,α ) + ω jk represent the attractiveness of the jth candidate from

the perspective of the hiring authority for school k. The vector q1j represents pertinent observed

attributes of the jth candidate. The vector zk2 represents the observed attributes of the kth school

that might affect the authority’s assessment of the jth candidate. α is a vector of parameters. The

random error ω kj reflects unobserved factors. To simplify the analysis, we assume hiring

authorities prefer all of the candidates to the alternative of leaving job vacancies unfilled. This




                                                                                                                 19
assumption, combined with the assumption that there are sufficient numbers of willing

candidates, implies that all job openings will be filled.

        Consider a case where the sets C and S are known, as are the values of q j ≡ (q1j , q 2j ) for

each candidate and zk ≡ ( z1k , zk2 ) for each job. Given the vector of parameters β and a particular

set of random variable draws for the δ jk , the formula u jk = u ( z1k , d jk q 2j , β ) + δ jk implies the

matrix of candidates’ benefits represented in panel (A) of Figure 3. Each row shows the benefits

that a particular candidate attributes to being employed in each of the K school alternatives.

These rows of benefit values, in turn, imply candidates’ complete rankings of school alternatives

                      c
shown in panel (C). r jk is the jth candidate’s ranking of the kth school alternative. In a similar

way, the vector of parameters α and a particular set of random variable draws for the ω kj ,

together with the formula v jk = v(q1j zk2 ,α ) + ω jk , imply the matrix of school benefits represented

in panel (B) of Figure 3 and the complete rankings of candidates by hiring authorities shown in

panel (D). Each column of panel B shows the benefits to a particular school of having an

                                                        s
opening filled by each of the alternative candidates. r jk is the ranking of the jth candidate from

the perspective of the kth employer.

        If each of the candidates unilaterally were able to choose the school in which to teach, the

framework summarized in panel A would imply that β in u jk = u ( z1k , d jk q 2j , β ) + δ jk could be

estimated using data characterizing those choices and a standard multinomial probit or logit

random utility model. Similarly, α could be estimated easily using the same type model if each

hiring authority unilaterally chose among candidates. However, the empirical model we employ




                                                                                                              20
                     Figure 3: Utility and Rankings of Candidates and Schools

                               (A)                                      (B)
                         Candidates’ benefits                    Schools’ benefits
                           from alternative                       from alternative
                             employment                             candidates
                              s1 s2 L sK                              s1 s2 L sK
                            c1   u11    u12    L u1K               c1   v11    v12    L v1K
                            c2   u21    u22    L u2 K              c2   v21    v22    L v2 K
                             M    M      M     O M                  M    M      M     O M
                            cJ   uJ 1   uJ 2   L u JK              cJ   vJ 1   vJ 2   L vJK

                                   (C)                                    (D)
                        Candidates’ rankings                     Schools’ rankings
                            of employers                           of candidates
                              s1 s2 L sK                              s1 s2 L sK
                          c1 r11c r12c L r1cK                     c1 r11s r12s L r1sK
                         c2 r21c r22c L r2cK                      c2 r21s r22s L r2sK
                          M M M O M                                M M M O M
                         cJ rJc1 rJc2 L rJKc                      cJ rJs1 rJs2 L rJKs


is more complex for two reasons. First, it is the interaction of decisions made by a candidate and

a hiring authority for a school that determines whether the two are matched. Second, even

though any such interaction would complicate the model, the decisions made by the two parties

considering whether to match crucially depend upon the choices made by all other candidates

and employers. In particular, a candidate’s willingness to accept a particular match depends

upon her own preferences as well as her “effective” choice set, i.e., the set of schools willing to

hire her given their own “effective” alternatives. In turn, whether employers make the candidate

an offer will depend upon whether they prefer to employ alternative candidates who are willing

to fill their positions, and so on.13


13
  To see how one can have a model with joint decisions that avoids this complexity, one need only consider a two-
sided search model in which candidates and employers randomly meet and individually decide whether they are
willing to match based upon reservation-wage decision rules, with a match occurring only if both agree. The


                                                                                                               21
        Because our framework is an example of the standard two-sided matching model

extensively studied by game theorists, many of the theoretical findings in that literature directly

apply to our analysis (Roth and Sotomayer, 1990). As is common in the literature, we assume

that there is a decentralized job-match mechanism having the following characteristics. Each

employer makes an offer to its highest ranked prospect. Job candidates receiving offers reject

those that are dominated either by remaining unemployed or by better job offers, and “hold” their

best offers if they dominate being unemployed. Employers whose offers are rejected make

second round offers to their second highest ranked choices. Employers whose offers remain

open stay in communication with these candidates but otherwise take no action. Job candidates

receiving better offers inform employers that they are rejecting the less attractive positions

previously held. In subsequent steps each employer having an opening with no outstanding offer

makes an offer to its top candidate among the set of job seekers who have not already rejected an

offer from the employer. Employees in turn respond. This deferred acceptance procedure

continues until firms have filled all their positions with their top choices among those not having

a better offer or have made unsuccessful offers to all their acceptable candidates. As shown by

Gale and Shapley (1962), such an allocation mechanism always will yield a stable matching, in

the sense that there will be no candidate and employer currently not matched who both would

prefer to be matched to each other rather than to the agents to whom they are matched.

Furthermore, if the rankings are strict (i.e., no agent is indifferent between any two alternatives),

the resulting stable matching will be both unique and employer-optimal (i.e., all employers

weakly prefer this match to all other stable matches). Alternatively, a deferred acceptance


relative simplicity of this model comes from the underlying assumptions of the model that imply the reservation-
threshold for any agent is not affected by the choices made by any other agent. In contrast, the model we use
explicitly allows for complex interactions. Furthermore, our model allows for unobserved heterogeneity in agents’




                                                                                                               22
procedure in which candidates made offers to hiring authorities would result in an employee-

optimal matching.

         The equilibrium employer-optimal stable matching corresponding to the alternatives and

rankings characterized in Figure 3 is represented in the left side of Figure 4. The right side of

Figure 4 characterizes this matching in terms of the resulting relationship between the attributes

of candidates and the schools where they are employed.

         The matching of candidates to schools represented in Figure 4 corresponds to particular

values of the model’s random variables ( δ jk and ω kj ; j = 1,2,…,J and k = 1,2,…,K), the

explanatory variables (e.g., q j and z k ) and the parameters (θ = (α , β )) of the model. Given the


                               Figure 4: Resulting Matching of teachers and Jobs

                         School-teacher                            Joint distribution of school
                         matched pairs                               and teacher attributes

                           ( s1 , c j )                                 z1 q j 
                                                                                     
                            ( s2 , c j ′ )                              z2 q j ′  = [ z q ]
                                                                       M M 
                            L                                                        
                           ( s , c ′′′ )                                z K q j′′′ 
                            K j 


implied rankings for candidates and employers, deriving such a stable matching is relatively easy

using the Gale-Shapley matching algorithm.14 However, deriving closed-form expressions for

the likelihood of observing any particular candidate-job matching or the probability distribution

of any particular distribution of worker and job attributes is impossible. To compute the

likelihood of a particular stable matching one would need to identify the set of all possible


rankings of alternatives whereas search models typically assume there are common rankings or only very limited
heterogeneity.
14
   Note that multiple worker-job matchings will yield the same distribution of matched attributes if either multiple
candidates or multiple jobs have the same observed attributes.


                                                                                                                   23
combinations of the random errors that would lead to that same stable matching. This would

entail determining all possible combinations of the rankings of candidates and employers that

would yield a particular matching and, in turn, all the combinations of random variable values

that would lead to each of those sets of rankings. This is an impossible task, especially since it

would have to be done repeatedly for various parameter values. Even if the ranges of the various

random errors could be identified, computation of the corresponding likelihood would be

impossible given that the implied integrals would have high dimensions and very complex

regions of integration.15 These complexities motivate our use of a method of simulated moments

(MSM) estimation strategy.

           Before discussing the MSM approach, it is first necessary to generalize the notation and

framework. Whereas the above discussion was for a single market at one point in time, our

empirical analysis considers M local labor markets, m = 1,2,…,M, and T years, t = 1,2,…,T. To

account for this generalization, we need only add the subscripts “m” and “t” to the explanatory

and random variables defined above. For example, qmtj represents the attributes of the jth

candidate first employed in the mth market during time period t. An assumption is needed to

allow for multiple job openings in a single school in any given year. With our empirical analysis

focusing on elementary schools where there is a large degree of homogeneity across teaching

jobs, we assume that all job openings within a school are identical. As shown in the two-sided

match literature, the pertinent theoretical underpinning for a many-to-one match parallels that for

one-to-one matches discussed above.

           Let qmtki represent the attributes of the teacher newly employed during period t to fill the

ith vacancy of school k in labor market m where i = 1,2,…, nmtk and nmtk is the total number of job


15
     Berry (1992) makes a similar point in a game-theoretic model of entry in the airline industry.


                                                                                                      24
openings in the kth school for that year. (Reflecting the two-sided match, qmtki from the

perspective of this employer is the same as qmtj defined above from the perspective of the

employee where j is the individual employed to fill the kth firm’s ith position.) The structure of

the two-sided matching model, values of parameters α and β and the distributions of sets of

random variables δ jk and ω kj , together imply the joint distribution of zmtk and qmtki , j = 1,2,…,J

and k = 1,2,…,K. This in turn implies the expected value of qmtki for the kth school,


  (               )
E qmtki zmtk ; θ . Subscript i in this expression can be dropped as a result of the assumption that

all the job openings within the school are identical, which implies the expected values for all

positions within the schools are identical. The above expression implies that

              (             )
E  qmtki − E qmtk zmtk ;θ zmtk  = 0 ; for a school having attributes zmtk , the difference between
                                 

the attributes of the ith newly hired teacher, qmtki , and the expected mean attributes, given zmtk , is


                                                       (                (             ))
zero in expectation. In turn, this implies that E zmtk  qmtki − E qmtk zmtk ;θ  = 0 ; across
                                                                               

schools, the difference between the actual and expected attributes of the new teachers hired by a

school is orthogonal to the school’s own attributes.

        The sample analog of the last expression is ∑ ∑ ∑ z mtk [q mtki − E (q mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 which
                                                            t k i


can be rewritten ∑ ∑ n mtk z mtk [q mtk − E (q mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 , where qmtk is the mean attributes of the
                      t k

new teachers employed by the kth school. We employ this moment condition in our




                                                                                                            25
estimation.16 Similarly, we use ∑ ∑ n mtk z mtk [d mtk − E (d mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 which relates the
                                      t k


average distance for those newly employed in a school, d mtk , to the corresponding expectation;

and ∑ ∑ n mtk [d mtk − E (d mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 , which relates to the overall average distance traveled by
         t k


new teachers in a market. Note that the three moment equations are defined at the market level,

implying that there is a set of such conditions for each market included in the analysis. We do

not employ the moment condition ∑ ∑ n mtk [q mtk − E (q mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 for the empirical estimates
                                         t k


to follow because, this condition holds for all θ since our analysis only includes candidates who

obtained jobs and, thus, the mean attributes of teachers are fixed.

           An issue that arises in implementing our estimation strategy concerns the fact that

     (            )        (                )
E qmtk zmtk ; θ and E d mtk zmtk ; θ are not easily computed; it is not possible to write out,

much less compute, analytical expressions for these expected values. We instead compute

values for these expressions using simulation. Our method of simulated moment estimation

strategy is described in Appendix B. In short, the MSM estimator, θˆ , is the value of θ which

minimizes a quadratic form defined in terms of the moment conditions. In effect, the parameter

estimates minimize the distance between moments reflecting the empirical distribution of

teachers across schools and the corresponding theoretical moments implied by our model.

           Within the burgeoning set of papers employing the method of simulated moments, we

know of three papers that have substantial overlap with our application. Epple and Sieg (2001)


                                          
                                               
                                                             (             )
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                              
 Equivalently, we could have employed E  qmtj  zmtk − E zmtk qmtj ; θ   = 0 and its sample analog
16

                                                                              
                     (          )
                                 
∑ ∑ qmtj zmtj − E zmtj | qmtj ; θ = 0 where zmtj represents the attributes of the job held by the jth candidate;
t j
                                




                                                                                                                   26
employ the method of simulated moments approach to estimate Tiebout equilibrium models of

residential choice. Their moment conditions relate to the equilibrium, one-sided sorting of

households to local communities. Berry (1992) has employed a simulation estimator to estimate

an equilibrium game-theoretic model of market entry in the airline industry, with the simulated

moments based on the equilibrium number of firms operating at each airport each year. Sieg

(2000) has estimated a bargaining model of medical malpractice disputes. Even though this

analysis focuses on bilateral interactions between individual plaintiffs and defendants, rather than

a market-level analysis, the paper is pertinent in that the simulated moments are obtained by

repeatedly solving a game-theoretic model for each of a large number of draws of the model’s

random variables, as is the case in Berry’s analysis.



V. Estimates of Several Models

         As the first test of this model we look at the initial sorting of first through sixth grade

teachers across schools in the Albany-Schenectady-Troy, Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, and

Utica-Rome metropolitan areas for school years 1994-95 through 1999-2000.17 We estimate the

following utility functions.


         u jk = β1 (salary) + β 2 (%minority ) + β 3 (%poor ) + β 4 (urban ) + β 5 (distance ) + δ jk
                                                                                                             (3)
         v jk = α 1 (teacherquality ) + ω jk


Thus, the jth teachers’ utility associated with working in the kth job, u jk , is assumed to be a

function of salary, the percent of students in the school who are black or Hispanic, the percent of



t k                                                                t j
                                                                                      (              )
∑ ∑ nmtk zmtk  qmtk − E ( qmtk | zmtk ; θ )  will always equal ∑ ∑ qmtj  zmtj − E zmtj | qmtj ; θ  .
                                                                                                       




                                                                                                             27
poor students in the school as measured by eligibility for free lunch, whether the school is in an

urban area, and distance. Distance is measured from the address given when the individual

applied for certification, a point in time typically prior to when individuals apply for teaching

jobs. (While an alternative distance measure based on their location when in high school may be

preferable because it is not endogenous to where teachers hope to teach, we do not have this for

all teachers.) If the distance to each district in the labor market where the individual took a job

was greater than 50 miles, the distance measures for all job alternatives were set equal, so that

distance would not be a factor in the candidate’s choice of jobs. The attractiveness of the jth

candidate from the perspective of the hiring authority for school k, v jk , is a function of teacher

qualifications measured as a scalar composite of (1) whether the teacher ever failed a liberal arts

certification test; (2) the test score on the certification exam; (3) the Barron’s rating of his/her

undergraduate institution; and (3) whether or not he/she has attained more than a Bachelor’s

degree.18 Both equations have normal random errors that are standardized, with no loss of

generality, to have standard deviations of one. We then run a number of alternative models.

         Table 1 presents the sample statistics. Starting salaries average $32,458 with a small

standard deviation of $2,607. On average 21 percent of students in a school were black or

Hispanic and 29 percent were poor. Many more new teachers were hired in recent years. Few

(6.4 percent) were black or Hispanic, and for those traveling less than 100 miles to their job, the

average distance was only ten miles. For the estimation, salary and distance were normalized to

standard deviation units.



17
   With computational limitations necessitating that we exclude the New York City metropolitan area, our analysis
includes the other large metropolitan areas in the state.
18
   We used principal component analysis to determine the weights used in constructing the composite. The
eigenvalue is 1.65 and the weightings are 0.6773 for test score, 0.6087 for failing, 0.3089 for college selectivity and
0.1603 for higher degree.


                                                                                                                    28
       The MSM estimations rely on 45 moment conditions. For each of the five labor markets

these correspond to teacher quality interacted with each of the four school characteristics (salary,

percent minority, percent free lunch, and urban), distance interacted with each of the four school

characteristics, and overall average distance.

       Table 2 gives the method of simulated moments results. The results corresponding to

Equation 3 are in the first column. Note that all the estimated coefficients are of the expected

signs and standard errors are quite small. Teacher qualifications have a positive effect on

employer utility. Salary has a positive effect on teacher utility; while percent minority and

distance both have negative effects. The coefficients on percent poor and urban are smaller but

also negative and statistically significant at traditional levels. To interpret the size of these

effects we can compare the coefficient estimates across variables or compare the size of the

effect to the variance of the error (signal to noise). For example, the utility loss associated with

teaching in a school having 30 percent more minority students (approximately one standard

deviation) is 0.46, an effect that could be offset by roughly a $3,475 increase in salary (1.3

standard deviations). Teacher qualifications as measured by test scores and college attended

contributes to schools’ assessments of potential teachers. A one standard deviation increase in

qualifications increases utility by 0.35 points. With the error in this equation and the teacher

qualifications factor both having standard deviations equal to one, the overall variance in utility

is 1.119 (alpha squared times the variation in qualifications plus the variation of the random

error), assuming that qualifications are orthogonal to the error. Thus, our qualifications measure

appears to account for somewhat more than ten percent of the total variance in utility.

       As noted above, a potential advantage of the empirical model developed here is the ease

with which preference heterogeneity can be taken into account, in particular the heterogeneity




                                                                                                    29
resulting for teacher-job proximity. The large magnitude of the distance coefficient estimate

underscores that this is important. To investigate the importance of accounting for distance

further, the second column of Table 2 reports results with distance omitted from the model. The

coefficient on qualifications drops by more than half though it remains significant. Salary,

percent minority, percent poor and urban also continue to significantly affect utility though the

relative importance of percent minority increases relative to salary and the overall proportion of

variances explained decreased markedly. Overall, distance is an important explanatory variable

and provides important identification in the standard model.19

         The third model in Table 2 introduces the race/ethnicity of candidates into the utility

function of the employers. This does not substantially change the coefficients on the other

variables but does show that employers value minority candidates. They appear to be willing to

tradeoff approximately one-half a standard deviation in the quality index for a non-white teacher.

Model IV adds an interaction between the measure of school racial composition and whether or

not a teacher is non-white. The estimates for the teachers’ utility do not show a difference

between white and non-white teachers in the effect of the proportion of non-white students. Both

sets of teachers prefer schools with lower proportions of minority students. This result could

easily arise if this measure of student body composition were proxying for unmeasured

characteristics of neighborhoods and schools. Distance continues to play an important role in

this specification. When distance is removed from the equation in Model V, the results are

qualitatively different. Without adjustments for distance it appears that non-white teachers favor


19
  It is not surprising that the estimated coefficients for salary, percents minority and poor and the urban dummy fall
when distance is dropped from the criterion function for candidates; a proportionate reduction in all these
coefficients is equivalent to an increase in the standard deviation of the random error in the equation which we
normalized to equal one. Dropping distance from the equation results in it being subsumed in the error term. These
parameter estimates not changing proportionately and the coefficient for the quality index in the employers’ criterion
function also showing a marked change both likely reflect the fact that the geographical distributions of candidates
and schools vary systematically with respect to their attributes.


                                                                                                                  30
higher percent minority schools. This change is likely a result of non-white teachers being

geographically clustered near schools with higher proportions of non-white students. The final

model in Table 3 adds a squared term for distance. As might be expected the linear term is

negative and the squared term, positive, iIndicating that the effect of distance is stronger when

the distance is short.



VI. Hedonic Model Estimates and Simulations

        It is constructive to compare the above estimates with those from the traditional wage-

equation approach. Table 3 reports parameter estimates for the following two equations:


salary = β 0 + β1 (teacherqualifications ) + β 2 (%minority) + β 3 (%poor ) + β 4 (urban ) + ε
                                                                                                  (4)
teacherquality = α 0 + α1 (salary) + α 2 (%minority) + α 3 (%poor ) + α 4 (urban ) + η


We include a specification having quality as the dependent variable because some studies have

used this approach as an alternative to the traditional wage equation (Loeb and Page, 2001).

Furthermore, such a specification corresponds to the function q = q(z) reflecting the equilibrium

allocation of teacher to jobs. Note that such a function has relevance whether or not the wage

clears the market. Fixed effects for years and for metropolitan areas are included in columns II

and IV of each panel. Estimates in column III include a dummy variable for whether or not the

teacher is non-white and an interaction of non-white with the percent of minority students.

Column IV estimates include measures of distance to job: both a continuous measure of distance

for those who travel 100 miles or less to their job and a dummy variable for traveling farther.

        The wage models produce typically inconsistent results. In the wage equation, salaries

are higher in schools with higher proportions of minority students (which we might predict,



                                                                                                    31
especially if racial composition proxies for other school or neighborhood characteristics that are

not appealing to teachers). Yet, there appears to be no premium for better teacher qualifications,

and teachers are willing to take lower salaries to teach in schools with high proportions of

children in poverty and in urban schools. In the quality equations, there is again no relationship

between quality and salary; but at the same wage, schools with higher proportions of poor

students appear to attract less-qualified teachers. This specification shows no relationship

between qualifications and either urban or the percent of minority students. The one exception to

this is for non-white teachers whose qualifications are lower in high proportion minority

schools.20 Clearly, it would be difficult to draw policy implications from these inconsistent

results.

            Given the wide use of the hedonic model, it is pertinent to investigate further why a

wage model and our empirical two-sided matching model yield such different results. We do

this by carrying out Monte Carlo simulations. Preferences are assumed to be as follows for 150

employers each having on average 3 openings and 450 teachers seeking those positions.

            u jk = β1 ( Z1 ) + β 2 ( Z 2 ) + β 3 ( salary ) + β 4 ( distance ) + σ δ δ jk

            v jk = α ( teacherquality ) + σ ω ω jk

The locations of teachers and schools are represented by scalar variables LT and LS, respectively,

so that a teacher’s distance to a particular school equals LS − LT . The values of LS, Z1, Z2 and

salary for each school, the values of LT and teacherquality for each teacher as well as the values

of the errors terms δ jk and ω jk were obtained by making 100 sets of independent random draws

from the standard normal distribution. For given values of the preference parameters and the



20
     Market-level hedonics produce similarly unintuitive results.


                                                                                                    32
standard deviations σ δ and σ ω , the teacher-employer stable matching implied by the matching

algorithm underlying our model was determined for each of the 100 draws. In turn, the

following salary and quality equations were estimated for each draw and mean values of the

parameter estimates were computed for the given values of the parameters and correlations.

                salary = γ 0 + γ 1 ( Z1 ) + γ 2 ( Z2 ) + γ 3 ( teacherquality ) + ε

                 teacherquality = τ 0 + τ1 ( Z1 ) + τ 2 ( Z2 ) + τ 3 ( salary ) + ξ

In this way we investigate how differing (i.) the degree of correlation among the variables and

(ii.) the preferences of teachers and schools affect parameter estimates in the salary and quality

equations. A number of general trends emerge which are illustrated in Table 4 where the first

number in each cell is the average of the parameter estimates and the second is the proportion of

the 100 estimates that are statistically significant (p<.05).

       First, when there is no correlation among variables in the model and teachers do not have

preferences over distance, the wage equation gives coefficients that qualitatively reflect

preferences. In Comparison 1 β3, α, σδ, and σω all equal 1 and β4 equals zero. If β1 and β2 equal

zero the mean estimates of γ1, γ2 and γ3 in the wage equation equal -0.0003, -0.009 and 0.699,

respectively. The estimates for γ3 are statistically significant in all of the simulations, while those

for γ1 and γ2 are significant 24 percent and 19 percent of the time. If β1 and β2 increase to 0.3 and

0.6, respectively, the estimates change to -0.13, -0.27, and 0.73. If β1 and β2 increase again to

0.6 and 1.2, the estimates change to –0.22, -0.45 and 0.78, respectively, with the estimates of γ2

and γ3 statistically distinguishable from zero in all simulations and the estimate of γ1 statistically

significant in all but one draw.




                                                                                                    33
        Second, when salary is correlated with another school characteristics, Z1, the coefficient

on Z1 reflects that correlation, even if candidates do not value Z1. Consider the same example as

above, except with β1 and β2 equal to zero (Comparison 2). When the correlation between Z1 and

salary equals zero, the mean estimates of γ1, γ2 and γ3 equal -0.0003, -0.009, and 0.70. The

estimate of γ1 is significant in 24 percent of the simulations. When the correlation is 0.3, the

estimates are 0.16, -0.01 and 0.67; and γ1 is significant in 97 percent of the simulations. When

the correlation is 0.6, the coefficient estimates are 0.38, -0.01 and 0.54, not reflecting the

underlying preferences for Z1 at all. Furthermore, the estimate of γ1 is significant in all of the

simulations.

        Third, when distance enters candidates’ preferences, or similarly when a relative increase

in noise raises the variance of the errors, the estimated coefficients in the wage equation drop in

magnitude. This happens even when distance is not correlated with any other measure.

Comparison 3 uses the reference parameter values (β1, β2, and β3 equal 0.5, 0.5 and 1.0,

respectively). If β4 equals zero, the mean estimates of γ1, γ2 and γ3 are –0.22, -0.23 and 0.74.

When β4 equals -0.5, the mean estimates change to –0.21, -0.22 and 0.72; and when β4 equals

–1.0, the mean estimates change to -0.20, -0.21 and 0.69. When β4 equals -1.5, the mean

estimates fall further to –0.19, -0.20 and 0.67. Increases in σδ and σω also decrease the estimates

in the wage equation (results not shown in Table 4). If β1 and β2 equal zero and β3 equals 1.0, the

mean estimate of γ3 is 0.70 when the standard deviations of the errors equal 1.0. When the

standard deviations drop to 0.5, the mean estimate of γ3 increases to 0.90. When they increase to

1.5, γ%3 drops to 0. 50.




                                                                                                     34
         Fourth, if candidates prefer closer schools and schools that are closer to more qualified

candidates systematically differ in their characteristics, then the estimated wage equation will

misrepresent the value teachers place on these characteristics. Using the example in which β1, β2,

β3 and β4 equal 0.5, 0.5, 1.0, and –1.0 respectively (Comparison 4), if the correlations both

between qualifications and teacher location and between Z1 and school location are zero then the

mean estimated coefficient for Z1 is -0.20 (statistically significant in 96 percent of simulations).

When these correlations equal 0.3,21 the mean estimated coefficient is -0.21. When the

correlations equal 0.6, the mean estimate is -0.261, one-third larger in magnitude compared to

the case where there is no such spatial proximity.

         Finally, while the quality equation more accurately reflects the underlying preferences

than the wage equation in some instances, it is also subject to potential biases. For example, the

increasing correlation between Z1 and salary has little effect on the predicted relationship

between salary and quality in the quality equation, while it reduces the estimated relationship

substantially in the wage equation (Comparison 2). Furthermore, in Comparisons 1 and 2 the

tests of statistical significance for the quality equation yield results that more accurately reflect

the underlying parameter values, more so than the tests of statistical significance for the wage

equation. On the other hand, increased error such as that resulting from the importance of

distance has an approximately equal effect on the estimated relationship in the salary and quality

equation estimates (Comparisons 3). The same is true for increasing the geographical proximity

of more qualified teachers and schools having higher values of Z1 (Comparison 4).

         In summary, the simulations suggest that the standard wage model approach for

estimating compensating differentials is seriously flawed. These simulations, the theoretical

21
  As these correlations increase, teachers having greater qualifications, on average, live increasingly close to
schools having higher values of Z1.


                                                                                                                   35
considerations discussed in section III, and the stark differences in the empirical results described

above together cause us to conclude that the matching model employed here provides a

preferable framework for analyzing teacher labor markets.



VII. Conclusion

       Our descriptive analyses of teacher labor markets point to a high degree of systematic

sorting of teachers across schools. Yet, hedonic wage models have not produced consistent

estimates for understanding this sorting. In this paper we have used a method of simulated

moments estimate of the two-sided matching model. The results suggest that this may be a

useful estimation strategy to explore further. Unlike the hedonic models, our empirical matching

model produces estimates in keeping with the hypotheses that schools prefer high ability teachers

and teachers prefer both higher wages and schools with fewer poor or minority students. Our

findings of the relative importance of school proximity and the interaction of geographical

proximity and school racial composition is relevant to policy. The negative estimate of the effect

of minority students on the utility of both minority and non-minority teachers once distance is

accounted for in the model suggests that the proportion of minority students in a school may be

proxying for other characteristics of the school. In future work we hope to include alternative

distance measures (e.g., distance from college and distance for home measured in terms of where

individuals attended high school) as well as an indicator of whether a school is in the district

where one attended high school. Other important extensions will be to analyze the effects of

potential policy levers, such as class size, teacher preparation time, school facilities, and other

non-instructional resources and gain access to the needed additional computational power needed

to analyze the New York City metropolitan area.




                                                                                                      36
       The model may also be expanded to address questions of who becomes a teacher and

who quits or transfers. The framework allows us to include potential teachers in the matching

process and not just those who took teaching jobs. Similarly, instead of assuming that the only

openings are for new teachers in the jobs that new teachers fill, we can allow for vacancy chains.

That is, when an opening becomes available because a teacher leaves the system or because the

number of teachers in a school increases, we can allow current teachers to move into those spots,

creating vacancies in their old schools.

       Even though this paper focuses on worker-job match within the context of teacher labor

markets, the issues raised and the empirical framework employed are relevant in other settings

where wages are set administratively or, more generally, do not clear the pertinent markets for

job and worker attributes. The theoretical points made in section III, the simulations in section

VI and the differences between the estimates for the hedonic and two-sided matching models

bring into question the common practice of employing hedonic models to estimate compensating

differentials in such settings. Even though there is little reason to think that the wage locus in

such cases will reflect marginal evaluations on either side of the market, the need to estimate

compensating differentials and empirically analyze the functioning of such markets remains.

The empirical framework and estimation strategy developed in this paper, thus, may prove useful

in a range of other applications.

       In summary, his paper is a step toward understanding the functioning of teacher labor

markets and the factors that influence teachers’ decisions about whether and where to teach and

schools’ decisions about which teachers to hire. The matching model shows promise for

estimating compensating differentials and the preferences of both employers and employees in

labor markets not characterized by perfect competition and the rapid adjustment of wages.




                                                                                                     37
References

Antos, J., and S. Rosen (1975). “Discrimination in the Market for Public School Teachers,”
Journal of Econometrics, 3(2) 123-50.

Ballou, D. (1996). “Do public schools hire the best applicants?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 111(1), 97-133.

Ballou, D., and M. Podgursky (1997). Teacher pay and teacher quality. Kalamazoo, MI: E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Baugh, W.H., and J.A. Stone (1982). “Mobility and wage equilibration in the educator labor
market,” Economics of Education Review, 2(3), 253-274.

Berry, S. T. (1992) “Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry,” Econometrica 60:
889-917.

Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff (2002a). “Initial Matches, Transfers, and Quits:
The Role of Teachers’ Career Decisions in the Disparities in Average Teacher Qualifications
Across Schools,” Working Paper.

Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff (2003). “The Geography of Teacher Labor
Markets: Implications for Policy,” Working Paper.

Brewer, D.J. (1996). “Career paths and quit decisions: Evidence from teaching.” Journal of
Labor Economics, 14(2) (April), 313-339.

Bridges, E.M. (1996). “Evaluation for tenure and dismissal.” In Millman, J. & Darling-
Hammond, L. (Eds.), The New Handbook of Teacher Evaluation (pp.147-157). Newbury Park:
Sage Publications.

Brown, C (1980). “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 94(1): 113-34.

Burdett, K. and M. Coles (1999). “Long-term partnership formation: marriage and
employment,” The Economic Journal 109, F306-F334.

Dolton, P.J. (1990). “The economics of UK teacher supply: The graduate's decision,” The
Economic Journal, 100(400): 91-104.

Dolton, P.J., and G.H. Makepeace (1993). “Female labour force participation and the choice of
occupation,” European Economic Review, 37: 1393-1411.

Dolton, P.J., and W. van der Klaaw (1999). “The turnover of teachers: A competing risks
explanation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(3): 543-552.




                                                                                             38
Epple, D. and H. Sieg (2001). “Interjurisdictional Sorting and Majority Rule: An Empirical
Analysis,” Econometrica, 69(6): 1437-65

Freeman, A. M. (1979). “Hedonic Prices, Property Values and Measuring Environmental
Benefits: A Survey of the Issues,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 81(2):154-173.

Gale, D. and L. Shapley (1962). “College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage,” American
Mathematical Monthly 69: 9-15.

Hanushek, E.A., J.F. Kain, and S.G. Rivkin (1999). “Do higher salaries buy better teachers?”
Working Paper.

Hanushek, E.A., and R.R. Pace (1995). “Who chooses to teach (and why)?” Economics of
Education Review, 14(2), 101-117.

Hwang, H., D.T. Mortensen and W.R. Reed (1998). “Hedonic Wages and Labor Market Search,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 16(4): 815-47.

Lang, K. and S. Majumdar (2001). “The Pricing of Job Characteristics When Markets Do Not
Clear: Theory and Policy Implications,” Working Paper.

Lankford, H. (1999). A descriptive analysis of the New York State and New York City teaching
force. Report prepared for the New York Supreme Court case Campaign for Fiscal Equity v.
New York State.

Lankford, H., S. Loeb and J. Wyckoff (2002). “Teacher Sorting and the Plight of Urban
Schools,” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(1): 37-62.

Lucas (1977). “Hedonic Wage Equations and Psychic Wages in the Returns to Schooling,”
America Economic Review, 67(4): 549-58.

Manski, C.F. (1987). “Academic ability, earnings, and the decision to become a teacher:
Evidence from the National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972.” In D.A.
Wise (Ed.), Public Sector Payrolls. Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 291-312.

McLean, H. M. (1978). “Compensating Wage Differentials for Hazardous Work: An Empirical
Analysis,” Quarterly Review of Economics and Business, 18(3): 97-107.

Mont, D., and D.I. Rees (1996). “The influence of classroom characteristics on high school
teacher turnover,” Economic Inquiry, 34(1): 152-167.

Murnane, R.J., J.D. Singer, and J.B. Willett (1989). “The influences of salaries and "opportunity
costs" on teachers' career choices: Evidence from North Carolina,” Harvard Educational Review,
59(3), 325-346.




                                                                                               39
Palmquist, R. B. (1991). “Chapter IV: Hedonic Methods,” in John B. Braden and Charles D.
Kolstad (Eds). Measuring the Demand for Environmental Quality, Elsevier Science Publishers
B.V.: 77-120.

Pflaum, S.W. and T. Abramson (1990). "Teacher Assignment, Hiring, and Preparation: Minority
Teachers in New York City," Urban Review 22(1): 17-31.

Rickman, B.D., and C.D. Parker (1990). “Alternative wages and teacher mobility: A human
capital approach,” Economics of Education Review, 9(1): 73-79.

Rosen, S. (1974). “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition,” Journal of Political Economy 82(1): 34-55.

Rosen, S. (1986). “The Theory of Equalizing Differences,” in Ashenfelter, E. and R. Layard,
Handbook of Labor Economics Volume I. Elsevier Science Publishers: 642-692.

Roth, A.E. and M.A. Sotomayer (1990) Two-sided matching: A study in game-theoretic
modeling and analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sattinger, M. (1979) “Differential Rents and the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic
Papers, 31(1): 60-71.

Sieg, H. (2000) “Estimating a Bargaining Model with Asymmetric Information: Evidence from
Medical Malpractice Disputes,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(5): 1006-1021.

Stinebrickner, T.R. (2000). An analysis of occupational change and departure from the labor
force: Evidence of the reasons that teachers quit. Working paper.

Stinebrickner, T.R. (1999). “Estimation of a duration model in the presence of missing data.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(3), 529-542.

Stinebrickner, T.R. (1998). “An empirical investigation of teacher attrition,” Economics of
Education Review, 17(2): 127-136.

Theobald, N.D. (1990). “An examination of the influences of personal, professional, and school
district characteristics on public school teacher retention,” Economics of education review, 9(3),
241-250.

Theobald, N.D., and R.M.Gritz, (1996). “The effects of school district spending priorities on the
exit paths of beginning teachers leaving the district,” Economics of Education Review, 15(1),
11-22.




                                                                                                40
      Table 1: The Sample: 5028 First Year K-6 Teachers, 2443 Employers

  Variable                Mean        Std Dev              Variable               Mean      Std Dev
  Qualific. Index          0.00         1.00       Percent Poor, K-6              0.293      0.265
  Salary                  32,458       2,607       Urban                          0.217
  Percent Minority        0.210        0.293       Distance to Job (miles)        24.61      115.27
  Minority Teacher        0.064                    Distance if < 100 miles        10.29      13.18

  Year
     1995                  0.109                       1998                       0.139
     1996                  0.123                       1999                       0.211
     1997                  0.151                       2000                       0.267
  MSAs/Regions
     Albany                0.178                      Syracuse                    0.167
     Buffalo               0.251                      Utica-Rome                  0.055
     Rochester             0.350
Note: Salaries are for 2000. If the 2000 salaries were not available due to districts operating out of contract, we
used salary information for the most recent prior year and inflated the value using the average percent change
across districts with salaries in both years. Only 4 percent of the sample traveled more than 100 miles to their
job.




                                                                                                               41
              Table 2: Estimated Parameters in Employers’ and Employees’ Criterion Functions

                                                 Model I   Model II   Model III   Model IV   Model V   Model VI
     Employers’ Criterion Function
                       Quality Index              0.345     0.156       0.346      0.346      0.198     0.334
                                                 (0.015)   (0.014)     (0.011)    (0.015)    (0.013)   (0.015)

                                 Non-White                              0.163      0.161      0.166     0.169
                                                                       (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.009)   (0.006)

    Candidates’ Criterion Function
                                       Salary     0.342     0.139       0.343      0.342     0.0902     0.346
                                                 (0.017)   (0.006)     (0.013)    (0.021)    (0.006)   (0.014)

                           Percent Minority       -1.533    -1.150      -1.532
                                                 (0.066)   (0.047)     (0.047)

                                % Poor, K-6       -0.187   -0.0633      -0.192     -0.192     -0.188    -0.187
                                                 (0.008)   (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.013)    (0.011)   (0.009)

                                       Urban      -0.280   -0.0845      -0.269     -0.274    -0.025     -0.275
                                                 (0.013)   (0.003)     (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.002)    (0.011)

                                % Minority                                         -1.629     0.945     -1.541
                             for Non-White                                        (0.091)    (0.045)   (0.099)

                                 % Minority                                        -1.535     -1.085    -1.547
                                  for White                                       (0.067)    (0.057)   (0.062)

                                    Distance      -2.455                -2.454     -2.432               -3.457
                                                 (0.089)               (0.089)    (0.098)               (0.097)

                          Distance Squared                                                               0.400
                                                                                                        (0.015)
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses.


                                                                                                                  42
                                     Table 3: Hedonic and “Quality Hedonic” Results

  Variable                                           Salary                                    Quality
                                 I              II            III     IV           I        II          III       IV
  Salary                                                                        -0.013    -.018       -0.016    -0.018
                                                                               (0.014)   (0.017)     (0.017)   (0.017)

  Qualification Index         -0.012       -0.012          -0.011    -0.012
                             (0.014)      (0.011)         (0.011)   (0.011)

  % Minority                   1.30         1.37           1.35       1.37      0.090     -0.16      -0.030      -0.16
                              (0.11)       (0.10)         (0.10)     (0.10)    (0.113)   (0.12)     (0.124)     (0.12)

  % Poor, K-6                  -1.16        -1.12          -1.12      -1.12     -0.62     -0.52       -0.51      -0.52
                              (0.11)       (0.09)         (0.09)     (0.09)    (0.11)    (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.12)

  Urban                        -0.21        -0.18          -0.18      -0.18     0.025     0.12        0.11       0.12
                              (0.08)       (0.07)         (0.07)     (0.06)    (0.079)   (0.08)      (0.08)     (0.08)

  Non-white teacher                                        -0.058                                     0.13
                                                          (0.073)                                    (0.09)

  % Min * Non-White                                        0.14                                       -0.79
                                                          (0.12)                                     (0.15)

  Distance                                                           -3.4E-4                                    2.0E-3
                                                                    (8.8E-5)                                   (1.1E-3)

  Dist > 100 miles                                                   -0.081                                      0.12
                                                                    (0.057)                                     (0.70)

  Year fixed effects           No           Yes               Yes     Yes        No       Yes         Yes        Yes
  MSA fixed effects            No           Yes               Yes     Yes        No       Yes         Yes        Yes

      R2                     0.0328        0.3593         0.3595    0.3596     0.0189    0.0409      0.0495    0.0410
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses




                                                                                                                          43
                                                           Table 4
                              Mean Estimates of Parameters in Wage and Quality Equations
        Monte Carlo Simulations Varying Either the Preference Parameters or Correlations Between Explanatory Variables
                                                                            mean estimates of parameters        mean estimates of parameters
                                     values of preference parameters             in wage equation                   in quality equation
                                                                   ρ qL ,
                                β1       β2       β4      ρ z1 S   ρ Z1L       γ%1        γ% 2      γ% 3          τ%1        τ%2       τ%3
Comparison 1:                   0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0     -0.0003     -0.009     0.699         0.004     -0.002     0.692
Variation in the preference                                                   0.24       0.19       1.00          0.08      0.08       1.00
parameters for Z1 and Z 2       0.3       0.6      0.0     0.0      0.0      -0.131     -0.274     0.732         0.183     0.363      0.609
                                                                              0.84       0.99        1.0           1.0       1.0       1.0
                                0.6       1.2      0.0     0.0      0.0      -0.215     -0.447     0.776         0.282     0.564      0.470
                                                                              0.99        1.0        1.0           1.0       1.0        1.0

Comparison 2:                   0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0     -0.0003     -0.009     0.699         0.004     -0.002     0.692
Variation in the correlation                                                  0.24       0.19       1.0           0.08      0.08       1.0
between Z1 and salary           0.0       0.0      0.0     0.3      0.0      0.165      -0.011     0.667         0.001     0.001      0.693
                                                                              0.97       0.22       1.0           0.08      0.02       1.0
                                0.0       0.0      0.0     0.6      0.0      0.380      -0.011     0.543        -0.006     0.002      0.696
                                                                               1.0       0.27       1.0           0.04      0.05       1.0

Comparison 3:                   0.5       0.5      0.0     0.0      0.0      -0.219     -0.231     0.736         0.302      0.302     0.599
Variation in teachers’                                                        0.98       0.99       1.0           1.0        1.0       1.0
distance preference             0.5       0.5     -0.5     0.0      0.0      -0.208     -0.224     0.719         0.296      0.299     0.590
parameter                                                                     0.99       0.99       1.0           1.0        1.0       1.0
                                0.5       0.5     -1.0     0.0      0.0      -0.195     -0.211     0.690         0.289      0.292     0.572
                                                                              0.96       0.96       1.0           1.0        1.0       1.0
                                0.5       0.5     -1.5     0.0      0.0      -0.186     -0.200     0.668         0.284      0.284     0.558
                                                                              0.95       0.97       1.0           1.0        1.0       1.0

Comparison 4:                   0.5       0.5     -1.0     0.0      0.0       -0.195     -0.211      0.690        0.289     0.292     0.572
Variation in the correlations                                                  0.96        0.96       1.0          1.0       1.0       1.0
between teachers’ location      0.5    0.5     -1.0      0.0     0.3          -0.211     -0.207      0.688        0.313     0.286     0.561
and q and between school                                                       0.97        0.97       1.0          1.0       1.0       1.0
location and Z1                 0.5    0.5     -1.0      0.0     0.6          -0.261     -0.197      0.687        0.387     0.271     0.529
                                                                                1.0        0.96       1.0          1.0       1.0       1.0
                          * The parameters α , β 3 , σ ω and σ δ are all set equal to one in each of the comparisons.

                                                                                                                                               44
                                                    Appendix A

                                              Workforce Database


                    Personnel data               Certification and       SUNY student data        School and district data
                                                     exam data
UNIVERSE:      All public school             All individuals taking    All SUNY applicants        All public schools and
               teachers,                     certification exams       (including non-teachers)   districts
               superintendents,
               principals, and other staff
ELEMENTS:      - salary                      - scores on NTE and       - high school attended     - enrollment
               - course subject and             NYSTCE (general        - high school courses      - student poverty (free
                     grade                      knowledge,             - high school GPA              and reduced lunch
               - class size                     pedagogy, and          - SAT exam scores              counts)
               - experience (district           content specialty)     - college attended and     - enrollment by race
                     and other)                 exams                      dates                  - limited English
               - years of education and      - college of              - intended college              proficiency
                     degree attainment           undergraduate and         major                  - student test results
               - age                             graduate degrees      - actual college major     - dropout rates
               - gender                      - degrees earned          - college GPA              - district wealth
                                             - zip code of residence   - degrees earned           - district salary schedule
                                                  when certified                                  - support staff and aides
                                             - race


TIME PERIOD:   1969-70 to 1999-00            1984-85 to 1999-00        1989-90 to 1999-00         1969-70 to 1999-00

SOURCE:        New York State                New York State            The State University of    New York State
               Education Department          Education Department      New York                   Education Department




                                                                                                                  45
                                                         Appendix B



          As noted in Section V, it is necessary to use simulation to compute values of E qmtk zmtk ; θ in  (             )
                                                                                    (
the moment condition ∑ ∑ n mtk z mtk [q mtk − E (q mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 and E d mtk zmtk ; θ
                             t k
                                                                                                    )     in the moment


conditions ∑ ∑ n mtk z mtk [d mtk − E (d mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 and ∑ ∑ n mtk [d mtk − E (d mtk | z mtk ;θ )] = 0 . Let
                 t k                                                t k


F (q mtk | z mtk ;θ ) be the approximation of E (q mtk | z mtk ;θ ) obtained through simulation; and

F (d mtk | z mtk ;θ ) , the simulator for E (d mtk | z mtk ;θ ) .

          Our method for calculating the simulated moments is as follows. (1) A standard-normal random

number generator generates H sets of independent draws for the random variables in the model. In

each draw, random numbers are generated corresponding to the random variable in each candidate’s

benefit equation for every school alternative. We denote these values in the hth draw using the notation

δ jkh , j = 1,2,…,J and k = 1,2,…,K. Similarly the hth draw includes randomly generated values for the

random error terms ( ω hjk ) in the equations characterizing the benefits to each employer associated with

hiring each candidate. These randomly generated values are held constant throughout the estimation,

as are the observed attributes of candidates and schools. (2) For a given set of parameter values

(θ = (α , β )) the simulated moments are obtained as follows.             The values of δ jkh and ω hjk for a particular

draw (h) are used to infer the rankings of candidates and jobs discussed above. In turn, these rankings

are used with the Gale-Shapley matching algorithm to determine the school-optimal stable matching

                                                                         h                 1           h
and the resulting distribution of teacher and job attributes. In turn, q mtk =            nmtk     ∑ q mtk and
                                                                                                    h
                                                                                                 i∈Smtk


  h
d mtk =    1
          nmtk    ∑h d mtk
                       h
                           are computed for each of the K schools hiring in the hth simulation of the outcome
                 i∈Smtk




                                                                                                                              46
                               h
in market m during period t. S mtk is the set of teachers in school k in draw h. Repeating this step for

each of the draws yields the following approximations of the pertinent expected values.

                  F (q mtk z mtk ;θ ) = H1 ∑ q mtk
                                               h
                                                   ≈ E (q mtk z mtk ;θ )
                                               h


                  F (d mtk z mtk ;θ ) = H1 ∑ d mtk
                                               h
                                                   ≈ E (d mtk z mtk ;θ )
                                               h


We substitute these expressions into the above moment conditions to get the simulated moment

conditions summarized by Equations 1 and 2:

                            a
                          ψ mtk ≡ z mtk [q mtk − F (q mtk | z mtk ;θ )]
                            b
                          ψ mtk            [
                                ≡ z mtk d mtk − F (d mtk | z mtk ;θ )     ]       (1)
                            c
                          ψ mtk    [
                                ≡ d mtk − F (d mtk | z mtk ;θ )     ]

                                                   ψ mtk
                                                      a
                                                          
                                                    b 
                          ψ m = ∑∑ nmtk            ψ mtk  =   ∑∑ n    mtk   ψ mtk = 0 (2)
                                   t   k
                                                   ψ mtk
                                                      c        t   k
                                                         

Defining ψ (θ ) to be a column vector containing the stacked values of ψ 1 , ψ 2 , … , ψ 5 for the five

markets, the method of simulated moment (MSM) estimator is defined by:

                                   θˆ(W ) = arg min ψ (θ )′W ψ (θ ) .
                                                       θ

where W is a symmetric, positive semidefinite weighting matrix. In general, the optimal weighting

matrix is W = Ω −1 where Ω = Asy Var [ψ ] . Given our framework, Ω simplifies to the following

block diagonal matrix where the mth diagonal block can be approximated using the formula

~                 ~         ~                                              ~
Ω m = 1 ∑ ∑ψ mtk (θ ) ψ mtk
                        ′ (θ ) evaluated at some consistent estimate of θ, θ .
      n m
            t k




                                                                                                          47
                        Eψ 1ψ 1′         0     L       0   Ω1 0 L 0 
                        0            Eψ 2ψ 2′ L   0   0 Ω 2 L 0 
        Ω = E[ψ ψ ′] =                                    =
                        M              M      O   M   M       M O M 
                                                                     
                        0              0      L Eψ 5ψ 5′   0  0 L Ω5 

                                                         ~
                                                            ( )                  ~
Thus, the efficient MSM estimator in our case will be θˆ Ω = arg min ∑ ψ m (θ )′ Ω m −1ψ m (θ ) .
                                                                       θ   m

       In the empirical analysis below, we obtain the consistent, but inefficient, estimate of θ,
~
θ (I ) = arg min ∑ ψ m (θ )′ ψ m (θ ) for the case of an identity weighting matrix, I. In later work, these
                θ   m

                                      ~                                                ~
                                                                                           ( )
estimates will be used to compute the Ω m used to obtain the second-stage estimates θˆ Ω . However, the

first-stage estimates are of interest in themselves, since they are consistent estimates of the parameters of

interest and can give us a sense of the fruitfulness of the estimation strategy.

                                                  ~      ~
                                                               ()
The asymptotic covariance matrix of the estimator θ is V θ = 1n [D ′ D ]−1 D ′ Ω D [D ′ D ]−1 where

        ∂ψ (θ 0 ) 
D = E0              and Ω is defined above. We approximate D using the formula
        ∂θ ' 
                                 ~
~                       ∂ ψ mtk (θ )
D=   ∑ ∑ ∑ nmtk            ∂θ ′
                                     and approximate the block diagonal elements of Ω using the formula for
      m t   k

~
Ω m shown above to obtain the standard errors of the first-stage parameter estimates.

       We use 25 draws of the random errors to calculate the simulators and a combination of grid

search and derivative techniques to estimate the parameters. We then use 250 draws of the random

errors in the simulations used to calculate the derivatives of the moments needed to compute the

standard errors of the point estimates.




                                                                                                          48
