NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVE-COMPATIBLE GUARANTEED
RENEWABLE HEALTH INSURANCE
Bradley Herring
Mark Pauly
Working Paper 9888
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9888
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

This research was supported by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. We appreciate helpful
comments from Keith Crocker, John Moran, Tom McGuire, seminar participants at both the 2003 NBER
Insurance Project Meeting and the 2003 14th Annual Health Economics conference at RAND, and several
health insurance actuaries participating in a focus group at the University of Pennsylvania in March, 2003.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Bradley Herring and Mark Pauly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Incentive-Compatible Guaranteed Renewable Health Insurance
Bradley Herring and Mark Pauly
NBER Working Paper No. 9888
July 2003
JEL No.G22, I10
ABSTRACT
Multi-period theoretical models of renewable insurance display front-loaded premium schedules that
both cover lifetime total claims of low-risk and high-risk individuals and provide an incentive for
those who remain low-risk to continue to purchase the policy. In practice, however, an age profile
of premiums that decreases with age might result in relatively high premiums for younger
individuals which they may consider unaffordable. In this paper, we use medical expenditure data
to estimate an optimal competitive age-based premium schedule for a benchmark renewable health
insurance policy. We find that the amount of prepayment by younger individuals that would be
necessary to cover future claims is mitigated by three factors: high-risk individuals will either
recover or die, low-risk expected expense increases with age, and the likelihood of developing a
high-risk condition increases with age. Although medical cost growth over time increases the
amount of prepayment necessary, the resulting optimal premium path generally increases with age.
We also find that actual premium paths exhibited by purchasers of individual insurance with
guaranteed renewability is close to the optimal schedule we estimate. Finally, we examine
consumers' gain in expected utility associated with the guaranteed renewability feature.
Bradley Herring
Department of Health Policy and Management
Rollins School of Public Health
Emory University
1518 Clifton Road NE
Atlanta, GA 30322
bjherri@sph.emory.edu

Mark Pauly
The Health Care Systems Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
I.A. Background
Not all illness-related events begin and end within the single-year time frame that is
typical for private health insurance policies. This means that a person initially in good health
who develops a chronic illness may have above-average expenses in subsequent years. If the
annual insurance premium is set proportional to expected expense in each year, the person who
contracts a multi-year condition would face a substantial and unexpected jump in premiums,
something a risk-averse person would prefer to avoid. A potential solution to this problem is for
the insurance policy purchased when the individual is still in good health to contain a guaranteed
renewability (GR) provision which stipulates that no insured’s future premium for the given
policy will increase more than any other insured’s premium increases. That is, people who
become high-risk will pay the same premium as those who remain low-risk.
However, in a world of competitive unsubsidized insurance firms, the insurer faces a
dilemma. If some individuals who are low-risk in period one will become high-risk in period
two, any resulting second-period premium based only on these higher expected expenses may
drive away from the plan those who remain low-risk. They will be attracted to other firms
promising to charge them no more than their own expected expenses. In this sense, the promise
to “community rate” insurance in the future for the population of initial purchasers is not
sustainable in competitive insurance markets.
There is, however, a solution in theory to this problem, as suggested by Cochrane [1995]
and Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth [1995]. The premium the insurer should charge the low-risk
individuals in period one should be higher than the expected expense for that population in
period one. The “extra” premium is used to cover the subsequent above-average expenses of

1

those who became high-risk between period one and period two. It would then be possible to
charge a premium equal to the low-risk individuals’ expected expense in period two; at this
premium, both those who became high-risk and those who remain low-risk would remain with
the insurer. Moreover, risk-averse individuals will prefer paying the somewhat higher premium
in period one to paying a lower premium in period one and facing the uncertainty of aboveaverage premiums in period two. The expected lifetime premiums are the same under both
scenarios, but “front-loading” the first-period premium produces an “incentive-compatible”
schedule of premiums which risk-averse individuals prefer to facing single-period risk-rated
insurance.
In just a two-period model, the additional premium in period one need not be large.
However, selling insurance to young people that will guarantee premiums in the face of a chronic
illness that persists for many years into the future might require charging a substantial extra
premium to cover the future expected excess expense for those who become high risk. Figure 1
illustrates what the theoretically-implied GR premium schedule would look like for a initially
low-risk population in which individuals face a constant per-period probability of becoming (and
remaining) high risk. Whereas a simple premium schedule based on age would obviously
increase with age, the incentive-compatible guaranteed renewable premium schedule under this
set of simple assumptions would decrease with age. Even with an insurer’s ability to earn a rate
of return on any reserves set aside for future claims, the additional premium to cover 40 or more
years of above-average spending might be quite high. If people could borrow in a perfect capital
market to pay this premium, they would do so. But, as Frick [1999] points out, with imperfect
capital markets, young people—particularly those with lower incomes—might be unable to

2

borrow on reasonable terms and therefore be unable to afford (even if behaving rationally in all
other ways) high initial premiums.
However, this pattern of excessively high initial premiums may not be realistic for health
insurance. The simple model assumed that the expected expenses for low-risk individuals stayed
constant over time, that a given proportion of the low-risk population converted to high risk in
every period, and that individuals remain high-risk for all remaining periods. These assumptions
may well not hold for health insurance. Expected expenses even for healthy or normal people
almost surely increase with age. Similarly, the probability of contracting a chronic condition
also almost surely increases with age. And finally, the time period over which people remain
high-risk, on average, is less than the average lifetime. (These conjectures are confirmed below
with our medical expenditure data.)
The implication of these modifications is that, in principle, the premium needed to fund
GR coverage might actually be moderate at a young age compared to what it will become later.
In fact, premiums for guaranteed renewable coverage for people in their twenties (including
enough to cover the excess expense of those who will become chronic high risks) could well be
lower than the premiums for healthy people in their sixties, since the latter’s expected expenses
would be higher and more of them would be becoming high risks (if only until they go on
Medicare). Applying a positive interest rate to the excess reserves collected by insurers would
also smooth the life-long pattern of premiums.
At a theoretical level, this observation does not, in itself, necessarily provide a solution to
Frick’s problem of imperfect capital markets. Markets may be imperfect in many ways, and
even with premiums that are relatively low for the young, those people may so prefer current
consumption that they sacrifice GR protection. The real issue is empirical: what schedule of

3

lifetime premiums related to age would individuals prefer? This paper does not answer that
question directly. But it does estimate a feasible breakeven incentive-compatible premium
schedule and approximates the willingness-to-pay for that schedule of lifetime premiums. We
also relate these schedules to typical lifetime income patterns; in an informal way this
comparison may suggest how “affordable” an incentive-compatible schedule would be.
There is another empirical fact that is relevant. GR health insurance policies (as well as
GR term life and nursing home insurance) do exist in (and dominate) the market, even in the
absence of regulation, and appear to be stable [Pauly, Percy, and Herring, 1999; Harrington and
Niehaus, 1999]. We want to see whether that apparent stability is consistent with an incentivecompatible premium schedule. In a sense, we are elaborating on the old joke: “Sure, it works in
practice, but could it work in theory?” because developing the theory that fits with practice may
further illuminate both.
Our approach follows and extends the work of Hendel and Lizzeri [2003] for term life
insurance. They do not deal with guaranteed renewability per se (despite its very common
presence in term life insurance markets [Harrington and Niehaus, 1999]), but instead use the
more explicit insurer commitment to future premiums present in policies with different lengths
of term. We show that essentially the same results can be obtained with guaranteed renewability
and single-year policies, and we go beyond Hendel and Lizzeri in providing direct comparisons
of the extent of “front-loading” of actual premiums paid with an estimate of the optimal age-path
of premiums.
The existence of GR features can also help to explain a seeming paradox in the
relationship between nongroup insurance premiums actually paid and risk. The nongroup
insurance market is thought to tailor premiums to risk, but in our previous research, we

4

discovered that, although insurance premiums increase with age, the increase is much less than
proportional to the increase in expected expenses with age [Pauly and Herring, 1999; Herring
and Pauly, 2001]. Expected expenses approximately quadruple between the ages of 25 and 60,
but paid premiums (for the same level of coverage) increase only about two-and-a-half times.
Moreover, we could not detect a statistically significant relationship between one’s risk level,
given one’s age, and the premiums paid. But such a dampening of the age-related pattern of
premiums is exactly what would be predicted if GR were in effect and insurers were pricing
rationally.1 And if renewability were guaranteed at average premiums regardless of risk,
premiums would be unrelated to risk for those who renew. One implication of this is that what
an insurer would charge a 50-year-old applying for new insurance will generally be more than
what the average 50-year-old, protected by GR, pays for “old” renewed insurance.

I.B. Overview
In this paper, we explicitly estimate the age profile of a GR premium schedule predicted
by the theory outlined above, using the individual-level data in the Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey (MEPS). We estimate expected medical expenses based on age, gender, and health
status. We then consider a benchmark insurance policy, and we “piece together” the ideal GR
premium schedule for that policy which will cover lifetime expected claims for both low-risk and
high-risk individuals yet will provide an incentive for the low-risk individuals to remain with the
policy. We also compare this GR premium schedule we estimate to actual nongroup insurance
premiums from the Community Tracking Study’s Household Survey. We then examine
consumers’ willingness-to-pay for this GR feature by producing estimates of both the benefits
from avoiding the uncertainty of future-period risk-rated premiums and the “capital constraint”

5

cost associated with the prepayment of GR premiums. Finally, we make some general
observations about the feasibility of GR health insurance based upon our findings.
Since incentive-compatible guaranteed renewable premium schedules require an insurer
to collect prepayments in order to cover the future claims of high-risk individuals (in excess of
the claims of low-risk individuals), our model needs to account for projected growth rates in
medical costs over time. Even though the premium can be increased to keep up with “pure”
medical spending growth for the lower risks who are retained in the pool, the prepayments also
need to cover anticipated spending growth for the higher risks above that for the lower risks. We
do not, however, consider the case in which there are ex post realizations of cost growth which
differ from the ex ante forecasts made, thereby creating unpredictable losses or gains to the
insurer.2 We do however comment on the magnitude of this non-diversifiable risk and make a
suggestion for potential diversification. One other aspect of long-term contracting in health
insurance which we do not consider in this paper is the enforceability of such long-term
contracts; there exists the potential for unscrupulous insurers to engage in either “reunderwriting” high-risk individuals or canceling a block of business in order to screen out highrisk individuals from new policies.3 We assume below that, because of effective regulation,
reputation effects, or the threat of legal action, insurers do not violate their insurance contracts.

II. METHODS AND MAIN RESULTS
II.A. Estimating Expected Expense
We use data from the 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys
(MEPS) to produce individual-level estimates of expected expense for individuals of various
ages and health risk levels. The MEPS is a nationally-representative household survey

6

containing detailed information on demographic characteristics, health conditions, insurance
status, and medical expenses. We first identify a pooled sample of 33,884 privately-insured
individuals ages 18 to 64 from the four survey years, and we inflate each year’s expenditure data
to 2003 dollars using the annual growth rates for both private out-of-pocket payments and private
health insurance payments identified by the National Health Expenditures data from the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services; these growth rates are presented in Heffler et al. [2003].
Since individuals in the MEPS held various types of plans with different cost-sharing provisions,
we apply the American Academy of Actuaries [1995] induction methodology to standardized
each individual’s expenditures (i.e., total expenses, benefits, and out-of-pocket payments) to a
benchmark plan, assumed to have a $200 deductible, 25 percent coinsurance, and a $2500 outof-pocket maximum.
We then use these data on actual insurance benefit payments to estimate individual-level
expected benefits using a two-part regression model.4 The first part is a logistic regression
model predicting the probability of having any nonzero benefits, and the second is an OLS model
predicting (untransformed linear) benefits for the sample of those with nonzero benefits.5 The
individual characteristics include binary variables for five-year age intervals interacted with
gender and binary variables identifying the absence of any prior chronic conditions or the
presence of the following twelve different medical conditions: cancer, diabetes, emphysema,
high cholesterol, hypertension, heart disease, stroke, arthritis, asthma, gall bladder disease,
stomach ulcer, and back problems. The MEPS identifies the year each of these conditions was
discovered, and since we are interested in obtaining forecasts of expected expense using preexisting conditions, we include indicators for only those conditions that were discovered prior to
the survey year.6 Because high risks on average either die relatively soon after their conditions

7

are discovered or recover from their illnesses, the median period of unusually high expenses is
only about four years [Eichner, McClellan, and Wise, 1998]. (Obviously some people who
become high risks do remain that way for a longer period of time.) For this reason, we identify
each of the twelve conditions in our regression model by whether it was discovered less than five
years ago or more than five years ago.
The results from this regression analysis are presented in Table 1. The second column of
this table shows mean statistics for the privately-insured MEPS sample, the third column shows
results for the logistic regression model predicting any insurance benefits, the fourth column
shows OLS results for untransformed “conditional” insurance benefits, and the final column
shows a “simulated” marginal effect from combining the logistic and OLS estimates. (We
determine this combined marginal effect for each variable by producing individual-level
estimates of expected expense for the entire sample both “turning on and off” the relevant
variable; the marginal effect for that variable is then the difference in mean expected expenses
for the two samples.) The coefficients on age suggest that, even after controlling for higher
expenses related to the presence of a high-expense condition, expected expense increases with
age (aside from the slight decrease in expense for women after child-bearing age). Moreover,
the results also demonstrate the dampening of the magnitude of condition-related expenses over
time for many of the conditions. That is, a more-recent condition’s marginal effect on expected
expense is often higher than a less-recent condition’s marginal effect on expected expense; these
patterns of a diminishing effect for most conditions with time are much less dramatic than what
would be observed if we included the conditions discovered during the survey year. However,
for a few conditions, particularly stroke and gall bladder disease, the pattern of condition-related
expense over time is the reverse.

8

II.B. Hypothetical Age-Related Premium Schedules and the Distribution of Risk
Using the predicted values from these two regression models shown in Table 1, we
produce estimates of expected expense based upon an individual’s age, gender, and health status.
After incorporating administrative loading equal to 30 percent of the premium, this expected
expense measure represents how risk-rated “spot market” insurance premiums (albeit rated by
the set of risk characteristics identified in our empirical model) for our benchmark plan would
appear.7 Since our theoretical interest is in the schedule of renewable premiums for individuals
who are all initially low risk, we exclude from the analysis individuals whose high-risk condition
was discovered before the age of 18; the MEPS data indicate that only 2.5 percent of eighteenyear-olds have one or more preexisting conditions.
Since the total number of high-risk individuals is (by definition) small, we increase the
sample size for our subsequent analysis by using the full sample of non-elderly adults (regardless
of their current insurance status) in the MEPS with non-missing data, producing a distribution of
expected benefits as if the full non-elderly adult sample was insured by the benchmark plan.
Since the number of high-risk observations is still somewhat limited for any given age, the
estimates we present below use a weighted average of the surrounding ages to produce
“smoother” patterns. Specifically, observations within seven years in age are used, but they are
given a weight inversely proportional to the number of years’ difference between the observation
and the specific age being estimated. The size of our resulting sample is 57,282 individuals.
Figure 2A and Figure 2B show the resulting estimated age profile of hypothetical lowrisk and high-risk premiums for females and males respectively. The premiums for each age are
shown in 2003 dollars. Single-period risk-rated premiums would be less than $1000 for younger

9

low-risk males and about $3000 for older low-risk males, but average about $2500 for younger
high-risk males and about $7000 for older high-risk males. It should be noted that these
hypothetical “high-risk” premiums shown here are actually averages of the different rated
premiums high-risk individuals would face based on the number and nature of their high-risk
conditions. The profile for average expense (from both low-risk and high-risk individuals
together) by age is also shown. The premium schedule represents how a “modified community
rating” (i.e., permitting rating by age but not by health status) premium schedule would appear.
We then examine in more detail how the number of high-risk individuals increases. The
first row of Table 2 shows the proportion of the population who are high-risk by age; for
simplicity, we present six selected ages at (roughly) ten-year intervals. Approximately a quarter
of both males and females (who are all initially low-risk at age eighteen) have developed a highrisk condition by age 55, and almost 40 percent are high-risk by age 64.
Estimating the probability that a low-risk individual develops a high-risk condition
during any given year that is implied by these estimates, however, needs to take account of
deaths. Since deaths occur more frequently to people with high-risk conditions, the per-period
probability of becoming high-risk is larger than the value that would result from examining a
static population without deaths. To be specific, the annual probability of a low-risk individual
becoming high-risk during age T can be expressed by the following:
PH,T = (NH,T+1 - (1- DH,T)NH,T) / (1- DL,T)NL,T),
where Ni,T is the number of individuals of risk-type i at age T, and Di,T is the mortality rate of
risk-type i at age T.
We produce a “standardized” population by adjusting the “point-in-time” MEPS sample
weights (which fluctuate, for example, with the presence of the “Baby Boom” population) using

10

age/gender mortality rates from the National Center for Health Statistics [Anderson, 1999]. By
age 64, a cohort of 100 low-risk males will have had about 21 deaths, so that there will be about
47 low-risk members and 32 high-risk members remaining. We use MEPS data for deaths that
occurred within the sample to determine the ratio of low-risk to high-risk mortality, Di,T , for
several selected age cohorts. We apply this ratio to the NCHS age/gender mortality rates to
determine age/gender/risk mortality rates needed to estimate the above expression for PH,T.
The remainder of Table 2 shows the results from these calculations. Conditional on age,
mortality rates for high-risk individuals are almost ten times as high as mortality rates for lowrisk individuals. The resulting annual likelihood of a low-risk individual developing a high-risk
condition is less than 0.5 percent in the early stage of life but increases considerably to over 2.5
percent in the later stage of life. The estimates presented in this table have two direct
implications for the gradient of the GR premium schedule. The first is that many of those who
develop a high-risk condition in their earlier years will die rather than continuing to incur high
claims. The second is that the pre-payment necessary to cover future claims for the younger
cohorts is decreased by the relatively fewer individuals developing high-risk conditions during
the earlier stages of life.

II.C. The Ideal Renewable Premium Schedule
Now consider the breakeven GR premium schedule implied by the theoretical work of
Cochrane [1995] and Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth [1995]. These models specify that the
premium at age T equals the low-risk expected expense at age T, plus the expected lifetime
difference between low-risk and high-risk expected expense for all those individuals who
become high-risk during age T. That is, the GR premium in each period is front-loaded by an

11

additional amount that essentially insures the financial consequences (until the person goes on
Medicare at age 65) of becoming high-risk during the period. For example, the premium at age
64 is simply equivalent to the low-risk expected expense at age 64. (All individuals who are
high-risk before age 64 will have already covered their excess claims through prior front-loaded
premiums.) The premium at age 63 is the sum of the low-risk expense at age 63 plus the
difference in expected expense between high-risk expected expense and low-risk expected
expense at age 64 for the cohort of 63-year-old low-risks who become high-risk during age 63
and are still alive at age 64.8
As a result, low-risk individuals in any given year have no incentive to exit the pool of
individuals covered by the GR policy for the risk-rated competitive “spot market” since the sum
of their remaining expected lifetime GR premiums equals the sum of their remaining expected
lifetime risk-rated premiums; an important assumption we make is that each consumer has the
ability to predict what his or her feasible set of remaining premiums in this risk-rated spot market
is, given his or her current health status, and makes a rational decision to either remain in or exit
the GR pool. High-risk individuals, of course, also have no incentive to leave the GR pool for
risk-rated insurance since the GR premium schedule is much lower. Moreover, even if some
low-risk individuals did leave the GR pool for other reasons, their departure would not affect the
insurer’s ability to cover its future high-risk claims, since the funds for this purpose have already
been prepaid by all insureds.
As discussed above, many individuals developing a high-risk condition may eventually
recover from their illness—generally within five years, if at all. What matters for the incentivecompatibility criteria to hold is only whether any individual gains by exiting the pool. A
formerly high-risk person who has recovered from a condition will have a lower expected

12

expense than a person still suffering from that condition, but it is highly unlikely that the
expected expense for individuals who have recovered from a condition is actually lower than the
expected expense for low-risk individuals who have never had a high-risk chronic condition.9 In
other words, if the GR premium schedule is low enough so that a low-risk individual will not exit
the pool to seek a risk-rated policy, it must be low enough for a formerly high-risk recovered
individual not to exit either.
It is not a problem that we cannot obtain separate estimates of expected expense for
recovered individuals and non-recovered individuals for those whose condition is more than five
years old. Determining the average of the two is sufficient because the excess premium that
must be collected at age T is the sum of the lifetime difference in future expected expenses for all
those developing a condition in T+1: those who recover, those who die after a time, and those
who remain chronically ill. This sum is the same whether it is comprised by the sum of the
average excess expected expenses (of both recovered and non-recovered individuals) essentially
estimated by our regression model, or by the sum of lower recovered individuals’ average
expense and higher non-recovered individuals’ average expense. However, there will be an
overall effect of illness recovery on the steepness of the optimal GR premium schedule, since the
average per-period expected expense for recovered and non-recovered individuals combined
(i.e., the “more than five years” measures) is often lower than the expected per-period expected
expense for newly-discovered conditions (i.e., the “one to five years” measures). The future
high-risk claims for the former are more concentrated in the younger cohort’s premiums while
the future high-risk claims for the latter are more concentrated in the older cohort’s premium—
simply because an older individual has less time to recover before the age of 64.

13

Finally, it is necessary to incorporate the overall growth in medical costs over time into
our model. GR policies typically stipulate that premiums can increase for all insured individuals
within a rating class (the rating class we consider is the entire set of initially low-risk eighteen
year olds). Therefore it will be possible for the insurer to increase a “predetermined” schedule of
premiums to reflect changes in medical prices and available technology. However, since an
incentive-compatible GR premium schedule must also be priced such that low-risk individuals
wish to remain in the GR pool, the “class-average” increase in the GR premium can reflect only
the currently low-risks’ growth in expenses. Therefore, it is necessary to apply a projected
growth rate to the excess claims (i.e., the difference between high-risk and low-risk expense)
incurred in periods T+1, T+2,…, 64 for individuals who become high risk during period T to be
set aside in reserve.
We use the projected growth rates for private health insurance from the National Health
Expenditures data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), given in Heffler
et al. [2003]. Specifically, CMS projects premium growth equal to 7.7 percent per year for the
period 2004-2008 and 6.9 percent per year for the period 2008-2012. We assume that the 6.9
percent growth rates prevails for the years beyond 2012, and we also assume that the growth rate
is proportional to low-risk and high-risk costs alike. Finally, we assume that insurers can earn a
three percent real rate-of-return on these early-life “overcharges” set aside in reserve. Hence, the
excess cost-inflated prepayment we estimate is actually a discounted value. That is, we assume
that an insurer has to only collect $100 in excess premiums today, for example, to pay out $103
in excess claims during the next year—while this $103 in T+1 claims are essentially equivalent
to $96 in claims in time T due to medical cost inflation.

14

Figure 3A and Figure 3B graph the incentive-compatible breakeven GR premium
schedule we estimate, for females and males, respectively; Table 3 shows the magnitude of the
premiums for several selected years. The premiums for each age are shown in 2003 dollars.
These figures illustrate that the GR premium schedule generally increases with age, despite the
prepayment necessary to cover future high-risk claims; the main exception to this trend is the
decrease in the GR premium for women after the peak child-bearing age. The prepayment
required (i.e., the difference between the future claims of newly high-risk individuals and lowrisk individuals) per year for the GR feature averages about $950 for both males and females,
and is relatively level throughout one’s lifetime until it begins to taper off during the fifteen years
before age 65. Over the course of one’s lifetime, this prepayment required for the GR feature is
about 50 percent above the low-risk premium which averages about $1800 for males and females
of all ages; however, this ratio of the prepayment to the low-risk expense decreases considerably
over time since the low-risk expected expense increases with age. For males ages 18 to 34 the
prepayment required is about $1050 per year which is about 175 percent above this young male
cohort’s low-risk premium averaging $600. For females ages 18 to 34 the prepayment required
is about $1200 per year which is about two-thirds of this cohort’s low-risk premium averaging
$1775.

II.D. Comparison to Actual Nongroup Premiums
We next compare our estimated GR premium schedules to actual data for nongroup
insurance premiums. The data sources for these premiums actually paid are the nationallyrepresentative 1996-1997 and 1998-1999 Community Tracking Study’s (CTS) Household
Surveys. The sample we use consists of all of the persons with single-coverage nongroup plans

15

(N = 1589) identified in these two surveys. We make no adjustment for variation in generosity
between these plans and our hypothetical benchmark plan, for whether a person is initiating or
renewing coverage, for variation between the generosity of plans chosen and age-related
expected expense, nor for state-level rating regulations. However, we do adjust for growth in
premiums both between 1996 and 2003 and between 1998 and 2003 using the CMS growth rates
for private health insurance premiums, so that we present these CTS nongroup premium data in
2003 dollars.
These mean nongroup premiums by age from the CTS data are shown in Figures 4A and
4B for females and males, respectively; Table 3 shows the magnitude of these CTS premiums for
several selected years. While we have no objective measure of comparing the gradient of our
hypothetical premium schedules with the premium schedule from actual nongroup purchases,
there does appear to be surprising consistency between the age profile of actual nongroup
premiums and the GR premium schedule we estimated. Nongroup premiums do not increase
proportionately with average age-related expense, and the magnitude of these premiums tapers
off considerably during the ten years before Medicare eligibility.10 However, since the CTS
premium schedule also happens to be similar in shape to the low-risk premium schedule (because
the expected expenses for those who remain low-risk also increases less rapidly with age than do
average expected expenses), an alternative hypothesis would be the existence of strict
underwriting to exclude all high-risk individuals from nongroup insurance. The publiclyavailable version of the CTS survey does not contain information on specific chronic health
conditions but does contain self-reported health status: 7.8 percent of individuals between age 18
and 64 with employment-based health insurance report their health as fair or poor, while 7.0
percent of the nongroup insured sample report their health as fair or poor. Such strict

16

underwriting to exclude all high risks from our nongroup sample, therefore, is not likely. While
the existence of underwriting may have some effect on the pattern on nongroup premiums we
observe, we conclude that the pattern of actual premiums is consistent with the hypothesis that
insurers are actually charging lifetime GR premiums.

II.E. GR Premium Schedules Under Alternative Assumptions
One important influence on the magnitude of the prepayment necessary to fund the GR
feature is the assumption made about the rate-of-return that insurers can earn on the early-life
overcharges set aside in reserve. We assumed a modest three percent rate-of-return for the
breakeven GR premium schedule shown above, but higher expected rates-of-return would
obviously result in a lower amount of front-loading necessary. For purposes of illustration, we
estimate breakeven GR premium schedules resulting from assuming that the rate-of-return
insurers earn on reserves simply equaled the expected growth in medical expenditures; these
schedules are shown in Figures 5A and 5B for females and males, respectively, and Table 3
shows the premiums for selected years. This alternative assumption about the rate-of-return
lowers the average prepayment across all ages from about $950 to about $525 per year and
decreases this amount by a relatively higher amount for younger individuals.
A second important influence on the degree of necessary front-loading is enrollee
turnover. In real insurance markets relatively few people buy an individual insurance policy at a
young age and stick with it until they go on Medicare. The turnover in the individual market is
relatively high, especially because people move back and forth between the individual and (taxsubsidized) group markets. Such turnover makes GR less valuable to consumers on average, but

17

it would also make the policy cheaper since insurers would not have to collect as much money to
set aside in reserve for high-risk individuals.
To illustrate this point, we assume that a small fraction of individuals will leave the plan
each year due to exogenous shocks but that the likelihood of leaving, given such a shock, is
lower for those who have become high-risk. Specifically, we first assume that the median length
of stay in the plan is five years for low-risk individuals and twenty years for high-risk
individuals; that is, we assume a per-period probability of leaving the plan equal to
approximately 3.402 percent for high-risk individuals. The resulting GR premium schedule for
this “low turnover” scenario is shown in Figures 5A and 5B and in Table 3; this set of
assumptions lowers the average prepayment of the GR feature above the low-risk expected
expense from about $950 to about $600 with (as expected) a larger effect on decreasing the
degree of front-loading for younger individuals.
We also consider a “high turnover” scenario in which we assume the median stay for
high-risk individuals is only ten years by assuming their per-period probability of leaving the
plan equals 6.693 percent. This increased turnover would result in GR premiums schedule with
the average prepayment necessary to cover future claims lowered to about $400. A fuller
analysis incorporating consumer turnover is not possible here, but the main implication we want
to note is that, in practical terms, the “horizon” that insurers typically take into account in
thinking about and pricing GR is usually five to at most ten years, and so these illustrative
breakeven GR premium schedules which incorporate turnover may be closer to reality than the
hypothetical ones presented earlier.

18

III. OTHER ISSUES
III.A. Consumer Willingness-to-Pay for GR
Up to this point, we have examined breakeven GR schedules that cover lifetime insurer
costs and only ensured that low-risk consumers are indifferent between the future costs of the
GR schedule and their expected future costs of alternative risk-rated schedules. On the one hand,
risk-averse insureds would in principle be willing to pay more than the cost for something that
protected them from uncertainty. On the other hand, Frick [1998] has argued that capital market
imperfections may limit a younger individual’s ability to afford the excess front-loading that
must be collected. Thus, consumers might react by choosing policies without GR. Is this likely
to happen? One way to answer this question is to estimate the valuation of the reduction in
uncertainty associated with the GR feature and compare it with an estimate of the “costs” of
assumed capital market constraints. The sum of these two components is then the net utility gain
or loss from GR.
The benefit to consumers is the reduction in the uncertainty associated with random
future-period premiums that one would face in a risk-rated spot market in the absence of GR
insurance. The value of this benefit can be estimated as ½ AP var(P), where AP is the ArrowPratt absolute risk-aversion coefficient and var(P) is the variance of the alternative set of riskrated premiums one faces. (See, for example, Feldman and Dowd [1991] for a derivation of this
expression.) Marquis and Holmer [1986] produced estimates of the Arrow-Pratt absolute riskaversion coefficient of 0.0011 and 0.00084 in 1982 dollars. Taking the average of these two
estimates and multiplying it by the ratio of the 1982 CPI (100.00) to the 2003 CPI (188.29) taken
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics [2003] gives an estimate of the Arrow-Pratt absolute riskaversion coefficient equal to 0.00052 in 2003 dollars.

19

The relevant uncertainty a low-risk individual faces at age T is the variation in futureperiod wealth related to becoming high risk during age T. (The variation in future premiums for
a low-risk individual opting out of the GR pool before age T that would result from becoming
high risk during age T + 1 or later is not included in the measure for age T, so as to not “double
count” the gain in utility from the GR feature.) Specifically, for age T, we identify the
distribution of risk-rated premiums an individual who is low-risk at age T faces in each
remaining year (i.e., T +1, T + 2,…, 64) if that individual either stayed low-risk or became highrisk during age T. As before, the set of future premiums are inflated according to the CMS
projections in private health insurance premiums. We then estimate the variance for each of
these 64 - T years faced at age T , use each computed variance to estimate that year’s ArrowPratt valuation of uncertainty, and calculate the total discounted sum to give the value for age T.
(The consumer discount rate we use is discussed below.)
Now consider the “capital constraint” cost resulting from the prepayment of future-period
excess claims from high-risk individuals. That is, there is an opportunity cost to the consumer of
foregone consumption associated with the prepayment of the GR feature; however, this
opportunity cost is offset by the return-on-investment that insurers earn on their reserves. We
generate two sets of results by assuming that the magnitude of the consumers’ discount rate
equals five percent and ten percent.11 These consumer discount rates are applicable not only to
the capital constraint cost, but also to individuals’ valuation of each future-period’s reduction in
uncertainty; the more myopic individuals are, they will place less emphasis on reductions in the
variation in wealth which occur farther in the future.
Figures 6A and 6B show estimates for the willingness-to-pay for the GR feature, for
females and males respectively, assuming a consumer discount rate of five percent; the top panel

20

of Table 4 presents mean values for these estimates by age range. With a relatively low discount
rate, the per-period valuation of the reduction in uncertainty averages about $2100 for females
and about $2200 for males; for both females and males, the valuation of the reduction in
uncertainty is slightly larger for the middle-aged cohort relative to the younger cohort, but it
decreases considerably for the older cohort. Although younger individuals face a potentially
longer lifetime of high premiums if they develop a chronic condition while young, the relatively
level pattern for the valuation in risk with age seems to be driven primarily by the higher perperiod probability of becoming high-risk condition as age increases. The capital constraint cost
associated with the prepayment of premiums averages about $250 for both females and males.
This capital constraint cost decreases with age similarly for both females and males. As a result,
the net utility gain of the breakeven GR schedule averages about $1850 for females and $1950
for males. For both females and males, the net utility gain is always positive and relatively level
across all ages, although it is highest for the middle-aged cohort. Thus, for all individuals, even
with a relatively low discount rate of five percent, the value of the GR feature is quite high.
Figures 7A and 7B and the bottom panel of Table 4 show the estimates of the utility gain
from the breakeven GR premium schedule if the discount rate is assumed to be a higher value
equal to ten percent. The higher discount rate both decreases the valuation of the reduction in
uncertainty (from about $2150 to about $1200) and increases the magnitude of the capital
constraint cost (from about $250 to about $550), thereby decreasing the net utility gain from the
GR feature to between $650 and $675. The higher discount rate has the largest impact on the
younger cohort; this is driven primarily by the significant decrease in the valuation of uncertainty
resulting from having relatively less concern with fluctuations in future-period risk-rated
premiums in the spot market. The net utility gain from the GR feature becomes negligible for

21

younger females, while it actually becomes negative for younger males, averaging about -$150,
although the net utility remains positive for older individuals. Therefore, under this set of
assumptions, males under the age of 30 would not be willing to purchase this breakeven GR
policy, since the capital constraint cost exceeds the valuation of the reduction in uncertainty.
These calculations for consumers’ willingness to pay for the GR feature imply that
consumers would be willing to pay a premium at each age equal to the sum of the breakeven GR
premium and the net utility gain from the GR feature. However, this does not imply that there is
actually a range of feasible GR premium schedules that could exist. Bertrand price competition
by insurers implies that the breakeven GR premium schedule we have estimated is the unique
equilibrium that will exist in the market. An insurer could not offer an alternative premium
schedule with lower younger-age premiums subsidized by higher older-age premiums, since the
low-risk older insureds will be attracted to other insurers offering the breakeven GR premium
schedule. However, the possibility that the net utility gain of the GR feature for younger
individuals is not positive (e.g., males under the age of 30 assuming a 10 percent discount rate)
does not imply that GR policies will cease to exist for all consumers. Rather, GR policies
(whose premiums schedule will be equivalent to the breakeven GR schedule we have estimated)
would exist for the cohort of low-risk consumers for whom both the current and future utility
gains are nonzero (e.g., low-risk 30 year-old males).

III.B. Lifetime Non-Medical Consumption Smoothing
An alternative way of examining the possible role of capital constraints builds on Frick’s
[1998] insight that individuals should generally seek to smooth lifetime consumption, but the
typical pattern of lifetime savings combined with capital constraints limits their ability to do so.

22

If we think of the relevant consumption as total spending minus medical insurance premiums, the
pattern of premiums (which are lower when younger) is offset by the typical earnings pattern
(which is also lower when young). But would the average age-related expense or the GR
premium schedule produce a smoother pattern of non-medical consumption?
To address this question, we obtain data for total annual income from the March 2002
Current Population Survey (CPS) for fulltime workers, and inflate these amounts to 2003
dollars.12 Table 5 describes the feasible consumption patterns assuming neither borrowing nor
lending for a typical production worker. Specifically, we show the non-medical consumption
(i.e., total income minus the premium) as a percentage of total income for both the age-rated
premium schedule and the breakeven GR premium schedule. For both males and females, the
non-medical consumption resulting from an age-rated premium schedule is relatively level
during the younger ages but then decreases considerably during the ten-to-fifteen years before
Medicare eligibility. Alternatively, the non-medical consumption resulting from the breakeven
GR premium schedule is lowest when workers are young (coinciding when these youngest
workers earn much lower incomes) and then relatively level during the middle and older ages.
However, since the breakeven GR premium schedule under consideration includes
prepayments for future medical claims incorporating medical cost growth rates, it is not entirely
appropriate to compare this GR premium schedule (deflated to 2003 dollars) that an individual
faces to current levels of income (as opposed to growing incomes, albeit growing less rapidly
than medical services costs) and age-rated premiums for other cohorts. Therefore, in the bottom
panel of Table 5, we present expected lifetime income and premium amounts for a cohort of
eighteen-year-old individuals looking towards the future. For these estimates, we assume annual
three percent growth in income (relative to older cohorts’ current levels of income) and use the

23

CMS growth rates for private health insurance premiums described above. Although the GR
premiums schedules generate relatively lower levels of non-medical consumption at the youngest
age, the GR premium schedule produces a much more smooth level of future non-medical
consumption than does the age-rated premium schedule.

III.C. Underwriting and GR
We have assumed to this point that the population of potential insurance purchasers
consists of low risks. This is approximately true at young ages. Less than ten percent of people
in their twenties have a pre-existing medical condition. If the process of underwriting is costly to
insurers, it may even be the case that the costs of screening younger applicants for many highrisk conditions would outweigh the consequences resulting from adverse selection, and hence it
is conceivable that almost all young applicants would be enrolled. If the purchase of insurance is
contemplated at an older age, however, we would expect to see underwriting to screen out highrisk applicants. Since the optimal GR premium schedule is defined by the incentivecompatibility of low-risk individuals at each age, older low-risk applicants could join an existing
GR pool and pay the same future premium schedule. High-risk applicants who are underwritten
would face higher premiums but could still perhaps take advantage of an alternative GR feature.
Since risk level is actually a continuum, it is conceivable that a population of middle-age
applicants who are moderate risk (e.g., one pre-existing conditions) could form their own GR
pool to insure against the uncertainty of becoming even higher risk (e.g., two or more preexisting conditions).

24

III.D. Forecasting Future Growth in Spending
As noted earlier, a potential problem with GR contracting is the magnitude and
uncertainty of future medical spending. This risk is alleviated somewhat by the “renewal at
class-average rates” feature, but since the incentive-compatible GR feature involves prepayment
of future claims for high-risk individuals, some potentially non-diversifiable risk to the insurer
will remain. This remaining risk is essentially the spread between forecasted and realized cost
growth times the proportion of the claims subject to this risk, which we estimate to be about 35
percent—based upon an average GR prepayment of $950 (which is subject to this uncertainty)
and an average low-risk expense of $1800 (which is not subject to this uncertainty).
High unanticipated medical cost growth (thereby resulting in a plan having undercharged
and under-reserved) could explain the practice of terminating rating classes without attributing
such observed behavior to an “underhanded” motive. That is, suppose that an insurer had
incorrectly underestimated future cost growth where the higher growth actually occurred, and it
adjusted the subsequent period’s premium upward—for both low-risk and high-risk
individuals—to simply cover the increase in costs resulting from excess claims from high-risk
individuals. For how long would the adjusted premium still appeal to low-risk individuals (since
they have a net utility gain from the GR feature) before (potentially) increasing too much? To
address this question, we consider an insurer’s naïve GR premium schedule resulting from its
simply assuming three percent growth in medical expenditures offset by its three percent rate of
return on its reserves. We then assume that the insurer adjusts the initial naïve GR premium
schedule upwards in each subsequent year to pay for the unanticipated cost growth (assumed to
ex post be seven percent). We observe how soon low-risk individuals would discontinue

25

purchasing this adjusted GR plan—based upon when (or if, for that matter) the plan’s necessary
upward adjustment exceeds the individual’s willingness-to-pay for the GR feature.
We first consider the willingness-to-pay associated with a five percent consumer discount
rate; recall that this assumption generated a positive utility gain averaging about $1900. For an
initial cohort of eighteen year olds, an upwards-adjusted premium schedule to cover such
unanticipated cost growth would actually remain incentive-compatible until age 43 for females
and age 45 for males; after twenty-five years, low-risk individuals would no longer be willing to
remain in this pool. We then consider the willingness-to-pay associated with a ten percent
discount rate; this assumption generated an average utility gain of just over $650, but was
generally negative for males and females in their twenties. Here we consider an initial cohort of
thirty-five year olds (for whom the optimal breakeven GR premium schedule would be
incentive-compatible). For this cohort, upwardly adjusting a naïve GR premium schedule would
instead remain incentive compatible for only twelve years—specifically, until age 47 for females
and 48 for males. After twelve years, individuals who remained low risk would no longer be
willing to purchase the policy and this naïve insurer would have to cancel the rating class to
avoid losing money.
However, as a modest proposal, we suggest that there may be a potential way in which an
insurer could diversify this remaining risk related to “unforeseen” cost growth. It is likely that
the profits of health care companies (e.g., for-profit hospital chains, pharmaceutical companies)
are positively correlated with the rate of growth in medical spending. If this were the case, an
insurer that invested its GR reserves into a portfolio of stocks of such companies should receive
returns that are negatively correlated (and hence diversified) with the fluctuations in its own GR
reserves set aside for future high-risk claims.

26

IV. CONCLUSION
This paper therefore draws optimistic implications for GR in individual health insurance.
The feature is virtually universal even without regulation in term life insurance, so health
insurers should be and probably are familiar with the need for some frontloading of premiums.
But what is less clear is whether they are aware of the desires of the low risks who need to be
kept in the pool. Despite the moderately low cost of the GR feature, younger individuals who
place a high value on current levels of consumption may still not be willing to pay this low cost
unless the breakeven GR premium is subsidized. Regardless, it does seem that existing
breakeven schedules come reasonably close to optimal incentive-compatible patterns.

27

References:
American Academy of Actuaries, 1995, Medical Savings Accounts: Cost Implications and
Design Issues, AAA Public Policy Monograph.
Anderson, R., 1999, “U.S. Abridged Life Tables, 1996,” in National Vital Statistics Reports
47.13. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Center for
Health Statistics.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2003, Handbook of Labor Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Labor.
Cochrane, J., 1995, “Time-Consistent Health Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy 103.3,
445-473.
Cutler, D., 1993, “Why Doesn’t the Market Fully Insure Long-Term Care?” NBER Working
Paper #4301.
Duan, N., et al., 1983, “A Comparison of Alternative Models for the Demand for Health Care,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 1.2, 115-126.
Eichner, M., M. McClellan, and D. Wise, 1998, “Insurance or Self-Insurance? Variation,
Persistence, and Individual Health Accounts,” in D. Wise, ed., Inquiries in the Economics
of Aging. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Feldman, R., and B. Dowd, 1991, “A New Estimate of the Welfare Loss of Excess Health
Insurance,” American Economic Review 81.1, 297-301
Frick, K., 1998, “Consumer Capital Market Constraints and Guaranteed Renewable Insurance,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 16, 271-278.
Harrington, S., and G. Niehaus, 1999, Risk Management and Insurance. New York: Irwin
McGraw Hill.
Heffler, S., et al., 2003, “Health Spending Projections for 2002-2012,” Health Affairs Web
Exclusive Supplement 3, 54-65.
Hendel, I., and A. Lizzeri, 2003, “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts: Evidence
From Life Insurance,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118.1, 299-327.
Herring, B., and M. Pauly, 2001, “Premium Variation in the Individual Insurance Market,”
International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 1.1, 43-58.
Marquis, M., and M. Holmer, 1986, Choice Under Uncertainty and the Demand for Health
Insurance. Publication Number N-2516-HHS. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation.
Patel, V. and M. Pauly, 2002., “Guaranteed Renewability And The Problem Of Risk Variation In
Individual Health Insurance Markets,” Health Affairs Web Exclusive Supplement 2, 280289.
Pauly, M., and B. Herring, 1999, Pooling Health Insurance Risks. Washington, D.C.: AEI Press.
Pauly, M., H. Kunreuther, and R. Hirth, 1995, “Guaranteed Renewability in Insurance,” Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 10, 143–156.
Pauly, M., A. Percy, and B. Herring. “Individual Versus Job-Based Health Insurance: Weighing
the Pros and Cons,” Health Affairs 18.6, 1999, 28-44.
Terhune, C., 2002, “Side Effect—Insurer’s Tactic: If You Get Sick, the Premium Rises,” Wall
Street Journal 04-09-2002, A 20

28

Notes:
1
Even before the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 requiring guaranteed renewability of all
nongroup insurers, many states had their own GR regulations in effect [Pauly, Percy, and Herring, 1999]. Although the HIPAA
law is somewhat incomplete in that it does not require premiums to be the same for all individuals within a rating class, Patel and
Pauly [2002] find, in a national survey of insurance regulators, that 47 states do have this requirement.
2
Cutler [1993] has argued that such inter-temporal uncertainty in the costs of long-term care has resulted in a failure to
completely insure nursing home care.
3
The practice of “re-underwriting” by a health insurer in Florida was highlighted a year ago in the Wall Street Journal [Terhune,
2002]. Although this article received a fair amount of attention, this practice is generally considered to be an anomaly within the
industry.
4

In principle, it would be possible to determine the premiums presented below by simply computing the average actual expense
for the relevant sub-sample. However, we are primarily interested in producing estimates for high-risk individuals both as a
function of their current age and the age at which their high-risk condition was first discovered. Since the reliability of such
estimates from so many different small-size samples of high-risk individuals would be quite low, we use the following regression
model instead.
5

We use a traditional two-part methodology for estimating expected expenses to handle the clustering of those with zero actual
expense [Duan et al., 1983], but we decide not to use a transformed dependent variable in the second stage model estimating
nonzero expenses. We have found that using untransformed linear expenses increases the model’s ability to more accurately
estimate the right tail of the expense distribution than using either logarithmic or square-root “smearing” models [Pauly and
Herring, 1999; Herring and Pauly, 2001].
6

The year that an existing condition was discovered is missing for a fraction of the observations in the MEPS. (There is,
however, complete data for whether an individual has ever been made aware by a physician about the condition.) Rather than
delete these observations and re-weight those observations with non-missing data, we wish to retain as many high-risk
observations in the data as possible; we therefore impute the date discovered for those with missing data using the age
distribution of conditions discovered during the MEPS sample year.
7
We should note that neither the assumptions about the AAA induction methodology, the inflator parameter to generate
expenses in 2003 dollars, nor the magnitude of the administrative loading affects the patterns of the resulting premium gradients
by age. Instead these assumptions are made simply to generate overall magnitudes that appear realistic.
8
To be clear, the premium at age 62 is the sum of the low-risk expense for 62-year-olds plus the difference in lifetime expected
expense between high-risk expected expense and low-risk expected expense (for both 63-year-olds and 64-year-olds who remain
alive) for the proportion of 62-year-old low-risks who develop a condition during age 62.
9

We cannot verify this empirically with the MEPS, however, because it is not feasible to accurately distinguish ex ante a
formerly high-risk recovered individual from a currently high-risk non-recovered individual with a two-year panel.

10

One comparison can be made by regressing the average actual nongroup premium from the CTS on the age-related average
expense and regressing the nongroup premium on the hypothetical GR premium schedule. Using logs for these measures to
generate an elasticity estimate, the elasticity of actual premiums with respect to age-related average expense (in results not
shown) was 0.45 for males and 0.57 for females, while the elasticity of the CTS premiums with respect to the GR premium
schedule was 1.11 for males and 1.11 for females. This informal comparison implies that the slope of the GR premium schedule
is considerably closer to the slope of the actual nongroup premium schedule than to the slope of age-related average expense.
11

If individuals have the same discount rate as insurers (i.e., three percent), the opportunity cost of the early-life “overcharges”
will simply offset the return-on-investment that insurers earn on this money set in reserve. The net utility gain of the GR feature
then would solely equal the benefit from the reduction in uncertainty.
12

We thank Peter Joski for providing these estimates for income from the CPS.

29

Table 1
Expected Expenses for Non-Elderly Insured Adultsa
Variable

Mean

Logisticc
Coefficient

Total expendituresb
Total benefitsb
Any positive benefitsb
Total nonzero benefitsb

1970.1
1571.8
0.558
2816.1

Male ages 18 to 24
Male ages 25 to 29
Male ages 30 to 34
Male ages 35 to 39
Male ages 40 to 44
Male ages 45 to 49
Male ages 50 to 54
Male ages 55 to 59
Male ages 60 to 64
Female ages 18 to 24
Female ages 25 to 29
Female ages 30 to 34
Female ages 35 to 39
Female ages 40 to 44
Female ages 45 to 49
Female ages 50 to 54
Female ages 55 to 59
Female ages 60 to 64

0.0554
0.0461
0.0585
0.0700
0.0735
0.0634
0.0547
0.0385
0.0303
0.0554
0.0496
0.0612
0.0707
0.0762
0.0671
0.0579
0.0402
0.0313

-0.004
-0.121

Cancer, one to five years ago
Cancer, more than five years ago
Diabetes, one to five years ago
Diabetes, more than five years ago
Emphysema, one to five years ago
Emphysema, more than five years ago
High cholesterol, one to five years ago
High cholesterol, more than five years ago
Hypertension, one to five years ago
Hypertension, more than five years ago
Heart disease, one to five years ago
Heart disease, more than five years ago
Stroke, one to five years ago
Stroke, more than five years ago
Arthritis, one to five years ago
Arthritis, more than five years ago
Asthma, one to five years ago
Asthma, more than five years ago
Gall bladder disease, one to five years ago
Gall bladder disease, more than five years ago
Stomach ulcer, one to five years ago
Stomach ulcer, more than five years ago
Back problems, one to five years ago
Back problems, more than five years ago
Number of observations
-2 Log Likelihood
Adjusted R-squared

0.0039
0.0055
0.0061
0.0104
0.0007
0.0006
0.0070
0.0120
0.0171
0.0364
0.0047
0.0110
0.0005
0.0006
0.0077
0.0153
0.0018
0.0152
0.0006
0.0007
0.0007
0.0017
0.0139
0.0331
33,884

OLSd
Coefficient

Combined
Effect

-0.917 ***
1486.7 ***
24.3
-228.2

7.0
-114.8

0.215 ***
0.262 ***
0.553 ***
0.816 ***
0.894 ***
1.344 ***
0.889 ***
1.455 ***
1.349 ***
1.200 ***
1.310 ***
1.443 ***
1.781 ***
1.892 ***
2.048 ***

103.3
506.7
777.8 *
1169.5 ***
2263.7 ***
2575.3 ***
193.6
833.3 *
1132.6 ***
1175.9 ***
943.6 **
679.8 *
1013.0 **
1813.6 ***
2299.4 ***

116.0
296.5
563.5
916.4
1565.2
2158.9
430.6
1086.6
1226.5
1164.0
1081.9
977.6
1375.3
2033.9

1.658 ***
1.810 ***
2.014 ***
1.927 ***
0.751
11.482
1.697 ***
1.748 ***
1.858 ***
1.664 ***
2.255 ***
2.207 ***
1.325
11.571
0.970 ***
1.083 ***
0.962 ***
1.246 ***
2.812 ***
1.576 **
0.537
1.485 ***
0.704 ***
0.791 ***
33,884
-40944

12108.0 ***
6060.5 ***
1653.5 ***
697.0
4800.3 **
-1653.0
61.6
-312.6
763.9 **
-285.2
5687.6 ***
4166.6 ***
2911.1
9860.3 ***
1584.9 ***
842.2 **
6029.9 ***
1171.0 ***
3475.2 *
6532.7 ***
1126.8
987.1
509.2
660.6 **
18,652

2505.4
10848.4
5910.9
2215.0
1347.7
3718.9
-653.2
737.6
432.6
1400.8
453.3
5935.9
4537.7
2888.4
10860.4
1615.5
1125.9
4880.9
1460.6
4147.8
6074.7
1004.3
1428.0
685.6
837.4

0.0412

Source: 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys.
p-values: Statistical significance at 0.01 or better (***); between 0.01 and 0.05 (**); between 0.05 and 0.10 (*)
a
Sample includes all privately-insured adults between 18 and 64, excluding those with public insurance.
b
Total expenditures are in 2003 dollars and are standardized to a benchmark plan; see text for details.
c
Model predicts the likelihood of having any positive insurance benefits.
d
Model predicts the magnitude of total benefits, conditional on having non-zero benefits.

30

Table 2
Distribution of Low-Risk and High-Risk Individuals
Age:
18

25

35

45

55

63

64

Females:
Proportion that are high-risk
Number that are alivea
Number that are low-riska
Number that are high-risk
Probability of dying, low-riskb
Probability of dying, high-riskb
Probability of becoming high-riskb

0.0
100.0
100.0
0.0
0.05
0.44
0.80

3.9
99.7
95.7
3.9
0.04
0.38
0.51

8.5
98.9
90.5
8.4
0.06
0.57
0.85

16.6
97.5
81.3
16.2
0.09
0.83
1.67

27.5
94.3
68.3
25.9
0.16
1.48
3.17

38.4
88.7
54.7
34.1
0.27
2.49
2.56

39.4
87.7
53.1
34.6
n/a
n/a
n/a

Males:
Proportion that are high-risk
Number that are alivea
Number that are low-riska
Number that are high-riska
Probability of dying, low-riskb
Probability of dying, high-riskb
Probability of becoming high-riskb

0.0
100.0
100.0
0.0
0.13
1.16
0.41

3.0
99.0
96.0
3.0
0.12
1.12
0.54

7.9
97.2
89.5
7.7
0.14
1.28
0.78

15.3
94.3
79.9
14.5
0.18
1.67
1.64

26.9
88.9
65.0
23.9
0.28
2.55
1.93

38.4
80.3
49.4
30.8
0.46
4.18
2.80

39.3
78.8
47.8
30.9
n/a
n/a
n/a

Sources: 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys. National Center for Health Statistics
[Anderson, 1999].
a
The MEPS sample weights are normalized to examine an initial population of 100 eighteen-year old females and
100 eighteen-year-old males. More details about the sample weight modification is presented in the text.
b
The probabilities of dying and the probability of becoming high-risk are all annual rates; e.g., the probability of
becoming high risk at age 25 is the likelihood of a low-risk 25-year old individual developing a high-risk
condition before age 26.

31

Table 3
Magnitude of Selected Premiums by Agea
Age:
18

25

35

45

55

64

Females:
Low-risk premium
High-risk premium
Age-rated premium
GR premium
CTS nongroup premium
GR premium with higher return
GR premium with low turnover
GR premium with high turnover

1208
n/a
1208
2291
1638
1605
1709
1454

1772
5070
1902
2955
1776
2278
2390
2100

2187
5168
2440
3556
2135
2923
3039
2718

2051
5039
2548
3043
2584
2718
2783
2589

2985
6680
4002
3534
3205
3444
3463
3402

4009
8027
5594
4009
3687
4009
4009
4009

Males:
Low-risk premium
High-risk premium
Age-rated premium
GR premium
CTS nongroup premium
GR premium with higher return
GR premium with low turnover
GR premium with high turnover

611
n/a
611
1536
1539
892
986
762

540
1929
582
1436
1712
894
983
756

711
2838
879
2048
1893
1365
1488
1152

1190
4172
1648
2294
2727
1932
2005
1788

2254
6603
3424
3005
3663
2875
2902
2815

3402
8819
5530
3402
4143
3402
3402
3402

Sources: 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys; 1996-1997 and 1998-1999
Community Tracking Study Household Surveys.
a
Each premium is given in 2003 dollars.

32

Table 4
Average Net Utility Estimates by Age Range
Age Range:
18-34

35-49

50-64

Entire

Five percent discount rate:
Females:
Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

2274
-414
1860

2537
-247
2289

1424
-38
1385

2099
-245
1853

Males:
Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

2037
-405
1632

2596
-258
2338

1947
-54
1893

2192
-254
1938

Ten percent discount rate:
Females:
Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

908
-847
62

1510
-602
908

1230
-112
1118

1201
-543
658

Males:
Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

657
-813
-157

1527
-625
902

1651
-158
1493

1232
-559
673

Note: The methodology for these estimates is provided in the text; values are given in 2003 dollars.

33

Table 5
Non-Medical Consumption as a Percentage of Income
Age:
18

25

35

45

55

64

Females:
Total income (I)a
Age-rated premium
GR premium
C/I:b average premium
C/I:b GR premium

13,686
1,208
2,291
0.91
0.83

27,443
1,902
2,955
0.93
0.89

37,525
2,440
3,556
0.93
0.91

40,112
2,548
3,043
0.94
0.92

41,478
4,002
3,534
0.90
0.91

36,531
5,594
4,009
0.85
0.89

Males:
Total income (I)a
Age-rated premium
GR premium
C/I:b average premium
C/I:b GR premium

14,265
611
1,536
0.96
0.89

31,408
582
1,436
0.98
0.95

52,040
879
2,048
0.98
0.96

62,291
1,648
2,294
0.97
0.96

66,636
3,424
3,005
0.95
0.95

66,399
5,530
3,402
0.92
0.95

2003

2010

2020

2030

2040

2049

Females, currently age 18:
Future total income (If)c
Future age-rated premium d
Future GR premium d
C/If:b future age-rated premium
C/If:b future GR premium

13,686
1,208
2,291
0.91
0.83

33,752
3,149
4,893
0.91
0.86

62,024
7,874
11,477
0.87
0.81

89,101
16,028
19,136
0.82
0.79

123,822
49,045
43,317
0.60
0.65

142,288
124,996
89,588
0.12
0.37

Males, currently age 18:
Future total income (If)c
Future age-rated premium d
Future GR premium d
C/If:b future age-rated premium
C/If:b future GR premium

14,265
611
1,536
0.96
0.89

38,628
964
2,378
0.98
0.94

86,015
2,837
6,608
0.97
0.92

138,367
10,361
14,426
0.93
0.90

198,924
41,964
36,832
0.79
0.81

258,629
123,557
76,025
0.52
0.71

Year:

Sources: 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys; 2002 Current Population Survey.
Total income (I) is for fulltime workers and is presented in 2003 dollars.
b
Consumption (C) is defined as total income minus the relevant health insurance premium.
c
Future total income (If) is for fulltime workers and is presented for the relevant future year, assuming
annual three percent growth above current ages’ levels.
d
Future premiums assume projected growth rates presented in Heffler et al. [2003]. The annual growth rate
for years 2004-2008 is projected to be 7.7 percent, the annual growth rate for years 2009-2012 is
projected to be 6.9 percent, and we assume a 6.9 annual growth rate for years 2013 and beyond.
a

34

Figure 1
Theoretical Guaranteed Renewable Premium Schedule Under a Set of Simple Assumptions

P
PHIGH-RISK

PAGE-RATED

PGR
PLOW-RISK

Age
Note: The GR premium schedule shown here assumes that individuals are either low-risk
or high-risk and that there is a constant per-period probability of low-risk individuals
becoming (and staying) high-risk. By the final period of the model, one-half of the
population is high-risk.

35

Figure 2A
Female Hypothetical Risk-Rated Premium Schedules
9000
High-risk rated premium
Low-risk rated premium
Age-rated premium

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

65

60

65

Note: These estimates are given in 2003 dollars.

Figure 2B
Male Hypothetical Risk-Rated Premium Schedules
9000

High-risk rated premium
Low-risk rated premium
Age-rated premium

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

Note: These estimates are given in 2003 dollars.

36

45

50

55

Figure 3A
Female GR Premium Schedule
9000
High-risk rated premium
Low-risk rated premium
Age-rated premium
Breakeven GR premium

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

65

50

55

60

65

Note: These estimates are given in 2003 dollars.

Figure 3B
Male GR Premium Schedule
9000
High-risk rated premium
Low-risk rated premium
Age-rated premium
Breakeven GR premium

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

Note: These estimates are given in 2003 dollars.

37

45

Figure 4A
Female Actual CTS Nongroup Premiums
9000
High-risk rated premium
Low-risk rated premium
Age-rated premium
Breakeven GR premium
Actual CTS premium

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

65

55

60

65

Note: These values are given in 2003 dollars.

Figure 4B
Male Actual CTS Nongroup Premiums
9000

High-risk rated premium
Low-risk rated premium
Age-rated premium
Breakeven GR premium
Actual CTS premium

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

Note: These values are given in 2003 dollars.

38

45

50

Figure 5A
Alternative Female GR Premium Schedules
9000
Breakeven GR premium
GR premium with higher return on reserves
GR premium with low turnover
GR premium with high turnover

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

55

60

65

Age
Note: These estimates are given in 2003 dollars.

Figure 5B
Alternative Male GR Premium Schedules
9000
Breakeven GR premium
GR premium with higher return on reserves
GR premium with low turnover
GR premium with high turnover

8000
7000
Premium ($)

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

Note: These estimates are given in 2003 dollars.

39

45

50

Figure 6A
Female Willingness-to-Pay for GR: Five Percent Discount Rate
7000
Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

6000
Willingness To Pay ($)

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
-1000
-2000
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

65

Note: The methodology for these estimates is provided in the text; values are given in 2003 dollars.

Figure 6B
Male Willingness-to-Pay for GR: Five Percent Discount Rate
7000

Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

6000
Willingness To Pay ($)

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
-1000
-2000
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

Note: The methodology for these estimates is provided in the text; values are given in 2003 dollars.

40

65

Figure 7A
Female Willingness-to-Pay for GR: Ten Percent Discount Rate
7000

Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

6000
Willingness To Pay ($)

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
-1000
-2000
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

65

Note: The methodology for these estimates is provided in the text; values are given in 2003 dollars.

Figure 7B
Male Willingness-to-Pay for GR: Ten Percent Discount Rate
7000
Benefit: uncertainty reduction
Cost: capital constraint
Net utility

6000
Willingness To Pay ($)

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
-1000
-2000
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

Note: The methodology for these estimates is provided in the text; values are given in 2003 dollars.

41

65

