                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   REGULATIONS, MARKET STRUCTURE, INSTITUTIONS,
                     AND THE COST OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION

                                            Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
                                                Luc Laeven
                                                Ross Levine

                                            Working Paper 9890
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9890


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2003




We thank Allan Berger, John Boyd, Gianni De Nicolo, Carola Schenone, Phil Strahan, Andrew Winton, seminar
participants at the University of Minnesota, the World Bank, and the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank, and an
anonymous referee for very helpful discussions and comments. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and
conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Regulations, Market Structure, Institutions, and the Cost of Financial Intermediation
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9890
July 2003
JEL No. G21, G28, O16

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of bank regulations, market structure, and national institutions on
bank net interest margins and overhead costs using data on over 1,400 banks across 72 countries
while controlling for bank-specific characteristics. The data indicate that tighter regulations on bank

entry and bank activities boost the cost of financial intermediation. Inflation also exerts a robust,
positive impact on bank margins and overhead costs. While concentration is positively associated

with net interest margins, this relationship breaks down when controlling for regulatory impediments
to competition and inflation. Furthermore, bank regulations become insignificant when controlling
for national indicators of economic freedom or property rights protection, while these institutional
indicators robustly explain cross-bank net interest margins and overhead expenditures. Thus, bank

regulations cannot be viewed in isolation; they reflect broad, national approaches to private property
and competition.

Asli Demirgüç-Kunt                     Luc Laeven                      Ross Levine
World Bank                             World Bank                      Carlson School
Washington, DC 20433                   Washington, DC 20433            of Management
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org            llaeven@worldbank.org           University of Minnesota
                                                                       Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                                       and NBER
                                                                       rlevine@csom.umn.edu
1.         Introduction

           This paper assesses the impact of bank regulations, market structure, and national

institutions on the cost of intermediation as measured by bank net interest margins and bank

overhead expenditures. Banks mobilize and allocate society’s savings and the efficiency with

which they intermediate capital has substantive repercussions on economic performance

(Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996; Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; Rajan and Zingales, 1998;

Wurgler, 2000; Beck, Levine, and Loayza, 2000; and Levine, Loayza, and Beck, 2000). Thus,

research on the determinants of the cost of intermediation will naturally enter the policy dialogue

(Group of Ten, 2001; Bank for International Settlements, 2001; and International Monetary

Fund, 2001).

           Theory provides conflicting predictions about the relationships among regulations,

concentration, institutions, and bank efficiency. Many of these differences arise because of

differing beliefs about the causes of bank concentration. One common view holds that

regulatory impediments to competition and monopolistic power create an environment in which

a few powerful banks stymie competition with deleterious implications for efficiency. From this

perspective, high concentration is a useful signal of an uncompetitive and hence inefficient

market. Alternatively, the “efficient-structure” theory argues that more efficient banks have

lower costs and garner greater market share (Demsetz, 1973; Pelzman, 1977).1 From this

perspective, competitive environments may produce concentrated and efficient banking systems.

Finally, a growing literature holds that some countries have institutions that restrict competition

to protect a powerful elite (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Acemoglu, et al., 2001; Haber et al.,




1
    Scale economies may also drive banking to a monopolistic structure (Diamond, 1984; Boyd and Prescott, 1986).


                                                          1
2003).2 According to this “institutions” view, bank regulations and concentration reflect broader

institutional characteristics rather than representing independent determinants of bank efficiency.

To assess the impact of bank regulations, the usefulness of concentration as a signal, and to

understand the role of national institutions in shaping regulations and market structure, one needs

to examine individual banks operating in distinct regulatory and institutional environments.

        This is the first study to examine the influence of bank regulations, concentration, and

institutional development on bank margins and overhead expenditures across a broad cross

section of countries while controlling for bank specific factors and cross-country differences in

macroeconomic and financial sector conditions. We use bank-level data across 72 countries and

over 1,400 banks. This sample includes great diversity in terms of the cost of financial

intermediation, other bank characteristics, bank regulations, macroeconomic and financial

conditions, and national institutions. New data on bank regulations allow us to contribute to the

public policy debate and help distinguish among theoretical models by studying the regulatory,

market structure, and institutional determinants of the cost of intermediation.

        We examine two dependent variables to gauge the cost of financial intermediation: the

net interest margin and overhead expenditures. The net interest margin equals interest income

minus interest expense divided by interest-bearing assets. The net interest margin measures the

gap between what the bank pays savers and what the bank receives from borrowers. Thus, the

net interest margin focuses on the traditional borrowing and lending operations of the bank. The

overhead expenditure ratio is computed by dividing bank overhead costs by the total assets of the

bank. Cost inefficiencies and market power may be reflected in high overhead costs. Though

subject to measurement problems discussed below, the net interest margin and overhead


2
 For an analysis of the politics fostering bank deregulation and policies, see Kroszner and Strahan (1999) and Rajan
and Zingales (2003).


                                                         2
expenditures reflect the pure operational efficiency of the bank and the competitive nature of the

banking market. For brevity, we focus on the results using bank net interest margins because the

two dependent variables yield remarkably similar findings.

        To assess and interpret accurately the relationship between the cost of intermediation and

regulations, concentration, and national institutions, we need to account for the fact that banks

differ within countries and banks differ systematically across countries. At a country-level, we

control for differences in what the term “bank” means. That is, we control for differences in

banks’ ability to conduct securities market, insurance, and real estate operations, and whether

banks can own nonfinancial firms. We also control for the degree of state-ownership of

commercial banks. At the bank-specific level, we control for bank size, the liquidity of bank

assets, bank equity relative to its assets, the degree to which the bank raises income through fees

and commissions, the standard deviation of each bank’s return on assets, and the market share of

each bank. Although the relationships between bank margins and these bank-specific variables

are independently informative as we discuss below, our focus is on the impact of bank

regulations, concentration, and national institutions on bank margins. Thus, we primarily use

these bank-specific variables to control for country-level and bank-level differences that might

confound the inferences that we draw on bank regulations, concentration, and national

institutions.

        To examine bank regulations, we exploit Barth, Caprio, and Levine’s (2001b, 2003) new

database. We focus on regulations concerning bank entry, reserve requirements, restrictions on

bank activities, and an overall index of regulatory restrictions on banks. Thus, we use an

assortment of information on the degree to which regulations may impede bank operations and

competition.




                                                 3
       To study the impact of bank concentration on the cost of intermediation, we primarily use

the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks. We confirm our results using alternative

measures of bank concentration. If bank concentration reflects only regulatory restrictions on

competition and our data fully measure regulatory restrictions, then any positive relationship

between bank margins and concentration should vanish when controlling for regulatory

restrictions. If concentration reflects regulatory restrictions and efficient-structure forces, then

we may actually find a negative coefficient on concentration after controlling for regulatory

impediments to competition.

       We also analyze the impact of institutions on the cost of intermediation using indicators

of property rights protection and the degree of economic freedom. Controlling for institutions

permits us to assess whether bank regulatory policies influence bank margins and overhead costs

beyond broad national approaches to competition. If bank regulatory policies reflect national

approaches to competition in general and our data comprehensively measure institutions, then

any association between regulations and the cost of intermediation should disappear when we

control for the overall level of institutional development governing property rights and

competition.

       To assess the robustness of the links between the cost of financial intermediation and

regulations, market structure, and institutions, we control for various theories of the role of

macroeconomic influences on bank margins and overhead expenditures. Huybens and Smith

(1999), for instance, stress that inflation exacerbates informational asymmetries and therefore

leads to larger interest margins. We examine this prediction. Also, we control for the level of

equity market development since competition from other segments of the financial system may

influence the cost of intermediation. Furthermore, since business-cycle fluctuations and




                                                  4
government ownership of banks may influence the pricing of loans and deposits, we include

GDP growth and the extent of state-ownership of banks in the analyses.

        There are at least three important reasons for examining a broad cross-section of

countries in assessing the relationship between the cost of intermediation and bank regulations,

bank concentration, and national institutions. First, although past research focuses on the U.S.,

the U.S. banking industry is unrepresentative. For example, the U.S. has over 23,000 banking

institutions, which is large even compared to Japan (4,635), Germany (3,509), and France (547).3

Also, the U.S. has very developed financial, legal, and regulatory systems, few state-owned

banks, and strong protection of private property, but these features do not hold in many

countries. Thus, it is important to look beyond the U.S. and to control for differences in

institutional development in drawing inferences about the impact of banking structure and

regulations on net interest margins. Second, existing work focuses on concentration as a signal

of competitiveness, but concentration per se is difficult to interpret. Theory suggests that

concentration reflects many factors, including regulatory restrictions on competition, efficient-

structure forces, and market power by banks.4 By controlling for regulatory restrictions on bank

competition, bank-specific characteristics, and the overall institutional environment, we narrow

the range of factors for which concentration proxies. This can only be done in a cross-country

context. Thus, while not fully resolving the interpretational problem with bank concentration,

we obtain more informative measures of the impact of bank concentration on net interest margins

3
  These statistics are for 1996 and are taken from Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan (1999, Table 5).
4
  While a few influential papers examine the relationship between concentration and efficiency outside of the U.S.,
they do not control for cross-country differences in regulatory restrictions on bank competition.
Similar to the U.S. studies, the non-U.S. studies also tend to produce ambiguous results on the concentration-
efficiency relationship (Goldberg and Rai, 1996; Lloyd-Williams, Moyneux, and Thornton, 1994). Using cross-
country banking data, Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga (1999) find little evidence that bank concentration has any
effect on bank profitability or margins. In a cross-country, cross-industry study Cetorelli and Gambera (2001) show
that banking sector concentration exerts a depressing effect on overall economic growth, though it promotes the




                                                        5
across countries. Finally, although Jayaratne and Strahan (1996, 1998) and Stiroh and Strahan

(2003) examine the impact of the deregulation of branching restrictions in the United States, we

provide estimates of the impact of numerous regulations on bank efficiency across 72 countries

while controlling for bank concentration, national economic and banking conditions, and cross-

country differences in a range of institutional features.

        Our research is related to an enormous literature on bank structure and efficiency. We

focus on a few key papers that motivate our approach and refer readers to more comprehensive

reviews (Bank for International Settlements, 2001; Berger and Mester, 1997; Berger, Demsetz,

and Strahan, 1999; Boyd and Graham, 1991, 1998; Group of Ten, 2001; and International

Monetary Fund, 2001). Most of the empirical evidence on banking structure and efficiency

examines the U.S. banking industry, producing generally ambiguous results. Some evidence

suggests that banks in highly concentrated local markets have larger overhead expenditures,

charge higher rates on loans, pay lower rates on deposits, and are slower to reduce rates in

response to Federal Reserve reductions in interest rates than banks in less concentrated markets

(Berger and Hannan, 1989, 1998; Hannan and Berger, 1991; and Neumark and Sharpe, 1992).

Others disagree. Smirlock (1985) and Graddy and Kyle (1979) find that interest rate spreads are

narrower in concentrated banking systems, while Whitehead (1977, 1978) and Keeley and

Zimmerman (1985) report more mixed results. Although Berger, Saunders, Scalise, and Udell

(1998) find that the best performing banks are generally not located in highly concentrated

markets and Rajan and Peterson (1995) find that firms are less credit constrained in more

concentrated banking markets, other researchers do not find unambiguous evidence that mergers

and acquisitions that increase bank concentration systematically lower deposit rates and increase


growth of industries that depend heavily on external finance. See Claessens and Laeven (2004) on the factors
driving cross-country differences in bank competition.


                                                     6
bank profitability (Prager and Hannan, 1999; Simons and Stavins, 1998; Berger and Humphrey,

1992; Pilloff, 1996; and Petersen and Rajan, 1994). Berger (1995) concludes that the

relationship between bank concentration and efficiency in the United States depends critically on

what other factors are held constant (Berger, Hunter, and Timme, 1993; Boyd and Runkle, 1993;

Clark, 1988; Berger and Mester, 1997; Radecki et al., 1997; Vives, 2001; Hughes et al., 1999;

and Berger et al., 2000). We contribute to this work by extending the analysis to a large number

of countries and controlling for cross-country differences in institutional development and

regulatory policies.5

         The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the econometric methodology.

Section 3 discusses the data. Section 4 presents the results, and Section 5 concludes.


2.       Methodology

         To assess the impact of bank regulations, banking sector concentration, and institutional

development on bank efficiency while controlling bank-specific characteristics and the

macroeconomic and financial environment, we estimate regressions of the following form:


                Net Interest Margini,k = α + β1Ci + β2Bi,k + β3Ri + β4Mi + β5Ii + εi,k                           (1)


Where i indexes country i, and k indexes bank k; Ci is a measure of bank concentration in

country i; Bi, k is a vector of bank-specific characteristics for bank k in country i; Ri is a vector of




5
  Existing research on economics of scope and scale also focuses on the U.S. banking industry and generally does
not find large cost savings or efficiency gains from consolidation (Berger et al., 1987; Ferrier et al., 1993; Rhoades,
1993, 1998; Peristiani, 1997). Indeed, researchers find that the cost curve facing U.S. banks is very flat, with
estimates of scale-efficient size as low as $100 million of assets (Berger and Humphrey, 1991; Boyd and Runkle,
1993; Clark, 1996; Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan, 1999). We do not estimate a cost curve for banks. In examining
the determinants of net margins, however, we do examine bank size while controlling for the independent effects of
bank regulations, bank concentration, the macroeconomic environment, institutional development, and other bank
specific traits.


                                                          7
regulatory restrictions on banks; Mi is a vector of macroeconomic and financial system control

variables;

Ii is a vector of institutional development indicators; and εi,k is the residual. As stressed above,

we examine overhead expenditures instead of net interest margins in robustness checks. We

obtain extraordinarily consistent results using overhead expenditures and report the only

discrepancy below.

       Since the model includes country-specific variables, we use a generalized least squares

estimator with random effects. The random effects specification is supported by the Breusch and

Pagan (1980) Lagrange multiplier test which strongly rejects the null hypothesis that errors are

independent within countries.

       To conduct the analyses, we need measures of (1) net interest margins, (2) bank

concentration, (3) bank-specific characteristics that may influence interest margins, (4)

regulatory policies, (5) cross-country differences in the macroeconomic environment and the

level of stock market development, and (6) cross-country differences in the level of institutional

development, e.g., the degree to which broad, national institutions support private property rights

and promote economic openness and competition in general.


3.     Data

       We use two main data sources. Bank-level information from 72 countries on over 1400

banks is from the BankScope database provided by Fitch-IBCA. The BankScope database has

comprehensive coverage in most countries, accounting for over 90 percent of all banking assets.

As specified in more detail below, we use data over the 1995-1999 period. One advantage of

using data averaged over the 1995-99 period is that we smooth variables that vary over time.

Information on commercial bank regulations is obtained from the Barth, Caprio and Levine


                                                  8
(2001b, 2003) database. Since the regulatory data are for commercial banks, we use bank-level

data on commercial banks from the BankScope database. Also, focusing on commercial banks

enhances the comparability of banks in our sample since some countries have banks that are not

classified as commercial banks. Details of sources and variable definitions are provided in the

Appendix.


3.1    Net Interest Margin

       Net interest margin equals interest income minus interest expense divided by interest-

bearing assets and is average over 1995-1999. The net interest margins measures the gap

between what the bank pays the providers of funds and what the bank gets from firms and other

users of bank credit. Since the net interest margin focuses on the conventional borrowing and

lending operations of the bank, we normalize by interest-bearing assets rather than total bank

assets. Table 1 shows that Belarus, Burundi, Ghana, and Moldova are notable for their margins

of over 10 percent, whereas countries like Switzerland and Netherlands have very low margins

of less than two percent.

       We use a variety of control variables and sensitivity checks to mitigate problems with

interpreting the net interest margin variable. We want to hold a sufficient amount constant such

that we can interpret greater net interest values as reflecting either operational inefficiency or

market power. Confounding issues arise, however. For instance, banks engaging in fee income

generating activities may have different net interest margins because of cross-subsidization of

activities. For example, commercial banks may reduce lending rates to borrowers that also use

bank services that generate fee and commission income, such as underwriting of securities and

consulting advice on mergers and acquisitions. In this case, cross-bank differences in net interest

margins may reflect difference in bank activity, rather than differences in efficiency or



                                                  9
competition. Also, bank inefficiencies and market conditions may yield high overhead costs

rather than large interest margins. Thus, cross-bank differences in net margins may reflect

choices regarding whether to enjoy high overhead costs or large margins rather than reflecting

differences in efficiency and competition. Furthermore, bank margins may reflect different asset

allocations and risk tastes of firms. These measurement and interpretational issues emphasize

the need to control for bank specific characteristics, conduct an array of sensitivity checks, and to

use alternative measures of bank efficiency/performance.6 As discussed above, we confirm the

results using overhead expenditures as an alternative dependent variable, which we define below.


3.2     Concentration

        Bank concentration equals the fraction of bank assets held by the three largest

commercial banks in the country and is averaged over 1995-99. Bank concentration is computed

using bank-level data from the BankScope database. Table 1 shows that concentration is quite

different across countries. It ranges from a low of 20 percent for the U.S. to 100 percent in

Burundi and Rwanda. But high concentration is not only a developing country phenomenon.

Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Switzerland have concentration levels over 70 percent.

For robustness, we confirm this paper’s results using alternative bank concentration measures

that we discuss below.


3.3      Bank-specific Control Variables

        We control for bank-specific traits. We use 1995 values to reduce potential simultaneity

with interest margins, which is computed over the period 1995-1999. The results, however, do

6
  Studies in the United States focusing on the efficiency-structure relationship have used price data from extensive
surveys conducted by the Federal Reserve System. See for example Berger and Hannan (1989). In these studies,
banks are assumed to be more efficient if they set prices that are more favorable to customers (higher deposit rates,
lower loan rates); in other words if they have lower ex-ante margins. Such data are not available on a cross-country
basis.


                                                        10
not change when using bank-specific control variables averaged over the 1995-99. Moreover,

we obtain the same results on the country-specific variables when we omit the bank-specific

variables altogether. Thus, endogeneity problems from the bank-specific variables are not

biasing the conclusions on our variables of focus: bank regulations, bank concentration, and

institutional development.

         Bank size equals the logarithm of total bank assets in millions of US dollars. Size may be

an important determinant of net interest margins if there are increasing returns to scale in

banking. As emphasized in the Introduction, however, we do not estimate cost functions for

each of the banks in our sample, so we do not explore the issue of increasing returns in detail.

Rather, we focus on the regulatory, concentration, and institutional determinants of net interest

margins while controlling for bank size. Table 1 indicates considerable cross-country variability

in the average size of banks.

         Bank equity equals the book value of equity divided by total assets. Some theories

suggest that well-capitalized banks face lower expected bankruptcy costs and hence lower

funding costs. According to this view, higher bank equity ratios imply larger net interest

margins when loan rates do not vary much with bank equity.7

         Fee income equals non-interest-operating income divided by total assets. Banks have

different product mixes. These differences may influence the pricing of loan products. Some,

for instance, argue that well-developed fee income sources will produce lower interest margins


7
  Table 1 suggests that there is quite a bit of variation in bank capitalization despite international capital adequacy
requirements. Banks in Japan, Finland, Rwanda, and Korea have very low capital ratios of less than five percent.
Banks in Mexico appear to be very highly capitalized with ratios of over 20 percent. Such a wide variance in figures
raises the question whether the data are comparable across countries. BankScope organizes the accounting data so as
to be comparable internationally. However, differences in accounting conventions regarding the valuation of assets,
loan loss provisioning, hidden reserves and other problems remain. For example, although efforts were made to use
a consistent definition of equity, the observed variation may still to a certain extent reflect differences in what is
considered capital in different countries. Thus, we conducted the analyses both with and without bank equity in the
regressions and found very similar results to those reported below.


                                                         11
due to cross-subsidization of bank activities. Thus, we control for fee income in assessing the

impact of bank regulations, bank concentration, and national institutions on bank margins.

       Liquidity equals the liquid assets of the bank divided by total assets. We use this

indicator to control for differences in bank assets. Banks with high levels of liquid assets in cash

and government securities may receive lower interest income than banks with less liquid assets.

If the market for deposits is reasonably competitive, then greater liquidity will tend to be

negatively associated with interest margins.

       Bank risk equals the standard deviation of the rate of return on bank assets over the

period 1995-99. Some hold that banks operating in more risky environment will tend toward an

equilibrium characterized by a high net interest margin to compensate for this risk. Thus, to

assess the independent effect of regulations, bank concentration, and institutions on bank

margins, we present regressions controlling for individual bank risk.

       Overhead equals overhead costs divided by total assets. We use this to capture cross-bank

differences in the organization and operation of the bank. Different organizations will choose

different business systems, product mixes, and asset allocations with consequently different

overhead cost structures. Also, cost inefficiencies or low levels of market competition may be

reflected in high overhead costs. Given that overhead may measure cost inefficiency and market

competition, we first conduct the analyses excluding overhead as a regressor. Then, we use

overhead as an alternative measure of bank efficiency/performance, i.e., as the dependent

variable (using overhead averaged over the 1995-1999 period). Finally, we include overhead (in

1995) as a control variable. These different analyses confirm the paper’s conclusions.

       Market share equals the bank’s assets divided by total commercial bank assets in the

economy. A bank that dominates the national market may enjoy a larger net interest income than




                                                 12
a bank that does not control much of the market even after controlling for bank size. In other

words, a bank with a large market share may exert market power to enjoy a higher net interest

margin. Note this is different from concentration. Concentration is not computed at the bank-

level; it is a national characteristic. Clearly, there is a relationship. In the case of a country with

a single bank, market share and concentration will both equal one. Just as clearly, however,

there can be concentrated banking systems in which many banks do not have much market share.

Indeed, although the Market share and Bank concentration variables are significantly correlated,

the correlation coefficient is quite low (0.12). We conduct the bulk of the analysis without

market share and then show that the results are robust to its inclusion.


3.4     Regulatory Variables

        Fraction of entry denied equals the fraction of entry applications denied. From Table 2

we see that this figure is particularly high for countries such as Bangladesh, Egypt, Ghana,

Kenya, and Thailand. On the other extreme, many countries including Germany, Switzerland

and the United States have granted licenses to all applicants. One problem with this measure is

that in the absence of applications – which may itself indicate the presence of insurmountable

entry barriers – this variable is not defined. However, when we replace the missing values with

ones in those countries that received zero entry application, we obtain very similar results to

those reported below. Also, we found similar results when we separately examine the fraction of

entry denied for domestic and foreign applicants respectively.8



8
  We also examined Foreign ownership, which equals the proportion of banking assets held in foreign-controlled
banks – defined as 50 percent or more foreign-owned. Table 2 shows that there is a wide variation in foreign
ownership in the sample. In Ghana, Hungary, and Jordan, foreign owned banks represent greater than 50 percent of
the banking system. At the other extreme, India, Rep. of Korea, and Nigeria have negligible foreign ownership.
While we find a close relationship between net interest margins and restrictions on bank entry, we do not find that
foreign ownership per se is important for accounting for interest margins. See, Levine (2003) for more on the
impact of foreign banks.


                                                        13
        Activity restrictions is an indicator of the degree to which banks face regulatory

restrictions on their activities in securities markets, insurance, real-estate, and owning shares in

non-financial firms. Activity restrictions may also have an important impact on bank efficiency

by reducing competition and limiting economies of scope (Barth, Caprio and Levine, 2001a;b;

2003). The indicator potentially ranges from 0 to 4, where higher values indicate greater

restrictions. Indonesia and Japan have severe restrictions on bank activity, with values of 3.75

and 3.5 respectively. Germany, Austria, the United Kingdom, and Switzerland do not impose

many restrictions on bank activities (Activity restrictions equals 1.25). In our sample, banks

differ substantially in their ability to engage in different activities as noted in Tables 2 and 3.

        Reserve requirements takes on the value one if there are reserve or liquidity requirements

and zero otherwise. Table 2 shows that about a quarter of the countries in the sample have no

reserve requirements. To the extent that reserve holdings are not remunerated or remunerated at

less-than-market rates, these regulations impose a tax on the bank. Thus, we assess whether

reserve requirements influence bank net interest margins.9

        Banking freedom is an overall indicator of banking freedom that ranges from 1 to 5.

Larger values signify more freedom. This variable comes from the Economic Freedom Index of

the Heritage Foundation and is designed to provide an overall measure of the openness of the

banking industry and the extent to which banks are free to operate their businesses. Since it may

be difficult to identify a single, key regulation that explains net interest margins, we also

examine this overall index of bank freedom.


3.5     Macroeconomic and Financial System Control Variables

        Table 2 reports the economic and financial system control variables.




                                                  14
        Inflation equals the annual rate of the change in CPI index. Boyd, Levine and Smith

(2001) show that countries with high inflation have underdeveloped financial systems and banks.

Huybens and Smith (1999) develop a theoretical model in which interest margins tend to rise in

the presence of inflation. Thus, we control for inflation in our analyses.

        GDP growth equals the rate of real per capita GDP growth. If investment opportunities

in an economy are correlated with the business cycle, there may exist a positive relationship

between business opportunities for banks and the growth rate of the economy.

        Total value traded equals the trading of domestic equities on domestic exchanges as a

share of GDP. We include this measure of stock market development (Levine and Zervos, 1998)

because countries with better functioning markets may create a competitive environment that

puts downward pressure on bank interest margins.

        State ownership equals the share of banking system assets that are in state-owned banks,

where state-owned is defined as 50 percent or more state-ownership. This measures government

involvement in the banking industry. Banking systems dominated by state-banks tend to be

inefficient and less open to entry. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) find that the

extent of state ownership of a country’s banking system is an indicator of the banking system’s

efficiency in financing the private sector. Banking systems dominated by state-banks are also

more likely to face restrictions on their activities. In our sample, Bangladesh, Belarus, Burundi,

Egypt, India, Romania and Russia have banking systems where state-owned banks account for

more than 60 percent of the market.




9
 We also examine the stringency of capital requirements as computed by Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003). The
capital stringency index, however, did not robustly enter the net interest margins regression significantly.


                                                    15
3.6     Institutional Impediments to Competition

        Besides examining specific regulatory restrictions on competition and the impact of bank

concentration on net interest margins, we also consider three indexes of the overall institutional

environment. In particular, we assess whether bank regulation and concentration influences bank

interest margins beyond the overall institutional structure of the economy.

        Property rights is an indicator of the protection of private property rights. It ranges from

1 to 5. Higher values signify greater protection of private property rights. There are some

countries that do a poor job of protecting private property rights. Rwanda’s Property Rights

index equals one, while it equals two for Bangladesh, Burundi and Romania. While a large

number of countries have Property Rights index values of five.

        KKZ Institution index is an aggregate index of the level of institutional development.

Kaufman, Kraay, and Zoido-Loboton (2001) compile information on (i) voice and

accountability, i.e., the extent to which citizens can choose their government and enjoy political

rights, civil liberties, and an independent press, (ii) political stability, i.e., a low likelihood that

the government will be overthrown by unconstitutional or violent means, (iii) government

effectiveness, i.e., the quality of public service delivery, competence of civil servants, and the

absence of politicization of the civil service, (iv) light regulatory burden, i.e., relative absence of

government controls on goods markets, government interference in the banking system,

excessive bureaucratic controls on starting new businesses, or excessive regulation of private

business and international trade, (v) rule of law, i.e., protection of persons and property against

violence or theft, independent and effective judges, contract enforcement, (vi) freedom from

graft – absence of the use of public power for private gain, corruption.




                                                    16
       Economic freedom equals an overall index of economic freedom. It measures the extent

to which individuals and firms feel free to conduct their businesses. Since Economic freedom

and the KKZ Institution index explicitly include information on the freedom to conduct banking

operations, we do not include the indexes and the bank regulation variables simultaneously in the

analyses. Including Economic freedom and the KKZ Institution index simultaneously with the

regulatory variables, however, confirms the results below. Economic freedom ranges in value

from 1 to 5, with greater values signifying better protection of freedoms. The United Kingdom,

the United States, and Switzerland have indexes of greater than 4.05. Burundi and Rwanda have

Economic Freedom indexes of less than 1.9.

       GDP per capita equals real per capita GDP expressed in thousands of 1995 US dollars.

Since it is very difficult to define and measure the important features of well-functioning

institutions, we also use GDP per capita as a general indicator of institutional development.

Table 2 provides data on GDP per capita.

       A broad set of research suggests that better institutions will promote greater competition

throughout the economy. This work predicts that better institutions will negatively influence net

interest margins (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Acemoglu, et al., 2001; Easterly and Levine,

2003). However, Bianco, Jappelli, and Pagano’s (2001) research indicates that the impact of

overall institutional quality on net interest margins is theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand,

improvements in the institutional environment (encompassing better property rights, stronger

contract enforcement, and a higher level judicial efficiency) increase the value of collateral for

bank loans and therefore reduce the cost of financial intermediation for existing borrowers. On

the other hand, such improvements can extend the credit market to low-grade borrowers and

thereby raise the average interest rate paid on loans. As a result, the impact of better institutions




                                                 17
on net interest margins could be ambiguous. We empirically examine the impact of overall

institutional development on net interest margins.


3.7    Summary Statistics

       The Table 3 correlations highlight key relationships. The results indicate that tighter

regulatory restrictions (more Fraction entry denied, more Activity restrictions, less Banking

freedom) and higher levels of bank concentration are associated with bigger net interest margins.

Furthermore, the correlations show that better institutions (Property rights protection, KKZ

Institution index, Economic freedom) are negatively correlated with bank interest margins and

negatively associated with regulatory restrictions. Furthermore, macroeconomic instability, as

proxied by inflation, is positively associated with net interest margins, while greater stock market

development (Value traded) is negatively linked with bank interest margins. The correlations

among these national characteristics suggest that it is important to control for a range of factors

in assessing the impact of any of these country traits on the cost of financial intermediation.

       Moving beyond correlations, we now examine the relationship between net interest

margins and bank regulations, bank concentration, and the institutional environment while

controlling for bank-specific characteristics and the macroeconomic and financial environment.


4.     The Results

4.1    Bank-specific Effects and Concentration

       Table 4 presents regressions of net interest margin on bank specific variables, bank

concentration, and the regulatory variables. Depending on data availability for the regulatory

variables, there are between 55 and 71 countries and between 1217 and 1372 banks. The table

provides within-country and between-country R2’s for each regression.




                                                 18
       First, consider the bank-specific variables in Table 4. Large banks tend to have lower net

interest margins than small banks. This is consistent with models that emphasize the positive

role of size arising from scale efficiency. Banks that hold a high fraction of liquid assets have

lower net interest margins. This is consistent with banks receiving lower returns on holding cash

or securities, but facing a competitive market for deposits. Highly capitalized banks have higher

margins, which is consistent with theories stressing that highly capitalized banks can charge

more for loans and/or pay less on deposits because they face lower bankruptcy risks. Finally,

banks engaging in fee-based activities tend to have lower margins, consistent with – though not

direct evidence of – cross-subsidization of bank activities.

       Now, consider concentration. As shown in Table 4, bank concentration enters positively

and significantly at the five-percent level in all of the regressions. While the impact of

concentration on net interest margins is not inconsequential, the economic magnitude is not

huge. For instance if Romania were to change from its very highly concentrated banking

structure (Bank concentration = 0.78) to the level in Poland (0.57), this would represent a one-

standard deviation change in bank concentration. If we use the coefficient from regression 2

(2.3), Romania’s reduction in bank concentration would translate into a reduction in its net

interest margin from 8.45 to 7.97, which is a bit less than one-fourth of a standard deviation drop

in the net interest margin. The economic effect of concentration is further illustrated by

comparing Burundi and Kenya. Burundi’s level of bank concentration is 1, i.e., the three largest

commercial banks fully account for the banking system in Burundi. If it had the level of bank

concentration in Kenya (0.57), this would involve a two-standard deviation reduction in bank

concentration. Again using the coefficient from regression 2, Burundi’s two-standard deviation

reduction in bank concentration would translate into a reduction in its net interest margin from




                                                 19
10.74 to 9.95, which is about 0.40 of a standard deviation, and would not dramatically close the

gap with Kenya’s net interest margin (7.46).


4.2        Regulatory Restrictions

           Table 4 also evaluates the impact of regulatory variables on net interest margins. We

include (1) Fraction of entry denied, (2) Activity restrictions, (3) Reserve requirements, and (4)

Banking freedom one-at-a-time while controlling for Bank concentration and the bank-specific

factors.

           The Table 4 results clearly indicate that regulatory restrictions substantively increase net

interest margins. First, in countries that deny a higher fraction of bank entry applications,

margins are larger. This is consistent with the view that restricting entry protects existing banks

and allows them to enjoy large interest margins. Note this is the only finding that differs when

using overhead expenditures instead of net interest margins as the dependent variable. With

overhead expenditures as the dependent variable, the restricting entry index does not enter

significantly at the 0.05 level.

           The Table 4 regressions also indicate that, in countries that restrict banks from engaging

in non-traditional activities, such as securities underwriting, real estate, owning non-financial

firms, and insurance, margins tend to be larger. The economic size of the effect is substantial.

For instance, if Mexico had the same level of restrictions on activities as Korea (2.25 instead of

3), this one-standard deviation drop in Activity restrictions would induce a full percentage point

drop in net interest margins in Mexico according to regression 2 in Table 4 (0.75*1.4). Thus, a

one-standard deviation drop in Activity restrictions translates into 0.6 of a standard deviation

drop in the net interest margin. Third, consistent with some theories, reserve requirements tend

to boost net interest margins. This relationship is not very strong, however; the coefficient is



                                                    20
significant at the 0.10 level. Finally, greater regulatory restrictions on operating a banking

business in general are associated with higher banking margins. In sum, regulatory restrictions

tend to boost interest margins.


4.3    The Macroeconomic and Financial Sector Environment

       Tables 5 and 6 examine the relationship between net interest margin, bank concentration,

bank-specific traits, and selected features of the macroeconomic and financial sector

environment. We do this both to study the relationship between net interest margins and these

macroeconomic and financial sector controls and to assess the robustness of the findings on bank

concentration and the bank-specific features to controlling for national characteristics. Table 5

reports results without the regulatory variables. Table 6 adds the regulatory variables.

       The macroeconomic and financial features help explain cross-bank net interest margins

(Table 5). First, higher inflation rates are positively associated with net interest margins.

According to the estimates, a one-standard deviation increase in the rate of inflation (i.e., an

increase in the inflation rate of nine percentage points) induces a boost in the net interest margin

of 0.36 of a percentage point (9*0.04). Thus, while significant, inflation’s impact on net interest

margins is not economically huge. Second, the regression results indicate that economic growth

is negatively associated with net interest margins using a 10 percent significance level, so that

economic growth is weakly associated with a drop in margins. Third, we also examine whether

other segments of the financial sector influence bank margins. Total value traded enters

negatively and significantly in regression (3) of Table 5. The coefficient estimate suggests that a

one standard deviation increase in total value traded will reduce net interest margins by almost a

full percentage point (2.8*0.35), which is about one-half of a standard deviation drop in net

interest margins. More concretely, the estimates suggest that if Mexico had the same level of



                                                 21
stock market development as the United States (0.70 instead of 0.12), then this would eliminate

the difference in the net interest rate margin between the United States (4.3) and Mexico (5.7).

Fourth, we also observe that the degree of state ownership of the banking industry is positively

linked with net interest margins.

       In Table 5, we also include all the macroeconomic and financial sector indicators

simultaneously with bank concentration and bank-specific controls. The data indicate that

inflation retains a strong, positive independent relationship with net interest margins while

controlling for the other macroeconomic variables. The other macroeconomic and financial

controls, however, are no longer significantly correlated with net interest margins at the five

percent significance level. The broad measures of macroeconomic and financial conditions are

highly correlated with each other (Table 3). Finally, note that the Table 5 results on the bank

specific variables and Bank concentration are very similar to the Table 4 results when we control

for the regulatory environment.


4.4    Regulatory Environment, plus Controlling for Inflation

       Next we examine the impact of bank regulations and bank concentration on net interest

margins while controlling for bank characteristics and inflation (Table 6). We report the results

while controlling for only the inflation rate and not the other macroeconomic and financial sector

features because (i) theory suggests that inflation influences interest margins, (ii) inflation

remained significantly associated with the net interest margin when including additional

macroeconomic and financial controls in Table 5, (iii) the macroeconomic/financial variables are

highly correlated (Table 3), and (iv) we obtain the same results when using the other

macroeconomic/financial controls. Finally, note that inflation is positive and significant across

the different specifications in Table 6.



                                                  22
       The Table 6 results confirm that restrictive bank regulations boost net interest margins

when controlling for macroeconomic conditions. When controlling for inflation, Fraction of

entry denied and Activity remain significantly positively correlated with net interest margin.

Banking freedom enters with a significantly negative coefficient.

       Furthermore, note that the relationship between net interest margins and bank

concentration virtually vanishes when including inflation and the regulatory environment. When

controlling for either Activity restrictions, Reserve requirements, or Banking freedom,

concentration enters significantly only at the 10 percent level and concentration enters

insignificantly when controlling for the Fraction of entry denied. Also, note that concentration

never enters negatively and significantly. Thus, the results do not provide supportive evidence

for theories stressing that a few, highly efficient banks will dominate the market, leading to a

negative associate between concentration and efficiency when controlling for impediments to

competition. These results do not reject that the hypothesis that there are economic forces at

play that induce more efficient banks to capture greater market share. Rather, this paper’s more

limited conclusion is that after we control for macroeconomic stability and include proxy

measures – albeit imperfect measures-- of regulatory impediments to competition, concentration

is unrelated to bank net interest margins at the 0.05 significance level.


4.5    Institutional Setting

       In Table 7 we examine the impact of the institutional setting on bank net interest margins

when controlling for Bank concentration, inflation, and bank-specific controls. Then, in Table 8,

we expand the analysis by also including regulatory restrictions.

       First, the results document a strong link between institutions – such as Economic

freedom, Property rights protection, and the KKZ Institution index – and net interest margins



                                                 23
(Tables 7 and 8). Countries where the overall institutional environment is conducive to private

sector competition tend to have lower interest margins. The results suggest that a one-standard

deviation improvement in Economic freedom (0.54) would lower net interest margins by 1.1

percentage point, which more than one-half of a standard deviation. Put differently, the

coefficient estimates in Table 7 (regression 3) imply that if Mexico had the same level of

Economic freedom as the United States (4.2 instead of 2.9), this would more than eliminate the

net interest difference of the two countries by bringing Mexico’s net interest margin of 5.7 down

below the U.S. level of 4.3. Thus, the overall institutional environment is importantly linked

with net interest margins.

       Second, after controlling for the institutional environment, Bank concentration no longer

enters significantly even at the 0.10 significance level (Tables 6, 7, 8). While concentration

remained significantly associated with net interest margins at the 0.10 when controlling for

regulatory restrictions (Table 6), Tables 7 and 8 show that concentration enters insignificantly

when controlling for overall institutional development.

       Third, when we include concentration, bank-specific controls, inflation, regulatory

restrictions, and Property rights simultaneously, we find that (1) Property rights matter for

explaining net interest margins, (2) regulatory restrictions do not provide additional explanatory

power, (3) inflation remains significantly positively associated with net interest margins, and (6)

the remaining bank-specific controls remain significant as discussed above. As noted, we do not

include the other institutional indicators in Table 8 because the KKZ Institution index and

Economic freedom measure include information on bank regulations. This would bias the results

against finding a significant coefficient on the regulatory restriction measures. Indeed, we get

the same results when including the KKZ Institution index and Economic freedom measure.




                                                 24
Since the regulatory variables do not enter significantly when including the Property rights

index, this suggests that bank regulations reflect something broader about the competitive

environment.

       We interpret these results as suggesting that there are broad national approaches to

competition and property rights that help explain economic efficiency throughout the economy,

including the banking industry. Once we account for these broad institutions, bank specific

regulations and bank competition have no additional explanatory power.


4.6    Robustness

       We have conducted a large number of sensitivity analyses. Many of these have already

been mentioned. Here we mention some additional checks.

       First, we confirm the results using three alternative measures of bank concentration

(Table 9). The three measures are as follows. Bank concentration (Top-5) equals the fraction of

commercial bank assets held by the five largest commercial banks in the country. This measure

differs from our basic measure of bank concentration by taking the share of the five rather than

three largest banks. Bank concentration (All) equals the fraction of bank assets held by the three

largest banks in the country. This measure differs form our basic measure of bank concentration

by using data on not only commercial banks, but also on savings banks, cooperative banks, and

non-bank credit institutions to calculate the concentration ratio. Finally, Bank concentration

(Deposits) equals the share in total deposits of the deposits of the five largest banks in the

country. Unlike the other three concentration measures, this measure is not constructed using

Bankscope data, but is taken from Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001b, 2003). This indicator is

based on bank deposits rather than assets, and is constructed from a survey of bank regulatory

and supervisory authorities in the respective countries. While the survey measure does not suffer



                                                 25
from problems of coverage associated with the three BankScope measures, it is sensitive to

different definitions used across the different countries and might therefore be subject to

measurement error. The survey was undertaken in 1999. The Bankscope measures of

concentration are calculated as averages over the period 1995 to 1999.

       The correlation coefficients between the different concentration measures are high and

significant at the one percent level (the correlation at the country level with Bank concentration

is 0.97 for Bank concentration (Top-5), 0.97 for the Bank concentration (All), and 0.85 for the

Bank concentration (Deposits)). Tables 1 and 3 also provide summary statistics on these

alternative measures. Table 9 indicates the consistency of the results using these different

concentration measures.

       Second, we focused on countries with very high concentration levels. Specifically, we

created dummy variables for those countries with concentration values of greater than 80

percent. We then examined whether countries with these very high concentration levels were

different, i.e., did very high concentration imply high net interest margins even when controlling

for the institutional environment. Again, we find that once we account for broad national

institutions, bank concentration and a dummy variable that identifies highly concentrated

systems have no additional explanatory power (Table 10).

       Third, as emphasized in the Introduction, we confirm the results using overhead

expenditures as a share of bank assets as the dependent variable. The Table 11 findings confirm

this paper’s conclusions. Bank concentration and regulatory restrictions do not help explain

cross-bank differences in overhead costs when controlling for the overall level of institutional

development.




                                                26
       Fourth, we control for the riskiness and profitability of individual banks. Since banks

that assume different levels of risk may charge different interest rates, we control for the standard

deviation of the return on assets of each bank. As show in Table 12, this does not alter our

findings. We further extended the analyses in Table 12 by controlling for bank profits as

measured by return on assets. Again, controlling for bank risk and return on assets did not

change the results.

       Fifth, Table 13 presents pure cross-country comparisons by averaging across the banks in

each country. Thus, we use one observation per country and do not control for any bank-specific

factors. The dependent variable is the average net interest margin across the banks in a particular

country. These regressions eliminate the bank-specific information. Thus, if bank-specific

endogeneity is driving the early results, then removing bank specific-effects should reverse the

findings. That is not the case. As show, bank concentration is unconditionally positively

associated with net interest margins. Furthermore, activity restrictions and banking freedom are

very closely linked with net interest margins even when controlling for inflation and bank

concentration. Moreover, bank concentration and regulatory restrictions become insignificant

when we control for Property rights. Thus, the pure cross-country results confirm this paper’s

bank-level analyses.

       Sixth, we also examine market share (Table 14). Unlike concentration, market share is a

bank specific variable that measures the relative size of the individual bank. We again confirm

the paper’s findings. When controlling for market share, we find that regulatory restrictions on

bank activity tends to boost net interest margins when also conditioning on bank concentration

and other bank-specific factors.




                                                 27
       We find that market share enters positively and significantly, consistent with the view

that banks that are relatively large compared to the market can exert market power to increase

rents. Furthermore, when adding institutional development to the analysis, we again find that

Property rights lowers net interest margins and the regulatory variables no longer enter

significantly. Throughout the analysis, market share enters positively and significantly. When

individual banks enjoy market power, they charge higher net interest margins even after

controlling for other bank specific traits, overall market concentration, regulatory restrictions on

banks, and overall level of institutional development.

       Seventh, we confirm that the results hold when using bank-specific factors averaged over

the 1995-99 period rather than using the initial values of the bank-specific variables (not

reported).

       Finally, we confirm this paper’s results using alternative samples. We have re-done the

analyses, for instance, omitting Latin American countries, Sub-Saharan African economies, or

the United States. We obtain the same results. Furthermore, we confirm this paper’s results

when excluding very small countries (e.g., countries with populations of less than one million

people). Similarly, for some countries, especially those with highly concentrated banking

systems, we only have data on three or fewer banks. The results are unchanged when restricting

the sample to countries for which we have data on four or more banks (not reported).


5.     Conclusions

       This paper investigates the impact of bank regulations, concentration, and institutions on

bank net interest margins and overhead expenditures using bank level data across 72 countries

while controlling for a wide array of macroeconomic, financial, and bank specific-traits. In

summary, we emphasize four findings.


                                                 28
       First, individual bank characteristics explain a substantial part of the within-country

variation in financial intermediary costs. High net interest margins and large overhead

expenditures tend to be associated with small banks, banks that hold a low fraction of liquid

assets, banks that hold a relatively low amount of capital, banks without substantial income from

fee-based activities, and banks with a large market share. The latter finding is consistent with the

view that banks that are relatively large compared to the market can exert market power to

increase rents.

       Second, bank regulations help explain the cost of financial intermediation. Tighter

regulations on bank entry, restrictions on bank activities, and regulations that inhibit the freedom

of bankers to conduct their business boost bank net interest margins. These results hold when

controlling for banking sector concentration, bank-specific characteristics, and the rate of

inflation. Furthermore, complimentary research does not find countervailing benefits from

regulatory restrictions on bank entry, activities, or freedom in terms of (a) bank stability, (b)

firms’ access to external finance, (c) bank valuations, or (d) overall financial development (Beck,

Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003a,b; Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2003; Caprio, Laeven, and

Levine, 2003).

       Third, there is an important caveat to the finding that bank regulations explain net interest

margins and overhead expenditures: bank regulations cannot be viewed in isolation from the

overall institutional framework. Bank regulations reflect broader, national institutions associated

with the protection of private property rights and the freedom to compete in the economy. Thus,

when controlling for these broader, national institutions, bank regulations do not provide

additional explanatory power of cross-bank net interest margins. Institutional development,

however, does explain cross-bank differences in net interest margins. We do not interpret these




                                                  29
results as suggesting that bank regulations are unimportant for explaining bank margins. Rather,

we interpret the findings as consistent with a strand of literature that emphasizes that policies and

regulations stem from national institutions.

       Four, the evidence on the relationship between concentration and net interest margins is

mixed, which is perhaps unsurprising given the conflicting predictions from theory. When

controlling for bank-specific factors, concentration is positively and significantly linked with

bank net interest margins. This relationship breaks down, however, when controlling for

regulatory restrictions on banks and macroeconomic stability. Given the availability of data on

the macroeconomic environment and regulatory impediments on banks, these results shed

skeptical light on using national bank concentration measures to proxy for the competitive

environment facing the banking industry. Furthermore, even when controlling for regulatory

restrictions and the overall institutional environment, we never find a significant positive link

between concentration and efficiency as predicted by some theories of banking.




                                                 30
                                         References


Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. (2001). “The colonial origins of

       comparative development: An empirical investigation.” American Economic Review 91,

       1369-1401.

Bank for International Settlements. (2001). “The Banking Industry in the Emerging Market

       Economies: Competition, Consolidation, and Systemic Stability.” BIS Papers 4, Basle.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. (2001a). “Banking Systems Around the Globe:

       Do Regulation and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” In Financial

       Supervision and Regulation: What Works and What Doesn’t, edited by Frederic S.

       Mishkin, pp. 31-88. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. (2001b). “The Regulation and Supervision of

       Banks Around the World: A new Database.” In Integrating Emerging Market Countries

       into the Global Financial System, Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services,

       edited by Robert E. Litan and R. Herring, pp. 183-241. Washington, DC: Brookings

       Institution Press.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine. (2003). “Bank Regulation and Supervision:

       What Works Best?" Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. (2000). “A New Database on Financial

       Development and Structure.” World Bank Economic Review, September, 597-605.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. (2002). “Law, Endowments, and

       Finance.” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. (2003a). “Bank Supervision and

       Corporate Finance.” University of Minnesota (Carlson School of Management), mimeo.


                                             31
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. (2003b). “Bank Concentration and

       Crises.” University of Minnesota (Carlson School of Management), mimeo.

Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Norman Loayza. (2000). “Finance and the Sources of the

       Growth.” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 261-300.

Becker, Gary. (1983). “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political

       Influence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 371-400.

Berger, Allen N. (1995). “The Profit-Structure Relationship in Banking - Tests of Market Power

       and Efficient-Structure Hypothesis." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 27, 404-431.

Berger, Allen N., Rebecca S. Demsetz, and Philip E. Strahan. (1999). “The Consolidation of the

       Financial Services Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future.”

       Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 135-194.

Berger, Allen N., Robert DeYoung, Hesna Genay, and Gregory F. Udell. (2000). “Globalization

       of Financial Institutions: Evidence from Cross-Border Banking Performance.”

       Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services 3, 23-125.

Berger, Allen N., and Timothy H. Hannan. (1989). “The Price-Concentration Relationship in

       Banking.” Review of Economics and Statistics 71, 291-299.

Berger, Allen N., and Timothy H. Hannan. (1998). “The Efficiency Cost of Market Power in the

       Banking Industry: A Test of the ‘Quiet Life’ and Related Hypotheses.” Review of

       Economics and Statistics 80, 454-465.

Berger, Allen N., Gerald A. Hanweck, and David B. Humphrey. (1987). “Competitive Viability

       in Banking: Scale, Scope and Product Mix Economies.” Journal of Monetary Economics

       20, 501-520.




                                               32
Berger, Allen N., and David B. Humphrey. (1991). “The Dominance of Inefficiencies Over Scale

       and Product Mix Economies in Banking.” Journal of Monetary Economics 28, 117-148.

Berger, Allen N., and David B. Humphrey. (1992). “Megamergers in Banking and the Use of

       Cost Efficiency as an Antitrust Defense." Antitrust Bulletin 37, 541-600.

Berger, Allen N., Anthony Saunders, Joseph M. Scalise, and Gregory F. Udell. (1998). “The

       Effects of Bank Mergers and Acquisitions on Small Business Lending." Journal of

       Financial Economics 50, 187-229.

Besanko, David, and Anjan V. Thakor. (1992). “Banking Deregulation: Allocational

       Consequences of Relaxing Entry Barriers.” The Journal of Banking and Finance 16,

       909-932.

Bianco, Magda, Tullio Jappelli, and Marco Pagano. (2001). “Courts and Banks: Effects of

       Judicial Enforcement on Credit Markets.” CSEF Working Paper No. 58, 48 p.

Boot, Arnoud W.A., and Anjan V. Thakor. (1996). “Banking Structure and Financial

       Innovation.” In Universal Banking: Financial System Design Reconsidered, edited by

       Ingo Walter and A. Saunders, pp. 420-430. Chicago, IL: Irwin Professional Publishing.

Boyd, John H., and Stanley L. Graham. (1991). “Investigating the Banking Consolidation

       Trend.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Spring, 3-15.

Boyd, John H., and Stanley L. Graham. (1998). “Consolidation in US Banking.” In Bank

       Mergers and Acquisitions, edited by Yakov Amihud and Geoffrey Miller, pp. 113-135.

       Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Boyd, John H., Ross Levine, and Bruce D. Smith. (2001). “The Impact of Inflation on Financial

       Sector Performance.” Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 221-248.




                                               33
Boyd, John H. and Edward C. Prescott. (1986). "Financial Intermediary-Coalitions." Journal of

       Economic Theory 38, 211-32.

Boyd, John H. and David E. Runkle. (1993). “Size and Performance of Banking Firms.” Journal

       of Monetary Economics 31, 47-67.

Breusch, Trevor S. and Adrian Rodney Pagan. (1980). “The Lagrange Multiplier Test and Its

       Applications to Model Specification in Econometrics.” The Review of Economic Studies

       47, 239-253.

Caprio, Gerard, and Daniela Klingebiel. (1999). “Episodes of Systematic and Borderline

       Financial Crises.” World Bank, mimeo.

Caprio, Gerard, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. (2003). “Governance and Valuation of Banks.”

       University of Minnesota, mimeo.

Cetorelli, Nicola, and Michele Gambera. (2001). “Banking Market Structure, Financial

       Dependence and Growth: International Evidence from Industry Data.” Journal of Finance

       56, 617-648.

Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga. (2001). “How Does Foreign Entry

       Affect Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance 25, 891-911.

Claessens, Stijn, and Daniela Klingebiel. (2001). “Competition and Scope of Activities in

       Financial Services.” World Bank Research Observer 16, 18-40.

Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven. (2004). “What Drives Bank Competition? Some International

       Evidence.” World Bank, mimeo.

Clark, Jeffrey A. (1996). “Economic Cost, Scale Efficiency and Competitive Viability in

       Banking.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28, 342-64.




                                               34
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic. (1998). “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth.”

       Journal of Finance 53, 2107-2137.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Harry Huizinga. (1999). “Determinants of Commercial Bank Interest

       Margins and Profitability: Some International Evidence.” World Bank Economic Review

       13, 379-408.

Demsetz, Rebecca S., and Philip E. Strahan. (1997). "Diversification, Size, and Risk at Bank

       Holding Companies." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28, 300-13.

Demsetz, Harold. (1973). “Industry Structure, Market Rivalry, and Public Policy,” Journal of

       Law and Economics 16, 1-9.

Demsetz, Harold. (1974). “Two Systems of Belief about Monopoly.” In Industrial

       Concentration: The New Learning, edited by Harvey J. Goldschmid, Michael H. Mann,

       and J. Fred Weston, pp. 93-100. Boston: Little-Brown.

Diamond, Douglas W. (1984). "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring." Review of

       Economic Studies, 51, 393-414.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. (2003). “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments

       Influence Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. (1997). “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and

       Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic

       Historians of the United States.” In How Latin America Fell Behind, edited by Stephen

       Haber, pp. 260-304. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Ferrier, Gary D., Shawna Grosskopf, Kathy J. Hayes, and Suthathip Yaisawarng. (1993).

       “Economies of Diversification in the Banking Industry: A Frontier Approach.” Journal

       of Monetary Economics 31, 229-249.




                                               35
Gande, Amar, Manju Puri, and Anthony Saunders. (1999). “Bank Entry, Competition, and the

       Market for Corporate Securities Underwriting.” Journal of Financial Economics 54,

       165-195.

Gerschenkron, Alexander. (1965). Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. New

       York, NY: Praeger.

Gilbert, R. Alton. (1984). “Bank Market Structure and Competition: A Survey.” Journal of

       Money, Credit and Banking 16, 617-645.

Goldberg, Lawrence G. and Anoop Rai. (1996). "The Structure-Performance Relationship for

       European Banking.” Journal of Banking and Finance 20, 745-771.

Graddy, Duane B. and Reuben Kyle. (1979). “The Simultaneity of Bank Decision-Making,

       Market Structure, and Bank Performance.” Journal of Finance 34, 1-18.

Group of Ten. (2001). Report on Consolidation in the Financial Sector. Bank for International

       Settlements: Basel, Switzerland.

Haber, Stephen H., Armando Razo, and Noel Maurer. (2003). The Politics of Property Rights:

       Political Instability, Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico,

       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Hannan, Timothy H. and Allen N. Berger. (1991). “The Rigidity of Prices: Evidence from the

       Banking Industry.” American Economic Review 81, 938-945.

Hughes, Joseph, William Lang, Loretta Mester, and Choon-Geol Moon. (1999). “The Dollars

       and Sense of Bank Consolidation.” Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 291-324.

Huybens, Elisabeth, and Bruce D. Smith. (1999). “Inflation, financial markets, and long-run real

       activity.” Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 283-315.




                                               36
International Monetary Fund. (2001). Financial Sector Consolidation in Emerging Markets,

       Chapter V. International Capital Market Report.

Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan. (1996). “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank

       Branch Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639-670.

Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan. (1998). “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution and

       Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking." Journal of Law and

       Economics 49, 239-274.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobatón (1999). “Governance Matters.” Policy

       Research Working Paper 2196. World Bank.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobatón. (2001). “Governance Matters II:

       Updated Indicators for 2000/01.” World Bank, mimeo.

Keeley, Michael C., and Gary C. Zimmerman. (1985). “Competition for Money Market Deposit

       Accounts.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review 1, 5-27.

Kroszner, Randall S., and PhilipE. Strahan. (1999). “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and

       Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 114, 1437-67.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. (1986). “Banks, Kinship, and Economic Development: The New England

       Case.” Journal of Economic History 46, 647-667.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. (1999).

       “The Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15,

       222-279.

Levine, Ross. (2003). “Deny Foreign Bank Entry: Implications for Bank Interest Margins.” In

       Bank Competition, edited by Luis Antonio Ahumada and Rodrigo Fuentes. Santiago,




                                                37
       Chile: Banco Central de Chile, forthcoming.

Lloyd-Williams, D. M., Phil Molyneux, and John Thornton. (1994). “Market Structure and

       Performance in Spanish Banking.” Journal of Banking and Finance 18, 433-443.

Macey, Jonathan R. and Geoffrey Miller. (1998). “Bank Mergers and American Bank

       Competitiveness.” In Bank Mergers and Acquisitions, edited by Yakov Amihud and

       Geoffrey Miller, pp. 175-190. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Mayer, Colin. (1990). “Financial Systems, Corporate Finance and Economic Development.” In

       Asymmetric Information, Corporate Finance and Investment, edited by R. Glen Hubbard,

       pp. 307-332. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Neumark, David and Steven A. Sharpe. (1992). “Market Structure and the Nature of Price

       Rigidity: Evidence from the Market for Consumer Deposits.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 107, 657-680.

North, Douglass. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.

       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Olson, Mancur. (1993). “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development.” American Political

       Science Review 87, 567-576.

Pagano, Marco. (1993). “Financial Markets and Growth. An Overview.” European Economic

       Review 37, 613-622.

Peltzman, Sam. (1976). “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law and

       Economics 18, 211-240.

Peltzman, Sam. (1977). “The Gains and Losses from Industrial Concentration.” Journal of Law

       and Economics 20, 229-263.




                                              38
Peristiani, Stavros. (1997). “Do Mergers Improve X-efficiency and Scale Efficiency of US

       Banks? Evidence from the 1980s.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 326-337.

Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan. (1994). "The Benefits of Lending Relationships:

       Evidence from Small Business Data." The Journal of Finance 49, 3-37.

Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan. (1995). “The Effect of Credit Market Competition

       on Lending Relationships” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 407-443.

Pilloff, Steven J. (1996). “Performance Changes and Shareholder Wealth Creation Associated

       with Mergers of Publicly Traded Banking Institutions.” Journal of Money, Credit, and

       Banking 28, 294-310.

Pilloff, Steven J. and Anthony M. Santomero. (1998). “The Value Effects of Bank Mergers and

       Acquistions.” In Bank Mergers and Acquisitions, edited by Yakov Amihud and Goeffrey

       Miller, pp. 59-78. Norwell, MA: Kluwer.

Prager, Robin A. and Timothy H. Hannan. (1999). “Do Substantial Horizontal Mergers Generate

       Significant Price Effects? Evidence from the Banking Industry.” Journal of Industrial

       Economics 46, 433-452.

Radecki, Lawrence J., John Wenninger, and Daniel K. Orlow. (1997). “Industry Structure:

       Electronic Delivery’s Potential Effects on Retail Banking.” Journal of Retail Banking

       Services 19, 57-63.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. (1998). “Financial Dependence and Growth.”

       American Economic Review 88, 559-586.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. (2003). Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists. New

       York, NY: Random House.




                                              39
Rhoades, Stephen A. (1993). “The Efficiency Effects of Horizontal Bank Mergers.” Journal of

       Banking and Finance 17, 411-422.

Rhoades, Stephen A. (1998). “The Efficiency Effects of Bank Mergers: an Overview of Case

       Studies of Nine Mergers.” Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 273-291.

Shaffer, Sherrill. (1993). “A Test of Competition in Canadian Banking.” Journal of Money,

       Credit, and Banking 25, 49-61.

Shepherd, William G. (1982). “Economies of Scale and Monopoly Profits.” In Industrial

       Organization, Antitrust, and Public Policy, edited by John V. Craven, pp. 165-204,

       Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing.

Simons, Katerina and Joanna Stavins. (1998). “Has Antitrust Policy in banking Become

       Obsolete?” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston New England Economic Review, March,

       13-26.

Smirlock, Michael. (1985). “Evidence on the (Non) Relationship between Concentration and

       Profitability in Banking.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 17, 69-83.

Stiroh, Kevin, and Philip E. Strahan. (2003). “Competitive Dynamics of Deregulation: Evidence

       from U.S. Banking.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, forthcoming.

Vives, Xavier. (2001). “Competition in the Changing World of Banking.” Oxford Review of

       Economic Policy 17, 535-545.

World Bank. (2000). Global Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries 2000. The

       World Bank.

Wurgler, Jeffrey. (2000). “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital.” Journal of Financial

Economics 58, 187-214.




                                               40
Table 1. Bank concentration and efficiency

                 Net                   Bank          Bank          Bank
               interest  Bank       concentration concentration concentration Bank                Bank    Fee            Market Bank Number
Country name   margin concentration (Top-5)           (All)      (Deposits)    size    Liquidity equity income Overhead share (%) risk of banks
Australia          3.12        0.63          0.85           0.59         0.73    9.09      12.54    7.17    0.81    2.94     6.88 0.30        14
Austria            2.16        0.44          0.58           0.45         0.38    6.62      16.09    7.73    1.55    2.51     1.15 0.71        22
Bahrain            2.45        0.92          0.98           0.91         0.71    7.06      11.82 14.67      1.62    1.93    16.46 0.40         6
Bangladesh         2.05        0.70          0.79           0.63         0.65    4.72      44.51    6.30    1.07    2.07     8.03 0.82         6
Belarus           10.68        0.84          0.96           0.81         0.83    5.18      37.29    1.12    0.45    5.82    18.43 2.70         1
Belgium            2.38        0.75          0.85           0.52         0.74    7.07      23.08    6.47    0.72    2.55     2.32 0.67        22
Bolivia            5.62        0.61          0.83           0.46         0.68    4.50      19.85 14.90      0.72    3.85     8.92 0.94        11
Botswana           7.03        0.92          1.00           0.90         1.00    5.48      11.46 10.44      1.44    4.31    25.00 0.87         4
Burundi           10.74        1.00          1.00           0.96         0.91    4.16      20.74 10.12      1.47    5.20    50.00 1.25         2
Canada             2.03        0.56          0.84           0.54         0.76    6.59      22.46    7.12    0.73    1.93     0.30 0.77        24
Chile              5.02        0.48          0.71           0.46         0.59    6.72      26.16 12.48     -0.53    3.04     6.91 0.68        14
Croatia            5.40        0.62          0.72           0.58         0.57    5.12      24.56 19.64      2.09    5.48     4.62 3.02        21
Cyprus             2.53        0.82          0.94           0.82         0.80    7.66      21.80    7.13    1.27    2.39    35.64 0.88         2
Czech Rep.         2.88        0.72          0.81           0.61         0.74    7.11      13.12    7.84    1.15    2.41     7.19 0.94        13
Denmark            5.28        0.71          0.80           0.66         0.79    5.98      19.58 10.78      0.41    3.87     1.91 0.39        46
Egypt              2.42        0.58          0.72           0.57         0.65    6.90        n.a.   7.74    1.47    1.89     2.44 0.47         3
Estonia            6.15        1.00          1.00           0.85         0.95     5.58      6.88    9.14    3.37    5.24    50.00 2.25         2
Finland            1.99        0.75          0.94           0.77         0.97    9.38      14.14    5.20    0.73    1.90    22.69 0.42         4
France             2.86        0.33          0.50           0.27         0.70    7.11      12.05    7.38    1.05    3.10     0.39 0.62       111
Germany            2.66        0.32          0.42           0.32         0.12    6.76      30.25    9.04    1.21    2.89     0.33 0.38       103
Ghana             11.61        0.79          0.98           0.75         0.78    5.52      49.18 11.59      5.62    7.68    30.97 1.05         2
Greece             3.50        0.71          0.88           0.68         0.70    8.04      32.16    6.15    1.49    3.22    11.11 0.95         9
Guatemala          7.53        0.26          0.40           0.26         0.38    4.50      23.72 10.33     -0.26    5.84     3.76 0.60        14
Honduras           8.82        0.42          0.64           0.41         0.52    4.71      32.68    9.76   -1.47    5.14    10.09 0.56         2
Hungary            4.86        0.53          0.67           0.51          n.a.    6.26      9.25    9.18    2.23    4.26     5.52 1.48        16
Iceland            4.15        0.87          0.96           0.73          n.a.    6.95      9.83    7.16    2.03    4.07    32.28 0.39         3
India              3.48        0.37          0.48           0.35         0.42    6.81      39.38    7.30    0.72    2.58     1.72 0.51        55
Indonesia          5.62        0.51          0.67           0.39         0.53    5.47      22.47 11.92      0.37    2.89     0.46 2.08        20
Ireland            3.49        0.68          0.79           0.62          n.a.   9.49      29.44    6.51    1.04    2.73    25.29 0.20         3
Israel             3.22        0.76          0.92           0.76         0.80    7.53      12.27 10.36      1.50    3.16     8.14 0.31        12
Italy              3.67        0.30          0.43           0.27         0.25    7.57      29.76    8.22    0.65    3.64     0.98 0.44        56



                                                                   41
Table 1. (cont.)
                     Net                   Bank          Bank          Bank
                   interest  Bank       concentration concentration concentration Bank               Bank     Fee            Market Bank Number
Country name       margin concentration (Top-5)           (All)      (Deposits)    size    Liquidity equity income Overhead share (%) risk of banks
Jamaica                9.43        0.92          1.00           0.81         0.74     5.37     32.91    9.25   -0.35    7.04    26.69 1.01         3
Japan                  2.07        0.27          0.39           0.26         0.31    9.80      11.80    3.76    0.20    1.56     0.79 0.30       102
Jordan                 3.47        0.89          0.96           0.89         0.68    6.86      41.29    7.95    0.46    2.61    16.43 0.47         6
Kenya                  7.46        0.57          0.70           0.54         0.62    4.58      35.57 10.08      0.85    4.79     6.64 1.51         5
Korea, Rep.            2.39        0.37          0.55           0.30         0.48    9.69      11.03    5.84    0.41    2.66     5.77 1.69        15
Kuwait                 1.87        0.68          0.91           0.67          n.a.   8.45      34.35 10.43      0.60    0.94    16.67 0.34         6
Latvia                 6.92        0.53          0.69           0.49          n.a.    3.44     11.75 14.14      3.10    7.03     6.58 4.55        10
Lebanon                4.18        0.32          0.47           0.31         0.40    5.02      54.26    8.86    0.10    2.83     2.16 0.84        28
Lithuania              8.43        0.94          0.98           0.86         0.90    5.66       8.48   -0.77    0.54    6.73    97.80 1.89         1
Luxembourg             1.19        0.21          0.32           0.19         0.27    6.92      45.02    5.54    0.61    1.38     0.77 0.24        26
Macedonia              9.57        0.87          0.93           0.84         0.77    5.67      52.57 10.90      4.05    5.33    43.58 0.32         2
Malta                  2.28        0.94          0.99           0.89         1.00    6.33      13.37    6.30    0.36    1.71    23.48 0.14         4
Mauritius              3.91        0.93          0.98           0.91         0.91    5.35      34.77 11.41      0.44    2.31    19.39 0.29         5
Mexico                 5.70        0.64          0.79           0.63         0.80    4.38      38.26 31.84     -0.44    5.98     3.60 3.30         9
Moldova, Rep.         10.03        0.83          0.98           0.76         0.71    2.55      50.69 11.07      8.88    6.96    17.54 2.28         1
Morocco                5.01        0.77          0.96           0.61         0.75    7.82      28.60 10.36      0.38    2.09    16.72 0.10         2
Namibia                6.64        0.83          1.00           0.79         1.00    5.95      15.08    5.91    1.22    4.26    25.00 0.28         4
Nepal                  5.41        0.77          0.92           0.77         0.55    4.39      37.21    8.08    1.34    2.45    25.00 0.55         4
Netherlands            1.97        0.81          0.91           0.77         0.88    7.51      34.01    6.83    0.89    1.95     3.56 0.23        18
New Zealand            3.03        0.70          0.95           0.66         0.91     8.53      9.08    6.09    1.10    2.49    18.92 0.14         5
Nigeria                8.94        0.62          0.71           0.50         0.51    6.31      64.46    7.60    3.35    7.79    11.50 0.96         8
Norway                 2.68        0.61          0.70           0.52          n.a.    7.94      5.96    6.48    0.82    1.87     8.56 0.48         5
Panama                 2.86        0.24          0.35           0.22         0.30    5.55      21.93    9.15    0.93    1.95     2.36 0.39         8
Peru                   7.92        0.64          0.78           0.46         0.81    5.83      26.89 10.58      1.01    5.79    10.09 0.93         9
Philippines            4.56        0.40          0.57           0.36         0.46    7.19      26.37 14.41      1.03    3.61     5.26 0.99        19
Poland                 6.81        0.57          0.69           0.51         0.57    5.63      13.08 14.65     -0.24    3.89     2.95 0.96        15
Romania                8.45        0.78          0.92           0.83         0.59    4.09      34.13 20.77      1.82    5.82     4.95 2.34         2
Russian Fed.           5.99        0.43          0.57           0.38         0.80    5.54      53.78 12.94      5.66    6.61     7.02 7.80         4
Rwanda                 5.74        1.00          1.00           0.97         1.00    4.27      43.61    3.33    1.06    4.61    43.54 0.15         1
Singapore              2.86        0.85          0.95           0.60          n.a.   8.78      13.36 15.23      0.36    1.18    18.82 0.47         5
Slovenia               4.00        0.64          0.77           0.60         0.64    5.61      16.10 13.29      2.67    4.23     8.17 0.53        11
South Africa           6.22        0.78          0.92           0.67         0.85    6.05      19.37 14.30      1.19    4.90     8.31 0.68        11


                                                                       42
Table 1. (cont.)
                    Net                   Bank          Bank          Bank
                  interest  Bank       concentration concentration concentration Bank               Bank     Fee            Market Bank Number
Country name      margin concentration (Top-5)           (All)      (Deposits)    size    Liquidity equity income Overhead share (%) risk of banks
Spain                 3.40        0.54          0.62           0.47         0.49    7.70      23.97    8.88    0.62    2.98     1.68 0.36        41
Sri Lanka             4.48        0.90          0.98           0.85          n.a.   5.66      27.75 13.28      0.61    3.05    24.93 0.64         4
Sweden                2.39        0.78          0.97           0.72          n.a.  10.11      50.37    7.32    0.94    2.29    14.68 1.20         5
Switzerland           1.75        0.77          0.84           0.74         0.65     6.02     25.82 12.99      1.77    2.41     0.82 0.35        85
Taiwan                2.42        0.31          0.45           0.33         0.15     8.91     13.25    9.09   -0.10    1.39     3.32 0.35        30
Thailand              2.30        0.66          0.82           0.56         0.75    9.36       8.53    7.49    0.48    2.22    20.64 4.55         4
Trinidad & Tobago     4.68        0.80          0.95           0.70         0.75    6.26      37.15    7.60    1.65    3.93    20.00 0.49         5
United Kingdom        2.98        0.47          0.61           0.40          n.a.   7.53      30.52 12.08      1.16    2.57     1.90 0.62        43
US                    4.34        0.20          0.27           0.18         0.21    7.32      12.61    8.71    0.74    3.17     0.27 0.29       236
Weighted average      3.61        0.45          0.57           0.41         0.46     7.04     21.90    9.18    0.90    3.02     3.53 0.64      1430

Notes: All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99, except Bank concentration (Deposits) for which we use data for the year 1999. All bank-
specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins, overhead ratios and bank risk for which we use averages for the period 1995-99. A detailed
description of the definition and sources of the variables can be found in the Appendix. n.a. indicates not available. Outliers (above 95% percentile and below
5% percentile) of the variables net interest margins through fee income are deleted from the dataset. Dataset includes commercial banks only, as defined by
BankScope. Number of banks is the number of banks in the final sample for each country. The total number of countries is 72. The total number of bank
observations is 1,430.
Source: BankScope.




                                                                              43
Table 2. Institutional and regulatory indicators
                                                                      KKZ
                  GDP per Value              GDP Economic Property Institution Fraction    Activity    Reserve Banking Foreign        State
   Country Name    capita  traded Inflation growth freedom rights    index entry denied restrictions requirements freedom ownership ownership
Australia            22.13    26.83    1.96     4.39    3.99   5.00       1.41       0.00       2.00            0      5.00     0.17      0.00
Austria              30.34    11.13    1.38     2.04    3.90   5.00       1.37       0.07       1.25            1      4.60     0.05      0.04
Bahrain               9.40      n.a.   1.08     2.62    4.22   5.00       0.05       0.33       2.25            1      4.00     0.28      0.04
Bangladesh            0.34     0.42    6.47     5.01    2.43   2.00      -0.39       0.79       3.00            1      2.60     0.06      0.70
Belarus               2.23      n.a. 238.51     2.91    2.22   2.60      -0.76       0.00       3.25            1      3.00     0.03      0.67
Belgium              28.33     5.58    1.45     2.45    3.90   5.00       0.90       0.00       2.25            1      4.00      n.a.      n.a.
Bolivia               0.94     0.01    7.43     4.02    3.23   3.20       0.02       0.00       3.00            1      3.60     0.42      0.00
Botswana              3.59     0.01    8.60     5.60    2.95   4.00       0.56       0.33       2.50            1      3.80     0.98      0.02
Burundi               0.15     0.00   18.54    -2.29    1.83   2.00      -1.01       0.33       3.00            1      2.00     0.00      0.63
Canada               20.55    32.03    1.61     3.31    3.89   5.00       1.43       0.13       1.75            0      4.00      n.a.     0.00
Chile                 5.00    16.98    6.04     5.64    3.68   5.00       0.87        n.a.      2.75            0      3.00     0.32      0.12
Croatia               3.85     0.26    4.51     4.34    2.39   2.25       0.03        n.a.      1.75            1      3.00     0.07      0.37
Cyprus               12.52     0.04    2.61     3.91    3.36   3.25       1.02       0.00       2.00            0      4.00     0.11      0.03
Czech Rep.            5.16     7.12    7.86     1.36    3.77   4.00       0.68       0.36       2.00            1      5.00     0.26      0.19
Denmark              35.97    14.34    2.15     2.53    3.86   5.00       1.58       0.08       2.00            1      4.00      n.a.     0.00
Egypt                 1.11     1.15    6.96     5.36    2.51   2.80      -0.15       1.00       3.25            1      3.40     0.04      0.67
Estonia               3.66      n.a.  14.78     4.48    3.59   4.00       0.61       0.00       2.00            0      4.00     0.85      0.00
Finland              27.79    15.10    1.07     4.72    3.78   5.00       1.62       0.00       1.75            1      3.00     0.08      0.22
France               27.72    23.75    1.24     2.14    3.65   4.00       1.02       0.00       1.50            1      3.00      n.a.      n.a.
Germany              30.79    23.76    1.31     1.51    3.80   5.00       1.37       0.00       1.25            1      3.60     0.04      0.42
Ghana                 0.39     0.35   32.19     4.38    2.72   3.00      -0.14       0.78       3.00            1      3.00     0.54      0.38
Greece               11.90     5.24    6.01     2.96    3.12   4.00       0.63       0.00       2.25            0      2.00     0.05      0.13
Guatemala             1.50     0.03    8.11     4.18    3.21   3.00      -0.50       0.30       3.25            1      3.60     0.05      0.08
Honduras              0.71     3.29   19.77     2.76    2.68   3.00      -0.43       0.20       2.25            1      3.00     0.02      0.01
Hungary               4.71     0.79   18.85     3.35    3.01   4.00       0.87       0.33       2.25            1      3.80     0.62      0.03
Iceland              28.49     0.01    2.13     4.21    3.82   5.00       1.35        n.a.      2.75            1      3.00     0.00      0.64
India                 0.41     3.66    8.85     6.49    2.19   3.00       0.00       0.47       2.50            1      2.00     0.00      0.80
Indonesia             1.05     7.12   20.45     1.69    2.97   3.00      -0.76       0.60       3.50            0      2.80     0.07      0.44
Ireland              21.60     0.21    1.95     9.31    3.98   5.00       1.40       0.00       2.00            1      4.00      n.a.      n.a.
Israel               16.30    10.57    8.19     4.02    3.17   4.00       0.68        n.a.      3.25            0      3.00      n.a.      n.a.
Italy                19.65     7.99    2.97     1.76    3.54   4.00       0.91       0.26       2.50            0      3.60     0.05      0.17




                                                                    44
Table 2. (cont.)
                                                                        KKZ
                   GDP per Value               GDP Economic Property Institution Fraction    Activity    Reserve Banking Foreign        State
   Country Name     capita  traded Inflation growth freedom rights     index entry denied restrictions requirements freedom ownership ownership
Jamaica                1.71     0.08   14.11    -0.70    3.24   3.80        -0.03       n.a.      3.00            1      3.80     0.44      0.56
Japan                 42.39    23.99    0.41     1.16    3.99   5.00         0.95      0.00       3.25            1      3.20     0.06      0.01
Jordan                 1.61     7.84    3.38     3.51    3.08   4.00         0.33       n.a.      2.75            1      4.00     0.68      0.00
Kenya                  0.34     0.72    6.01     2.71    2.78   3.00       -0.78       0.85       2.50            1      3.60      n.a.      n.a.
Korea Rep. of         11.48    40.63    4.44     4.98    3.76   5.00         0.48       n.a.      2.25            1      3.80     0.00      0.30
Kuwait                15.94     0.24    2.01    -1.11    3.48   5.00         0.34       n.a.      2.50            1      3.00     0.00      0.00
Latvia                 2.19      n.a.  11.61     3.22    3.10   3.00         0.26      0.00       2.00            1      3.75      n.a.      n.a.
Lebanon                2.86     0.00      n.a.   3.45    2.88   3.00        -0.09      0.00       2.75            1      4.00     0.27      0.00
Lithuania              1.91     0.01   15.80     3.30    2.85   3.00         0.26      0.50       2.25            1      2.75     0.48      0.44
Luxembourg            47.99     0.01    1.33     5.29    4.05   5.00         1.46      0.00       1.50            1      4.00     0.95      0.05
Macedonia (FYR)        1.30      n.a.   3.88     1.43     n.a.   n.a.      -0.33        n.a.      3.25            1       n.a.    0.93      0.01
Malta                  9.41     0.00    2.82     4.60    2.83   3.40         0.85      0.00       2.50            1      3.00     0.49      0.00
Mauritius              3.85     0.00    6.63     4.98    3.35   4.00         0.69       n.a.      3.25            1      4.00     0.26      0.00
México                 3.39    12.03   24.50     2.90    2.86   3.20       -0.07        n.a.      3.00         n.a.      2.00     0.20      0.25
Moldova                0.67     0.65   18.71    -3.12    2.52   3.00       -0.20       0.33       1.75            1      2.60     0.33      0.07
Morocco                1.34     7.35    2.72     1.91    3.08   3.60         0.19      0.00       3.25            1      3.00     0.19      0.24
Namibia                2.32     0.00    8.33     3.89    3.12   4.00         0.47      0.67       2.75            1      4.00      n.a.      n.a.
Nepal                  0.22     0.40    7.79     4.15    2.53   2.75       -0.29       0.21       2.00            1      2.00     0.35      0.20
Netherlands           28.45    62.53    2.06     3.27    4.00   5.00         1.64      0.00       1.50            0      5.00      n.a.     0.06
New Zealand           16.70     0.14    1.68     2.56    4.21   5.00         1.59      0.00       1.00            0      5.00     0.99      0.00
Nigeria                0.25     0.05   25.45     2.46    2.73   3.00       -1.00       0.00       2.25            1      2.20     0.00      0.13
Norway                35.90    16.66    2.18     3.26    3.60   5.00         1.53       n.a.      2.50            1      3.00      n.a.      n.a.
Panama                 3.12     0.00    1.09     3.27    3.56   3.00         0.11      0.06       2.00            1      5.00     0.38      0.12
Peru                   2.33     6.64    8.39     3.75    3.10   3.20       -0.18       0.00       2.00            1      4.00     0.40      0.03
Philippines            1.13    19.88    7.86     3.69    3.10   3.80         0.21      0.34       1.75            1      3.00     0.13      0.12
Poland                 3.22     2.18   16.40     5.74    2.96   3.80         0.70      0.00       2.50            0      3.00     0.26      0.44
Romania                1.37     0.01   66.15    -0.43    2.55   2.00       -0.08       0.35       3.25            1      3.00     0.08      0.70
Russian Fed.           2.22     0.13   74.66    -1.23    2.54   3.00       -0.54        n.a.      2.00            1      3.60     0.09      0.68
Rwanda                 0.22     0.00    5.81    15.67    1.83   1.00       -1.18       0.00       3.25            1      1.00     0.50      0.50
Singapore             24.95     0.71    0.97     6.02    4.54   5.00         1.44       n.a.      2.00            1      4.00     0.50      0.00
Slovenia              10.23     0.02    9.32     4.24    2.83   3.25         0.85      0.00       2.25            1      4.00     0.05      0.40
South Africa           3.93    10.88    7.32     2.46    3.08   3.00         0.11      0.26       2.00            1      3.00     0.05      0.00


                                                                     45
                                                                      KKZ
                  GDP per Value              GDP Economic Property Institution Fraction    Activity    Reserve Banking Foreign        State
   Country Name    capita  traded Inflation growth freedom rights    index entry denied restrictions requirements freedom ownership ownership
Spain                15.86    10.69    2.87     3.32    3.48   4.00       1.11       0.00       1.75            0      3.60     0.11      0.00
Sri Lanka             0.77     1.70    9.45     4.94    3.26   3.00      -0.38        n.a.      1.75            1      4.00      n.a.     0.55
Sweden               28.26    40.29    0.77     2.70    3.49   4.00       1.53       0.07       2.25            0      3.60     0.02      0.00
Switzerland          44.34 101.15      0.80     1.11    4.06   4.75       1.72       0.00       1.25            0      4.75     0.09      0.15
Taiwan               13.76 147.23      1.91     5.87    4.05   5.00       0.89       0.07       3.00            1      3.00      n.a.     0.43
Thailand              2.84    33.86    5.12     1.44    3.66   4.60       0.15       1.00       2.25            1      3.00     0.07      0.31
Trinidad & Tobago     4.53     0.03    4.25     4.48    3.40   5.00       0.59       0.25       2.25            0      4.00     0.08      0.15
United Kingdom       20.19    92.16    2.79     2.72    4.13   5.00       1.50        n.a.      1.25            1      5.00      n.a.     0.00
US                   29.25    70.32    2.36     3.72    4.16   5.00       1.29       0.00       3.00            0      4.00     0.05      0.00
Weighted average     22.50     0.35    4.37     3.02    3.65   4.38       0.93       0.09       2.25         0.60      3.66     0.13      0.16

Notes: All variables are averages for the period 1995-99, except value traded for which we use year 1995 data. A detailed description of the definition and
sources of the variables can be found in the Appendix. n.a. indicates not available.




                                                                            46
Table 3. Summary statistics and correlation matrix for entire sample by variable

Panel A          Summary statistics
Variable                                   Observations       Mean         Std. Dev.     Minimum    Maximum
Net interest margin                                1,430           3.61           2.03         0.72      12.60
Bank concentration                                 1,430           0.45           0.21         0.20       1.00
Bank concentration (Top-5)                         1,430           0.57           0.22         0.27       1.00
Bank concentration (All)                           1,430           0.41           0.20         0.18       0.97
Bank concentration (Deposits)                      1,330           0.46           0.24         0.12       1.00
Bank size                                          1,430           7.04           2.02         1.74      13.49
Liquidity                                          1,375          21.90          16.42         0.23      82.19
Bank equity                                        1,429           9.18           6.97        -0.77      78.76
Fee income                                         1,426           0.90           1.52        -6.39      13.80
Overhead                                           1,430           3.02           1.65         0.64      10.18
Market share                                       1,430           0.04           0.09         0.00       0.98
Bank risk                                          1,430           0.64           1.12         0.00      11.52
GDP per capita                                     1,430          22.50          14.25         0.15      47.99
Value traded                                       1,409           0.35           0.35         0.00       1.47
Inflation                                          1,402           4.37           9.05         0.41     238.51
GDP growth                                         1,430           3.02           1.59        -3.12      15.67
KKZ Institution index                              1,430           0.93           0.62        -1.18       1.72
Economic freedom                                   1,428           3.65           0.54         1.83       4.54
Property rights                                    1,428           4.38           0.81         1.00       5.00
Fraction entry denied                              1,273           0.09           0.18         0.00       1.00
Activity restrictions                              1,430           2.25           0.73         1.00       3.50
Reserve requirements                               1,419           0.60           0.49         0.00       1.00
Banking freedom                                    1,428           3.66           0.73         1.00       5.00
Foreign ownership                                  1,093           0.13           0.20         0.00       0.99
State ownership                                    1,258           0.16           0.22         0.00       0.80

Notes: All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99, except Bank concentration (Deposits) for which we use data for the year 1999. All bank-
specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins, overhead ratios and bank risk for which we use averages for the period 1995-99. A detailed
description of the definition and sources of the variables can be found in the Appendix.




                                                                              47
Panel B         Correlation matrix
                        Net interest Bank                                                  GDP per     Value
                         margin concentration Bank size Liquidity Bank equity Fee income    capita     traded     Inflation GDP growth
Net interest margin            1.000
Bank concentration          **0.083     1.000
Bank size                  **-0.379  **-0.226      1.000
Liquidity                 **-0.053    **0.143   **-0.175     1.000
Bank equity                 **0.247   **0.186   **-0.454   **0.083      1.000
Fee income                     0.012  **0.155   **-0.109   **0.153    **0.186        1.000
GDP per capita             **-0.452  **-0.234    **0.270  **-0.210   **-0.162       -0.021     1.000
Value traded               **-0.207  **-0.139    **0.146  **-0.191    **0.057        0.008   **0.418      1.000
Inflation                   **0.382   **0.180   **-0.202   **0.164    **0.112     **0.107   **-0.444   **-0.309       1.000
GDP growth                  **0.163  **-0.069     -0.050   **0.067      0.020    **-0.114   **-0.456     -0.012       0.046      1.000
KKZ Institution index     **-0.426   **-0.104    **0.220  **-0.232   **-0.082     **0.006    **0.804    **0.533    **-0.485   **-0.232
Economic freedom           **-0.339  **-0.267    **0.301  **-0.327   **-0.118    **-0.077    **0.775    **0.636    **-0.463   **-0.307
Property rights           **-0.376   **-0.237    **0.355  **-0.260   **-0.159    **-0.089    **0.754    **0.547    **-0.435   **-0.224
Fraction entry denied       **0.210   **0.189   **-0.144   **0.161      0.040        0.009  **-0.617   **-0.348     **0.309    **0.218
Entry fit test              **0.131   **0.341   **-0.116     0.045    **0.100        0.023  **-0.129    **0.170     **0.104    **0.109
Activity restrictions       **0.274  **-0.316    **0.146  **-0.181   **-0.090    **-0.212   **-0.183     -0.006     **0.160    **0.259
Reserve requirements          -0.035    0.042     -0.020   **0.141   **-0.052        0.022  **-0.173   **-0.401     **0.068     -0.038
Banking freedom            **-0.167   **0.154     -0.028  **-0.067      0.036     **0.079    **0.386    **0.445    **-0.232   **-0.233
Foreign ownership              0.046  **0.235 **-0.137*    **0.137      0.008        0.011  **-0.109   **-0.296     **0.066    **0.240
State ownership                0.009  **0.070 **-0.143*    **0.254      0.054     **0.070   **-0.395   **-0.213     **0.299    **0.237




                                                                    48
Panel B          Correlation matrix (cont.)
                              KKZ
                           Institution Economic Property     Fraction    Activity     Reserve    Banking    Foreign   State
                             index      freedom    rights entry denied restrictions requirements freedom ownership ownership
KKZ Institution index             1.000
Economic freedom              **0.803        1.000
Property rights               **0.825      **0.904     1.000
Fraction entry denied        **-0.629 **-0.630 **-0.560           1.000
Activity restrictions        **-0.380 **-0.066 **-0.071        **0.194        1.000
Reserve requirements         **-0.338 **-0.332 **-0.249        **0.154 **-0.205            1.000
Banking freedom               **0.589      **0.629  **0.500 **-0.377 **-0.305           **-0.329      1.000
Foreign ownership                -0.044     -0.043 **-0.069      -0.024 **-0.149         **0.198    **0.174     1.000
State ownership              **-0.409 **-0.613 **-0.454        **0.538 **-0.122          **0.322 **-0.556 **-0.215       1.000

Notes: All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99, except Bank concentration (Deposits) for which we use data for the year 1999. All bank-
specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins, overhead ratios and bank risk for which we use averages for the period 1995-99. A detailed
description of the definition and sources of the variables can be found in the Appendix. ** indicates significance at a 5% level.




                                                                              49
Table 4. Regression results controlling for bank regulatory environment


                                   (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
Bank concentration                  **2.782          **2.326          **2.584         **2.206
                                     (1.313)          (1.055)          (1.141)         (1.108)
Bank size                         ***-0.179       ***-0.182        ***-0.185        ***-0.180
                                     (0.024)          (0.024)          (0.023)         (0.024)
Liquidity                         ***-0.015       ***-0.018        ***-0.017        ***-0.019
                                     (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)
Bank equity                         **0.015        ***0.024         ***0.019         ***0.024
                                     (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.006)
Fee income                         **-0.065            -0.024           -0.034          -0.029
                                     (0.026)          (0.026)          (0.026)         (0.026)
Fraction of entry denied            **2.760                —                —               —
                                     (1.155)
Activity restrictions                     —        ***1.366                —                —
                                                     (0.378)
Reserve requirements                     —                —            *1.036               —
                                                                      (0.577)
Banking freedom                          —                —                —        ***-0.963
                                                                                      (0.294)

R2-within                             0.096            0.107            0.101           0.107
R2-between                            0.209            0.232            0.165           0.221
No. observations                       1217             1372             1362            1371
No. countries                            55               71               69              70

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99.
All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins for which we use averages for the period
1995-99. A detailed description of the definition and sources of the variables can be found in the Appendix. We use
GLS with random country effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance
levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.




                                                        50
Table 5. Regression results controlling for macro environment


                               (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)
Bank concentration              **2.314            ***2.889                1.834          **2.727           *2.066
                                 (1.080)              (1.122)            (1.164)           (1.150)         (1.140)
Bank size                     ***-0.179           ***-0.181           ***-0.177         ***-0.162       ***-0.155
                                 (0.024)              (0.024)            (0.023)           (0.024)         (0.024)
Liquidity                     ***-0.019           ***-0.018           ***-0.020         ***-0.020       ***-0.021
                                 (0.003)              (0.003)            (0.003)           (0.003)         (0.003)
Bank equity                    ***0.022            ***0.024            ***0.024          ***0.025        ***0.024
                                 (0.006)              (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.006)         (0.006)
Fee income                        -0.024               -0.031              0.001             0.006           0.010
                                 (0.026)              (0.026)            (0.027)           (0.027)         (0.027)
Inflation                      ***0.041                    —                  —                 —        ***0.090
                                 (0.009)                                                                   (0.023)
GDP growth                            —             *-0.202                   —                 —           -0.024
                                                    (0.104)                                                (0.108)
Total value traded                    —                  —            ***-2.847                 —         *-1.640
                                                                        (0.906)                            (0.889)
State ownership                       —                   —                  —            **2.559           -0.432
                                                                                           (1.108)         (1.219)

R2-within                          0.106               0.107                0.110            0.113          0.114
R2-between                         0.293               0.165                0.237            0.196          0.461
No. observations                    1344                1372                 1352             1206           1168
No. countries                         70                  71                   66               63             58

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99,
except total value traded for which we use 1995 data. All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data, except net
interest margins for which we use averages for the period 1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of
the variables, see the Appendix. Results estimated using GLS with random country effects. A constant term was
included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.




                                                        51
Table 6. Regression results controlling for macro and regulatory environment


                                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
Bank concentration                      1.923            *1.971            *2.046            *1.840
                                      (1.226)           (1.029)           (1.088)           (1.057)
Bank size                          ***-0.178         ***-0.180         ***-0.183         ***-0.178
                                      (0.024)           (0.024)           (0.024)           (0.024)
Liquidity                          ***-0.016         ***-0.019         ***-0.018         ***-0.020
                                      (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)
Bank equity                           *0.013          ***0.022          ***0.017          ***0.022
                                      (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.006)
Fee income                           *-0.058             -0.020            -0.030            -0.024
                                      (0.006)           (0.026)           (0.026)           (0.026)
Inflation                           ***0.039          ***0.036          ***0.040          ***0.038
                                      (0.009)           (0.009)           (0.009)           (0.009)
Fraction of entry denied            ***2.718                 —                 —                 —
                                      (1.052)
Activity restrictions                      —          ***1.008                 —                 —
                                                        (0.373)
Reserve requirements                                                        0.737                —
                                                                          (0.542)
Banking freedom                             —                —                 —         ***-0.774
                                                                                           (0.279)

R2-within                                 0.095           0.106             0.099             0.106
R2-between                                0.382           0.349             0.330             0.374
No. observations                           1189            1344              1334              1343
No. countries                                54              70                68                69

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99.
All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins for which we use averages for the period
1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We use GLS with random
country effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5,
and 1 percent respectively.




                                                        52
Table 7. Regression results controlling for institutional environment


                                  (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
Bank concentration                    0.939             1.571             0.929             1.214
                                    (1.027)           (0.970)           (1.045)           (1.057)
Bank size                        ***-0.174         ***-0.172         ***-0.170         ***-0.170
                                    (0.024)           (0.024)           (0.024)           (0.024)
Liquidity                        ***-0.019         ***-0.020         ***-0.020         ***-0.020
                                    (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)
Bank equity                       ***0.022          ***0.022          ***0.023          ***0.022
                                    (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.006)
Fee income                           -0.023            -0.024            -0.027            -0.027
                                    (0.026)           (0.026)           (0.026)           (0.026)
Inflation                         ***0.031          ***0.023          ***0.025          ***0.028
                                    (0.008)           (0.009)           (0.009)           (0.009)
GDP per capita                   ***-0.088                 —                 —                 —
                                    (0.018)
KKZ Institution index                    —         ***-1.797                  —                 —
                                                     (0.301)
Economic freedom                          —               —          ***-2.046                  —
                                                                       (0.415)
Property rights                           —                 —               —          ***-1.132
                                                                                         (0.249)

R2-within                               0.106             0.106             0.107             0.107
R2-between                              0.475             0.540             0.503             0.475
No. observations                         1344              1344              1343              1343
No. countries                              70                70                69                69

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99.
All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins for which we use averages for the period
1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We use GLS with random
country effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5,
and 1 percent respectively.




                                                          53
Table 8. Regression results controlling for macro, regulatory, and institutional environment


                                   (1)                  (2)                   (3)
Bank concentration                       1.159                1.152                1.228
                                       (1.206)              (1.031)              (1.058)
Bank size                           ***-0.171            ***-0.171            ***-0.170
                                       (0.024)              (0.024)              (0.024)
Liquidity                           ***-0.017            ***-0.020            ***-0.020
                                       (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.003)
Bank equity                          ***0.013             ***0.022             ***0.022
                                       (0.006)              (0.006)              (0.006)
Fee income                           **-0.058                -0.025               -0.027
                                       (0.026)              (0.026)              (0.026)
Inflation                            ***0.028             ***0.027             ***0.028
                                       (0.009)              (0.009)              (0.009)
Property rights                     ***-1.114            ***-1.048            ***-1.037
                                       (0.296)              (0.253)              (0.286)
Fraction of entry denied                 1.503                   —                    —
                                       (1.069)
Activity restrictions                       —                   0.449                   —
                                                              (0.389)
Banking freedom                             —                      —                 -0.213
                                                                                    (0.316)

R2-within                                0.095                 0.107                 0.107
R2-between                               0.504                 0.483                 0.478
No. observations                          1189                  1343                  1343
No. countries                               54                    69                    69

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99.
All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins for which we use averages for the period
1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We use GLS with random
country effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5,
and 1 percent respectively.




                                                        54
Table 9. Regression results using alternative bank concentration measures and controlling for regulations


                                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
Bank concentration (Top-5)                  1.386        1.423        1.482              —            —            —            —            —            —
                                          (1.238)      (1.078)      (1.106)
Bank concentration (All)                       —            —            —           0.875       0.827        0.891             —            —            —
                                                                                   (1.257)     (1.078)      (1.107)
Bank concentration (Deposits)                 —             —            —              —           —            —          0.889        0.998        1.006
                                                                                                                          (1.189)      (1.161)      (1.200)
Bank size                              ***-0.171    ***-0.171    ***-0.170    ***-0.171      ***-0.171    ***-0.170    ***-0.180    ***-0.183    ***-0.183
                                          (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)        (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)
Liquidity                              ***-0.017    ***-0.020    ***-0.020    ***-0.017      ***-0.020    ***-0.020    ***-0.018    ***-0.019    ***-0.019
                                          (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Bank equity                              **0.013     ***0.022     ***0.022      **0.013       ***0.022     ***0.022         0.010    ***0.022     ***0.022
                                          (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)
Fee income                              **-0.058        -0.025       -0.027    **-0.058          -0.025       -0.027       -0.027       -0.022       -0.024
                                          (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)        (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.029)      (0.029)      (0.029)
Inflation                               ***0.028     ***0.027     ***0.028     ***0.028       ***0.027     ***0.028     ***0.029     ***0.026     ***0.028
                                          (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)        (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.010)
Property rights                        ***-1.123    ***-1.055    ***-1.049    ***-1.131      ***-1.059    ***-1.053    ***-1.123    ***-1.049    ***-1.034
                                          (0.294)      (0.251)      (0.283)      (0.296)        (0.254)      (0.287)      (0.311)      (0.298)      (0.347)
Fraction of entry denied                    1.455           —            —         1.509             —            —         1.673           —            —
                                          (1.071)                                (1.072)                                  (1.126)
Activity restrictions                          —         0.450           —            —          0.456             —           —        0.510             —
                                                       (0.387)                                 (0.389)                                (0.448)
Banking freedom                               —             —        -0.207              —          —        -0.206             —          —        -0.255
                                                                    (0.315)                                 (0.317)                                (0.377)
R2-within                                  0.095         0.107        0.107         0.095        0.107        0.107        0.099        0.114        0.114
R2-between                                 0.508         0.487        0.482         0.501        0.479        0.473        0.508        0.461        0.454
No. observations                           1189           1343         1343          1189         1343         1343         1159         1247         1247
No. countries                                 54            69           69            54           69           69           50           59           59

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99, except Bank concentration (Deposits) for
which we use data for the year 1999. All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margins for which we use averages for the period 1995-
99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We use GLS with random country effects. A constant term was included, but
is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.




                                                                              55
Table 10. Regression results controlling for high concentration, institutions and regulatory
restrictions

                                                                   High concentration
                                                         (1)              (2)                (3)
Bank concentration                                           1.409            1.233              1.154
                                                           (1.537)          (1.412)            (1.454)
High bank concentration                                      0.183           -0.021             -0.242
                                                           (2.450)          (2.088)            (2.159)
Bank size                                               ***-0.171        ***-0.171          ***-0.170
                                                           (0.024)          (0.024)            (0.024)
Liquidity                                               ***-0.017        ***-0.020          ***-0.020
                                                           (0.003)          (0.003)            (0.003)
Bank equity                                               **0.013         ***0.022           ***0.022
                                                           (0.006)          (0.006)            (0.006)
Fee income                                               **-0.058            -0.025             -0.027
                                                           (0.026)          (0.026)            (0.026)
Inflation                                                ***0.028         ***0.025           ***0.028
                                                           (0.010)          (0.009)            (0.009)
Property rights                                         ***-1.084        ***-1.046          ***-1.055
                                                           (0.351)          (0.290)            (0.311)
Property rights * high bank concentration                   -0.115           -0.010              0.079
                                                           (0.634)          (0.518)            (0.539)
Fraction of entry denied                                     1.550               —                  —
                                                           (1.121)
Activity restrictions                                           —             0.451                  —
                                                                            (0.397)
Banking freedom                                                 —                —              -0.224
                                                                                               (0.329)

R2-within                                                      0.095           0.107               0.107
R2-between                                                     0.505           0.483               0.493
No. observations                                                1189            1343                1343
No. countries                                                     54              69                  69

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99.
All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data, except net interest margin for which we use averages for the period
1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. High bank concentration
is a dummy variable that takes value of one if the country has a concentration ratio of more than 80 percent, and zero
otherwise. We use GLS with random country effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, ***
indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.




                                                         56
Table 11. Regression results using an alternative efficiency measure and controlling for
institutions and regulatory restrictions

                                                                     Overhead costs
                                                     (1)                  (2)                     (3)
 Bank concentration                                        0.056               -0.081                  -0.057
                                                         (0.820)              (0.735)                 (0.737)
 Bank size                                            ***-0.133            ***-0.132               ***-0.132
                                                         (0.021)              (0.021)                 (0.021)
 Liquidity                                                 0.002               -0.000                  -0.000
                                                         (0.003)              (0.002)                 (0.002)
 Bank equity                                              -0.002                0.006                   0.006
                                                         (0.006)              (0.005)                 (0.005)
 Fee income                                            ***0.362             ***0.373                ***0.372
                                                         (0.023)              (0.022)                 (0.022)
 Inflation                                                *0.012               *0.012                  *0.013
                                                         (0.007)              (0.007)                 (0.007)
 Property rights                                      ***-0.564            ***-0.587               ***-0.584
                                                         (0.205)              (0.182)                 (0.200)
 Fraction of entry denied                                  0.008                   —                       —
                                                         (0.739)
 Activity restrictions                                        —                  0.142                      —
                                                                               (0.276)
 Banking freedom                                               —                    —                    -0.065
                                                                                                        (0.220)

 R2-within                                                   0.210               0.212                   0.212
 R2-between                                                  0.525               0.517                   0.515
 No. observations                                             1189                1343                    1343
 No. countries                                                  54                  69                      69

Notes: Dependent variable is overhead costs over total average assets, average for the period 1995-99. All country-
level variables are averages for the period 1995-99. All bank-specific independent variables are year 1995 data. For
more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We use GLS with random country
effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and
1 percent respectively.




                                                        57
Table 12. Regression results controlling for bank risk, institutions and regulatory restrictions


                                         (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
Bank concentration                      **2.814         1.925        *1.963        *1.827         0.906         1.193        1.157         1.133         1.207
                                         (1.122)      (1.239)       (1.037)       (1.065)       (1.052)       (1.065)      (1.219)       (1.040)       (1.066)
Bank size                             ***-0.182    ***-0.180     ***-0.180     ***-0.178     ***-0.171     ***-0.171    ***-0.174     ***-0.171     ***-0.171
                                         (0.024)      (0.024)       (0.024)       (0.024)       (0.024)       (0.024)      (0.024)       (0.024)       (0.024)
Liquidity                             ***-0.018    ***-0.016     ***-0.019     ***-0.020     ***-0.020     ***-0.020    ***-0.017     ***-0.020     ***-0.020
                                         (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
Bank equity                            ***0.024      **0.013      ***0.022      ***0.022      ***0.023      ***0.023      **0.013      ***0.023      ***0.023
                                         (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
Fee income                                -0.029    **-0.053         -0.019        -0.023        -0.025        -0.025    **-0.053         -0.024        -0.025
                                         (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)
Bank risk                                  0.001       -0.075        -0.020        -0.023        -0.029        -0.028       -0.075        -0.027        -0.028
                                         (0.041)      (0.051)       (0.042)       (0.042)       (0.041)       (0.042)      (0.051)       (0.042)       (0.042)
Inflation                                     —     ***0.040      ***0.036      ***0.038      ***0.025      ***0.029     ***0.029      ***0.027      ***0.029
                                                      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.009)       (0.009)
Fraction of entry denied                     —      ***2.831             —             —             —             —         1.616            —             —
                                                      (1.065)                                                              (1.083)
Activity restrictions                        —             —      ***1.006             —            —             —             —          0.442           —
                                                                    (0.376)                                                              (0.392)
Banking freedom                              —             —             —     ***-0.778            —             —             —             —     ***-0.213
                                                                                 (0.281)                                                              (0.318)
Economic freedom                             —             —             —            —      ***-2.059            —             —             —            —
                                                                                               (0.418)
Property rights                              —             —             —             —            —      ***-1.139    ***-1.115     ***-1.057     ***-1.045
                                                                                                             (0.251)      (0.299)       (0.255)       (0.288)

R2-within                                 0.107         0.097         0.106         0.107        0.107         0.107         0.107         0.107        0.107
R2-between                                0.126         0.380         0.347         0.372        0.502         0.474         0.503         0.482        0.477
No. observations                          1372           1189          1344          1343         1343          1343          1189          1343         1343
No. countries                                71            54            70            69           69            69            54            69           69

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99. All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data,
except net interest margin for which we use averages for the period 1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We
use GLS with random country effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent
respectively.




                                                                               58
Table 13. Regression results using country-level averages and controlling for institutions and regulatory restrictions


                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)
Bank concentration                                *2.417      **2.474         *2.192         1.318         1.538          1.442         1.499         1.536
                                                 (1.340)       (1.161)       (1.164)       (1.081)       (1.065)        (1.221)       (1.044)       (1.068)
Inflation                                      ***0.038      ***0.033      ***0.036      ***0.024      ***0.027       ***0.027      ***0.026      ***0.027
                                                 (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.008)
Fraction of entry denied                           1.805            —             —             —             —           0.523            —             —
                                                 (1.466)                                                                (1.444)
Activity restrictions                                 —       **0.989             —             —              —             —          0.315            —
                                                               (0.410)                                                                (0.364)
Banking freedom                                       —             —     ***-0.810             —              —             —             —         -0.189
                                                                            (0.267)                                                                 (0.281)
Economic freedom                                      —             —            —       ***-2.028             —             —             —             —
                                                                                           (0.467)
Property rights                                       —             —             —             —      ***-1.164     ***-1.181     ***-1.102     ***-1.080
                                                                                                         (0.285)       (0.337)       (0.288)       (0.298)

R2                                                 0.320         0.321         0.346         0.468         0.457         0.469          0.462         0.460
No. observations (countries)                          55            71            70            70            70            55             70            70

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin averaged across banks in each country. All country variables are averages for the period 1995-99. Net interest
margins are country-averages for the period 1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We report OLS estimates
with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent
respectively.




                                                                                 59
Table 14. Regression results controlling for bank market share, institutions and regulatory restrictions


                                         (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
Bank concentration                        *2.004        1.085         1.172         1.225         0.441         0.716        0.576         0.643         0.740
                                         (1.057)      (1.069)       (0.944)       (0.989)       (0.979)       (0.988)      (1.077)       (0.959)       (0.996)
Market share                           ***1.583     ***1.677      ***1.621       **1.336       **1.171       **1.164      **1.347       **1.195       **1.142
                                         (0.577)      (0.644)       (0.570)       (0.576)       (0.573)       (0.575)      (0.645)       (0.574)       (0.575)
Bank size                             ***-0.220    ***-0.214     ***-0.219     ***-0.210     ***-0.198     ***-0.197    ***-0.199     ***-0.199     ***-0.197
                                         (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.027)       (0.027)       (0.027)       (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.027)       (0.027)
Liquidity                             ***-0.018    ***-0.015     ***-0.019     ***-0.019     ***-0.020     ***-0.020    ***-0.016     ***-0.019     ***-0.020
                                         (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)
Bank equity                            ***0.023       *0.012      ***0.021      ***0.022      ***0.023      ***0.022     ***0.013      ***0.022      ***0.022
                                         (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
Fee income                                -0.026    **-0.054         -0.017        -0.022        -0.026        -0.025    **-0.055         -0.023        -0.025
                                         (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)
Inflation                                     —     ***0.040      ***0.036      ***0.038      ***0.025      ***0.029     ***0.029      ***0.028      ***0.029
                                                      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)
Fraction of entry denied                     —      ***2.380             —             —             —             —         1.288            —             —
                                                      (0.891)                                                              (0.932)
Activity restrictions                        —             —      ***0.948             —            —             —             —          0.458           —
                                                                    (0.329)                                                              (0.349)
Banking freedom                              —             —             —     ***-0.712            —             —             —             —         -0.195
                                                                                 (0.254)                                                               (0.263)
Economic freedom                             —             —             —            —      ***-1.931            —             —             —             —
                                                                                               (0.382)
Property rights                              —             —             —             —            —      ***-1.065    ***-1.046     ***-0.978     ***-0.981
                                                                                                             (0.229)      (0.260)       (0.231)       (0.263)

R2-within                                 0.106         0.095         0.105         0.106        0.107         0.107         0.096         0.107        0.107
R2-between                                0.220         0.430         0.414         0.415        0.528         0.501         0.527         0.510        0.503
No. observations                          1372           1189          1344          1343         1343          1343          1189          1343         1343
No. countries                                71            54            70            69           69            69            54            69           69

Notes: Dependent variable is net interest margin. All country-level variables are averages for the period 1995-99. All bank-specific variables are year 1995 data,
except net interest margin for which we use averages for the period 1995-99. For more details on the definition and source of the variables, see the Appendix. We
use GLS with random country effects. A constant term was included, but is not reported. *, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent
respectively.




                                                                               60
Appendix. Description of Variables and Data Sources


Variable name                     Description and source


Bank market structure:

 Number of Banks1                 Number of commercial banks in existence as of end-1999 (Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision question 1.2).

 Bank concentration 2             A measure of the degree of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest
                                  commercial banks in each country, average over the period 1995-99.

 Bank concentration (Top-5) 2     A measure of the degree of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the five largest
                                  commercial banks in each country, average over the period 1995-99.

 Bank concentration (All) 2       A measure of the degree of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest
                                  commercial banks, savings banks, cooperative banks and/or non-bank credit institutions in each country, average over the
                                  period 1995-99.

 Bank concentration (Deposits) 1 A measure of the degree of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of deposits held by the five largest
                                 commercial banks in each country as of end-1999.

Bank-specific variables:

 Net interest margin2             Interest income minus interest expense divided by interest-bearing assets, average over the period 1995-99.

 Bank size2                       Logarithm of total individual bank assets in millions of U.S. dollars, year 1995.

 Bank Equity2                     Bank equity divided by total assets, year 1995.

 Liquidity2                       Liquid bank assets divided by total bank assets, year 1995.

 Overhead2                        Overhead costs divided by total assets, year 1995.

 Fee income2                      Other operating income divided by total assets, year 1995.




                                                                                61
Appendix (cont.)

Variable name                Description and source



 Bank risk2                  Standard deviation of the return on average assets over the period 1995-99.

 Market share2               Individual bank assets over total commercial bank assets as reported by Bankscope, year 1995.

Regulatory restrictions:

 Fraction of Entry Denied1   A measure of the number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the number of applications received from domestic and
                             foreign entities (ratio of Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision questions 1.9.1 and 1.10.1 to 1.9 and 1.10).

 Activity Restrictions1      A measure of a bank's ability to engage in the businesses of securities underwriting, insurance, and real estate, and of the
                             regulatory restrictiveness of banks to own shares in non-financial firms (sum of Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision
                             questions 4.1 through 4.4).

 Banking freedom3            An indicator of banking freedom (ranging from 1 to 5), averaged over 1995-99 period. Greater values signify more freedom.
                             Calculated as 6 minus the banking freedom index of the Heritage Foundation.

 Reserve requirements1       Takes value of one if banks are required to hold either liquidity reserves or any reserves whatsoever on deposits at the Central
                             Bank? (Based on question 7.3 of Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision).

Ownership:

 State ownership1            A measure of the degree of government ownership of banks, measured as the fraction of the banking system's assets that is in
                             banks that are 50% or more government owned (Question 3.7 in the Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision).

 Foreign ownership1          A measure of the degree of foreign ownership of banks, measured as the fraction of the banking system's assets that is in banks
                             that are 50% or more foreign owned (Question 3.8 in the Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision).

Institutional environment:
 Economic freedom3           An indicator of economic freedom (ranging from 1 to 5), averaged over 1995-99 period. Greater values signify more freedom.
                             Calculated as 6 minus the economic freedom index of the Heritage Foundation.




                                                                           62
Appendix (cont.)

Variable name                   Description and source


    Property rights3            An indicator of the protection of private property rights (ranging from 1 to 5), averaged over 1995-99 period. Greater values
                                signify better protection of property rights). Calculated as 6 minus the property freedom index of the Heritage Foundation.

    KKZ Institution index       An indicator of the quality of institutional development in the country. Calculated as the average of six indicators: voice and
                                accountability, political stability, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption. Average
                                for the period 1998. Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, Zoido-Lobaton (2001).

    GDP per capita4             GDP per capita expressed in thousands of 1995 U.S. dollars, averaged over the period 1995-99.

Other variables:

    Total traded value4         A measure of stock market development. Calculated as total value of stocks traded divided by GDP for the period 1995, in %.

    Inflation4                  Rate of inflation, calculated as log difference of CPI (1995=100) over 1995-99 period.

    GDP growth4                 Growth in GDP expressed in 1995 U.S. dollars, averaged over the 1995-99 period.


1
  Source: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001b). Data available at: www.worldbank.org/research/projects/bank_regulation.htm
2
  Source: Fitch IBCA's Bankscope Database
3
  Source: Economic Freedom Index of the Heritage Foundation
4
  Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank




                                                                              63
