NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UTILITY EVALUATION OF RISK IN
RETIREMENT SAVING ACCOUNTS
James Poterba
Joshua Rauh
Steven Venti
David Wise
Working Paper 9892
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9892
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

We are grateful to the National Institute on Aging (grants P30 AG12810 and P01 AG05842) and the National
Science Foundation (Poterba) for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by James Poterba, Joshua, Rauh, Steven Venti, and David Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Utility Evaluation of Risk in Retirement Saving Accounts
James Poterba, Joshua Rauh, Steven Venti, David Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 9892
August 2003
JEL No. I0, H0
ABSTRACT
The shift from defined benefit to defined contribution plans in the United States has drawn new
attention to the effect of participants' asset allocation decisions on their financial resources for
retirement. This paper develops a stochastic simulation algorithm to evaluate the effect of holding
a broadly diversified portfolio of common stocks, or a portfolio of index bonds, on the distribution
of 401(k) account balances at retirement. We compare the alternative distributions of retirement
wealth both by showing the empirical distribution of potential wealth values, and by computing the
expected utility of these outcomes under standard assumptions about the structure of household
preferences. Our analysis highlights the critical role of other sources of wealth, such as Social
Security, defined benefit pension annuities, and saving outside retirement plans in determining the
expected utility cost of holding equities in the retirement account. Our findings also demonstrate the
importance of the equity premium in affecting investors' utility from different retirement asset
allocations. Viewed from the beginning of a working career, and given the historical pattern of
returns on stocks and bonds, a household that does not have extremely high risk aversion would
achieve a higher expected utility by holding a portfolio of stocks rather than bonds.
James Poterba
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-350
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
poterba@mit.edu

Joshua Rauh
Department of Economics
MIT, E52
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
rauh@mit.edu

Steven Venti
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
steven.f.venti@dartmouth.edu

David Wise
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard University
dwise@nber.org

1

The last two decades have witnessed a remarkable shift in the structure of retirement saving in
the United States. In 1980, most workers with pension plans participated in defined benefit plans,
with benefits determined by the worker’s earnings history, years of service, and age at the time of
retirement. The investment allocation of assets in defined benefit pension accounts was determined by
professional money managers or corporate executives, and the worker controlled his retirement benefit
only through the choice of retirement age and job change decisions.
Over the 1980s and 1990s, the U.S. pension system shifted toward a defined contribution
structure, with 401(k) plans growing particularly rapidly. In the late 1990s, about 85 percent of
pension plan contributions were directed to defined contribution personal retirement accounts. This
shift transferred responsibility for investment decisions, contribution rates, and ultimately the drawdown of retirement assets from firms to workers. It replaced the link between retirement income, job
change, and final earnings, which were important sources of worker risk, with a link between
retirement account balances and the uncertain return on invested assets. The risk that workers bear as
a result of fluctuations in the value of assets in retirement accounts has attracted considerable attention
in the popular press, often with the claim that workers are now facing riskier retirement prospects than
in the past.
This paper presents new evidence on the risk of different investment strategies when evaluated
in terms of retirement wealth accumulation. We use two different approaches to describe the risk of
investing 401(k) assets in a broadly-diversified portfolio of common stocks, compared to a portfolio of
index bonds. The first involves computing the empirical distribution of potential wealth values at
retirement resulting from different investment strategies, and then making explicit comparisons of the
wealth distributions. If the average return on one asset class, such as corporate stock, is substantially
greater than the average return on another asset class, such as bonds, this approach shows that over
long horizons, the higher return asset class will outperform the lower-return asset class with very high
probability. One criticism of this approach is that it does not adequately consider the potential cost to

2
a retiree of the low levels of wealth at retirement that might emerge from the riskier, but higher
expected return, strategy.
Our second evaluation approach is designed to address this issue. We assume that the value
that the retiree assigns to the consumption stream after retirement can be parameterized using a simple
utility function, in which utility is a function of the stock of wealth at retirement. We then use
simulation methods to compute the distribution of wealth at retirement that might emerge under
different portfolio investment strategies, and to evaluate the expected utility of this distribution.
Comparing the expected utility, which recognizes the potential cost of a small probability of very
unfavorable outcomes, provides an alternative to comparing the distributions as a method for
evaluating different investment strategies.
We compare the distribution of retirement wealth and the expected utility of retirement wealth
for three different investment strategies. The first involves holding only index bonds, the second holds
only a portfolio of common stocks similar to the S&P500, and the third invests in a 50/50 mix of index
bonds and common stocks. We conduct our analysis at the household level, recognizing that
retirement plan investment decisions have implications for all household members. We also treat the
evaluation of risk as a collective household decision. To make the retirement wealth calculations as
realistic as possible, our simulations are run through the lifetime profiles of Social Security earnings
records for each of 759 Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) households. This allows for realistic
variation in age-specific labor income flows. We also calculate the level of non-401(k) wealth
holdings for these HRS households. We find that the expected utility of retirement wealth is very
sensitive to the value of wealth held outside the defined contribution plan, including both liquid wealth
and annuitized wealth such as prospective Social Security benefits or defined benefit plan payouts.
The paper is divided into seven sections. Section one describes our basic framework for
evaluating the risks associated with the accumulation of retirement saving. The second section
discusses our use of earnings histories for a subset of HRS households. These earnings histories are
the basis for contribution flows into our hypothetical 401(k) account. Section three describes our

3
decomposition of the wealth holdings of HRS households near retirement age. The wealth data
provide the benchmark against which we evaluate the level of 401(k) assets. The fourth section
describes our assumptions about the returns to both stocks and index bonds that are available for the
retirement saver, and it outlines our simulation algorithm for generating the distribution of plan assets
at retirement. Section five presents our results on the distribution of retirement plan balances, and
shows the stock of retirement wealth under different assumptions about portfolio allocation. The sixth
section reports our expected utility calculations, focusing on different asset allocation strategies during
the accumulation phase. A brief conclusion summarizes our findings and suggests several directions
for future work, particularly the comparison between the risks of defined contribution and defined
benefit retirement plans.
1. A Framework for Modeling Retirement Wealth Accumulation in Self-Directed Retirement Plans
To analyze the risk associated with the accumulation of retirement assets in defined
contribution pension plans, we need to model the path of plan contributions over an individual’s
working life, and to combine these contributions with information on the potential returns to holding
401(k) assets in different investment vehicles. We need to decide whether the unit of observation is
the individual or the household and to specify the age at which contributions begin and end. For the
initial analysis reported in this paper, we focus our attention on married couples. We do this because
we suspect that this group is more homogeneous than non-married individuals, some of whom are
never-married and some of whom have lost a spouse. Married couples represent about seventy percent
of individuals reaching retirement age. We assume that a fixed fraction of the household’s earnings
are contributed to a defined contribution plan. We do not address whether the contributions are due to
one or both members of the couple participating in a defined contribution plan. We follow Poterba,
Venti, and Wise (1998), who report that the average 401(k) contribution represents roughly nine
percent of contributing household earnings, including both employer and the employee contributions.
We assume that the couple begins to participate in a 401(k) plan when the husband is 28, and
that they contribute in every year in which the household has social security earnings until the husband

4
is 63. Households do not make contributions when they are unemployed or when both members of the
couple are retired or otherwise not in the labor force. When the husband is age 63, we assume that
both members of the household retire if they have not already, and that contributions cease.
We denote a couple’s 401(k) contribution at age a by Ci(a), where we index each couple by i.
A household’s contribution Ci(a) = .09*Ei(a), where Ei(a) denotes social security covered earnings at
age a. We express this contribution in terms of year 2000 dollars. To find the 401(k) balance for the
couple at age 63 (a = 63), we need to cumulate contributions over the course of the working life, with
appropriate allowance for the returns on 401(k) assets at each age. Let Ri(a) denote the return earned
on 401(k) assets that were held at the beginning of the year when the husband in couple i attained age
a . The value of the couple’s 401(k) assets when the husband is 63 is then given by:
35  t

Wi (63) = ∑ ∏ [1 + Ri (63 − j )]C i (63 − t )
t =0  j =0


(1)

We in turn assume that Ri(a) is determined by the returns on stocks and index bonds. The couple may
hold a portfolio of all stocks, in which case Ri(a) = Rstock(a), all index bonds, in which case Ri(a) =
Rbond(a), or a 50-50 mix of the two asset classes, in which case Ri(a) = .5*Rstock(a) + .5*Rbond(a). We
discuss below our calibration of the distribution of risky returns associated with holding stocks.
We report the distribution of Wi(63), averaged over the 759 households in our sample, for the
three different investment strategies. These three distributions provide some evidence on how each
investment strategy might affect the retirement resources of households that pursued them. The
difficulty with this approach, however, is that it does not capture the cost of low payouts in the event
of unfavorable returns. To allow for differential valuation of wealth in different states of nature, we
evaluate the wealth in the 401(k) account using a utility-of-terminal wealth approach. We assume that
the household’s preferences over wealth-at-retirement (which we now write as W, dropping the
household subscript for ease of notation) are described by a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA)
utility function

5
W 1−α
U (W ) =
1−α

(2)

where α is the household’s coefficient of relative risk aversion. The utility of household wealth at
retirement is likely to depend on both 401(k) and non-401(k) wealth, and thus we need to modify (2)
to allow for other wealth:

U (W401( k ) ,Wnon − 401( k )

(3)

(W
)=

+ Wnon − 401( k ) )

1−α

401( k )

1−α

The difference in the utility associated with different levels of 401(k) wealth is likely to be very
sensitive to the household’s other wealth holdings, so in the empirical analysis that follows, we
summarize the balance sheets of retirement-age households in the Health and Retirement Survey.
To determine the expected utility associated with various investment strategies, we generate
hypothetical 35-year 401(k) return histories associated with the all index bonds, 50/50 bonds/stocks,
and all stock investment strategies for each household in our sample. Each return history, denoted by
h, generates an associated 401(k) wealth at age 63, W401( k ),h (63) , and a corresponding utility level,

U h , where

(4)

Uh

(W
=

401( k ), h

+ Wnon − 401( k )

1−α

)

1−α

We evaluate the expected utility of each portfolio strategy by the probability-weighted average of the
utility outcomes associated with that strategy, and denote these expected utility values EUSP500,
EUBonds, and EU50-50, respectively. These utility levels can be compared directly for a given degree of
risk tolerance. They can also be translated into certainty equivalent wealth levels (Z) by asking what
certain wealth level would provide a utility level equal to the expected utility of the retirement wealth
distribution. The certainty equivalent of an all-equity portfolio, for example, is given by:
1

(5)

Z SP 500 = [ EU SP 500 (1 − α ) ]1−α − Wnon − 401( k )

6

We present certainty equivalent calculations of this form to summarize our findings. Note that when
the household has non-401(k) wealth, the certainty equivalent of the 401(k) wealth is the amount of
401(k) wealth that is needed, in addition to the non-401(k) wealth, to achieve a given utility level. We
treat non-401(k) wealth as nonstochastic throughout our analysis.
2. Earnings Profiles for Current Retirees
Calibrating the expected utility of various 401(k) portfolio strategies requires information on
both the earnings histories and the non-401(k) wealth held by these households. We obtained these
data from households in the 2000 wave of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is a
longitudinal study of the economic and health status of older Americans. In the first wave of the study
(1992), in-home interviews were conducted for respondents in the 1931-1941 birth cohorts and their
spouses. Follow-up surveys were administered by telephone every two years. The fifth wave of the
survey was completed in 2000, and the core final data for this wave was released in September 2002.
This wave provides the most recent and complete source of information on the balance sheet of U.S.
households around retirement age.
Table 1 shows the relationship between the number of households in various waves of the
HRS, and their corresponding household counts for the U.S. population. There were 7580 households
in the first wave of the HRS, but various factors, most importantly death or voluntary termination of
survey participation, reduced the sample size in subsequent waves. By the 2000 wave, respondents
from only 6074 of the original households remained. After accounting for household splits due to
divorce and excluding five observations with missing birth years, we had a sample of 6195 households
in 2000. The sampling probabilities for these households suggest that they represent 16.7 million U.S.
households. Among these households, 4.3 million had a household head, which we define as the
husband in the case of married couples, with less than a high school education, 8.6 million had a
household head with maximum education attainment of high school or some college, and 3.8 million
had a household head with a college or postgraduate education. Because lifecycle earnings profiles

7
differ for households with different levels of education, we present separate earnings histories for these
three groups.
We construct an earnings profile for each household using data from the Social Security
administrative records file. These data are available for 4233 of the 6195 households in the 2000 wave
of the HRS and contain Social Security earnings from 1951-1991. Appendix Table A-1 provides a
detailed breakdown of the number of sample households in the HRS that satisfy our further data
requirements and are included in our sample. Throughout our analysis, we deflate historical nominal
wages by the CPI to construct real wages at each age. For years after 1991 in which a member of the
household was still working, we multiply reported HRS wage and salary earnings by a scaling factor
equal to the ratio of Social Security administrative earnings in 1991 to reported HRS earnings in the
same year. We thereby construct a proxy for Social Security earnings for 1993, 1995, 1997, and 1999.
We assume that in even-numbered years for which we do not have a survey response, earnings
remained at the same level as in the previous year.
We want to base our simulations on households who have completed their working lives, and
potentially to consider their wealth at retirement relative to their final earnings. We therefore
construct a measure of final earnings which we view as representative of household labor earnings
near retirement. This measure is defined as household earnings in the year before the household’s
reported retirement year. In dual-earner households, this is the year in which the first retirement takes
place. Retirement of either the primary or the secondary earner can therefore trigger the final earnings
calculation.
A number of the HRS households reported that all members of the household were still
working in 2000, so that we could not define final earnings for them. Extrapolating the HRS data to
the nation as a whole using HRS weights, out of 16.7 million households in the survey, 9.0 million had
at least one member of the household working, and 2.6 million had two earners. Another group, 0.9
million households, contained someone who reported both working and being retired. These
individuals are presumably working part-time or have partially re-entered the labor force. Out of 2.1

8
million couples for whom we could compute final earnings, and in which the husband was aged 63-67,
1.3 million had at least one person working, 0.5 million had both working, and 0.2 million had at least
one person claiming to be both retired and working.
Table 2 presents summary information on the median earnings profiles for households in our
sample, including years with no earnings because of unemployment or retirement. The table also
reports the number of HRS households that are used to estimate the earnings profiles. We present
tabulations for four different sets of households in the HRS universe. The first, in the first column, is
the earnings profile for all HRS households with social security earnings histories, regardless of their
household structure and whether they had left the labor force by 2000. The second column shows the
earnings profile for households with at least one labor force leaver, and for which it is therefore
possible to compute final earnings — this represents 3749 of the 4233 households with earnings
profiles. The third column further tightens the selection criterion, by limiting the analysis to married
couple households at the time of the 2000 HRS survey. This reduces the sample size to 2275
households. Finally, in the last column we restrict the sample to married couples in which the husband
was between 63 and 67 in 2000. This limits the sample to only 759 households. This is a relatively
homogenous sample that we use for much of our subsequent analysis. In further work we plan to
generalize our procedures to all households.
The entries in the columns of Table 2 track median earnings for each of the education groups
and subsamples that we consider. Not surprisingly, there are very substantial differences in the level,
and the shape, of the earnings profile across subgroups. The peak earning level for couples in our
sample is up to six percent higher than the peak earning level for all couples with final earnings and up
to two times higher than that of all households with earnings histories (including singles). The ratio of
peak median earnings to salary early in life is highest for the group with the highest education levels.
Median earnings of couples in which the better-educated spouse has at least a college degree are up to
a third higher around age 60 than those in couples in which neither has a college degree. The better

9
educated households have lower earnings than the less-educated groups, however, between ages 2530, when the highly educated group are presumably still accumulating educational human capital.
For comparison, Figures 1A and 1B show the age-earnings profiles for couples with final
earnings and a husband between the ages of 63 and 67 in 2000. These figures exclude years in which
a household has zero earnings. Figure 1A shows median income relative to age 28 earnings and
Figure 1B shows median income in year 2000 dollars. All three educational groups show a decline in
the last third of the working life even excluding household-year observations with zero earnings. The
shape of the age-earnings profile matters for our computations of 401(k) balances at retirement, and it
also affects the interpretation of financial magnitudes that are normalized by final earnings. We
therefore analyze the three education groups separately in our computation of simulated 401(k)
balances at retirement. We include years of zero earnings in our simulations to account realistically
for work interruptions and retirement.
3. Household Balance Sheets and Non-401(k) Wealth for HRS Respondents
We now consider the household balance sheet, to calibrate the non-401(k) wealth that affects
the expected utility of retirement wealth. We classify total household wealth into seven categories: the
present discounted value of Social Security payments, the present discounted value of defined benefit
pensions, the present discounted value of other annuities, the current value of retirement accounts, all
other net financial wealth, housing equity, and all other wealth.
The retirement account category includes IRAs, 401(k)s and other defined contribution
accounts. Data on DC plan balances were collected for each respondent in the employment module of
the HRS, and then aggregated to the household level. Amounts classified as DC wealth include the
balances of workers at their present job, plus any balances that workers or retirees left to accumulate in
the plans of former employers. “Other net financial wealth” includes stocks, equity mutual funds,
bonds, fixed income mutual funds, checking and saving accounts, money market mutual funds and
certificates of deposit. We refer to this category below as “financial wealth” despite the fact that it
excludes annuitized wealth and retirement account assets. Net housing wealth equals gross home

10
value less mortgages and home loans on the primary residence. The other wealth category includes
the net-of-debt value of real estate other than household’s principal residence, the value of businesses
or farms net any outstanding debt, all assets held in trusts not otherwise classified, vehicles, and all
“other” HRS wealth which includes jewelry and expected repayment on personal loans.
The present discounted value (PDV) of Social Security wealth is calculated based on the
reported current Social Security payments for members of the household already receiving Social
Security, plus reported expected Social Security payments for other members not yet receiving Social
Security. We do not use actual Social Security earnings histories to compute expected or accrued
Social Security payments for individuals still in the labor force in 2000. Actual earnings histories end
in 1991, and there is uncertainty about the date of retirement for individuals still in the labor force.
We used cohort mortality tables for individuals born in 1930 to value Social Security payment
streams. Distinct mortality probabilities for men and women were taken from the Social Security
Administration (SSA) life tables for the US Social Security Area, as reported by Bell and Miller
(2002). The SSA’s intermediate-cost scenario discount rates (3.0 percent real, 6.0 percent nominal)
were applied to discount future payments, and payments were assumed to be indexed using an
expected inflation rate of three percent. In these calculations, we take the joint-and-survivor properties
of Social Security into account. We assume that as long as both members of the couple are alive, each
respondent receives his or her current or projected Social Security benefits. When only one member
of the couple is alive, we assume that the household receives benefits equal to the maximum of the
two spouses’ benefits.
Of the 6195 observations represented in HRS Wave 5, 2293 reported receiving a defined
benefit (DB) pension while 478 reported expecting to receive a DB pension at some future date. Thus,
out of the 16.7 million represented households, 7.7 million received or were expecting to receive DB
pensions. To determine the PDV of reported DB wealth, we took a similar approach to our valuation
of Social Security wealth and valued the annuitized payment streams using the same mortality tables
and discounting assumptions. Although some DB plans have cost of living adjustments, most are not

11
indexed to inflation. We therefore assume that all DB pensions have a fixed nominal payout. We
make the same assumption for any other other annuities owned by household members.
Table 3 presents information on mean and median wealth levels for the four groups of HRS
households whose earnings histories were shown in Table 2. The Social Security earnings history
sample is slightly less wealthy than the sample consisting of all households, but the households
generally become wealthier as we move from the entire HRS to our most restricted sample of couples
with husbands between the ages of 63 and 67 in 2000. We focus on this group in the subsequent
analysis, since this is the group that is at, or slightly older than, the typical age of retirement in the
most recent HRS survey wave. For this group, we find the median value of a defined benefit pension
of $35,400. The mean value, $182,600, is much greater, reflecting the right skewness of the
distribution of pension values. For Social Security wealth, the median ($242,000) is actually greater
than the mean ($228,900), which reflects the upper limit on Social Security benefits.
Table 3 also shows several wealth aggregates. First, we compute annuitized wealth as the sum
of the present discount values of Social Security, defined benefit pensions, and other annuities. We
also present the sum of annuitized wealth and all other financial wealth, as well as aggregates
reflecting all wealth and all wealth excluding retirement account assets. When we calibrate our
simulations with individual households’ non-401(k) wealth, we focus on two wealth components:
annuitized wealth and all wealth excluding retirement account assets. We do not wish to include
retirement account assets in the calibration of non-401(k) wealth on the grounds that we are using our
simulations to construct values of retirement accounts. By using the observed values of these wealth
components from the HRS, and treating them as non-random when we evaluate the expected utility of
401(k) retirement balances, we are implicitly assuming that changes in 401(k) wealth values do not
affect other components of wealth. In future work, we plan to allow for correlation between the
returns on assets in 401(k) accounts, and the returns on other components of the household balance
sheet.

12
Table 3 also shows final income for the various HRS sub-samples. Below, we report the ratio
of the wealth components to final income, so the variation in final income is of independent interest.
In the upper panel of Table 3, the ratio of median Social Security wealth to final income is a little over
five, while the ratio of broadly-defined net financial wealth to final income is about three. These
statistics suggest the importance of recognizing wealth sources other than defined contribution plans in
analyzing the risks of portfolio strategies.
Although Table 3 shows net housing wealth as a balance sheet component, its role in
providing resources for retirement consumption is not clear. Several studies, such as Venti and Wise
(2001b, forthcoming) and the references cited therein, suggest that retired households do not typically
draw down their housing wealth to finance non-housing consumption. This work suggests focusing
only on non-housing wealth as we consider the wealth available to support retirement spending. One
way to conceptualize this approach is to assume the utility from housing consumption as additively
separable from all other consumption in the household’s utility function, and to further assume that
owner occupied housing generates only housing consumption. The difficulty with this approach is
that it is possible that households view their housing equity as a reserve asset that can be tapped to
support other consumption in the event of financial difficulty. In this case, housing equity should be
combined with financial assets in calculating the household’s assets outside defined contribution
plans. To allow for this possibility, we present results in which we consider housing as well as other
financial assets as the household’s non-401(k) wealth at retirement.
Table 4 presents information on wealth holdings across different education subsamples. The
results suggest that there are importance differences across groups. The table focuses on the subsample of HRS couples that have earnings records and in which the husband is between 63 and 67 in
2000. The summary statistics show the clear link between education and wealth, measured both in
absolute dollars and relative to final income. Annuitized wealth alone is $240,800 for the median
household with less than a high school education and $375,500 for those with at least a college degree.
The dispersion here is mostly due to the disparities across education categories in the level of defined

13
benefit pensions. The present discounted value of Social Security benefits varies relatively little. It is
$217,000 for those who never finished high school, and $248,800 for those with at least a college
degree. Other financial wealth, which excludes annuitized wealth and retirement account assets,
displays a high degree of dispersion, with $8,100 for the median household with less than a high
school education and $328,000 for the median household with at least a college degree. These
findings suggest that in evaluating 401(k) plan risk, the effect of accounting for non-401(k) assets will
vary across education groups.
Table 4 summarizes the average wealth holdings of the different education groups, but it does
not characterize the dispersion of wealth within these groups. Table 5 offers further detail on such
distributions, showing the 20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th percentiles of the distribution of each wealth
component relative to final income. Consider, for example, financial wealth. For households with
high school and/or some college education, but no college degree, the 20th percentile value of the ratio
of financial wealth to final earnings is 0.1 while the 40th percentile value is1.0 and the 80th percentile
value is 7.4. Patterns like this emerge for each of the asset categories, with very substantial dispersion
between the lowest and the highest percentiles. These tabulations suggest that one household having a
higher educational attainment than another does not guarantee a higher ratio of any given financial
asset class to labor income. In particular, the ratio of Social Security wealth to final earnings
decreases with education. Venti and Wise (2001a) emphasize the wide range of asset accumulation
within like lifetime earnings groups, at all lifetime earnings levels.
The entries in Table 5 show the ratio of wealth components to final earnings. Final earnings
vary systematically across education group, however, which makes it difficult to identify the
underlying differences in wealth holdings. To facilitate such analysis, Table 6 presents information on
the wealth distribution with all entries measured in year 2000 dollars. For the median household in
each education group, the results suggest a substantial amount of non-401(k) wealth already in place.
The 40th percentile value of total wealth excluding retirement assets less for couples in our sample
with less than a high school degree is $311,800, compared with $527,700 for those with at least a high

14
school degree and $1,007,700 for those with at least a college degree. For the 60th percentile these
values are $424,900, $708,600, and $1,393,900 respectively. The households in the 60th percentile of
the distribution of those with less than a high school degree correspond to those near the 30th percentile
in the group with a high school degree and/or some college education, and to those near the 10th
percentile in the group with at least a college degree.
4. Asset Market Returns and Equity Premium
Our simulation methodology is designed to calculate the 401(k) wealth at retirement for
households with any given earnings profile while accounting for uncertainty in the distribution of
financial market returns. We treat the other components of the household balance sheet as nonstochastic, although as we further develop the simulation algorithm that we describe here, we will
include a more complete analysis of the uncertainties associated with non-401(k) wealth.
We assume that households have two investment choices in their 401(k) accounts. One is an
index bond, with an assured real return of 2.8 percent per year. The current term structure of yields
(April 22, 2003) on U.S. Treasury Inflation Protection Securities is upward sloping. For bonds with a
maturity of between five and six years, real interest rates are less than two percent. At a maturity of
almost thirty years, the yield is between 2.7 and 2.8 percent. Since retirement saving accumulation
takes place over long horizons, and to err on the side of generosity in the assumed return on bonds, we
assume that investments in index bonds earn a return of 2.8 percent each year, net of inflation.
Index bonds deliver a net-of-inflation certain return only if the investor holds the bonds to
maturity. Investors who sell their bonds before maturity, however, are exposed to asset price risk. If
real interest rates rise between the time index bonds are purchased and the time they are sold, the price
of the bonds can decline, leaving the investor with a capital loss. Similarly, a decline in real interest
rates would generate a capital gain. When investors do not know the precise timing of their
withdrawals, as they may not when they contemplate retirement with an unknown lifespan, purchasing
an index bond is not riskless. These bonds nevertheless seem like the least risky long-term investment
available to retirement savers.

15
The alternative investment in our simulations is a diversified portfolio of large capitalization
U.S. stocks. We assume that the uncertain real return on this portfolio is represented by the empirical
distribution of returns during the 1926 to 2001 period. Ibbotson Associates (2002) reports the annual
return time series, which has an annual average real return of 9.4 percent and a standard deviation of
20.4 percent. Figure 2 presents a histogram of real returns, which shows substantial dispersion.
In an earlier simulation analysis of 401(k) wealth accumulation, Poterba, Venti, and Wise
(2001) considered investments in nominal bonds and corporate stock. We consider investments in
index bonds rather than corporate bonds in the current project because they are likely to provide a less
risky source of long-term returns, and therefore to provide a more natural benchmark for analyzing the
risks of corporate stock from the vantage point of retirement income accumulation.
On each iteration of our simulation algorithm, we draw a sequence of 35 real stock returns
from the empirical return distribution. The draws are done with replacement and we assume that there
is no serial correlation in returns. We then use this return sequence to calculate the real value of each
household’s retirement account balance at age 63, assuming that their contributions are determined by
their earnings history. We consider the full 35-year working life for each household, and we evaluate
both a 100 percent equity investment case, and a 50-50 stocks and index bonds case. Since the goal of
our procedure is to generate reasonably precise estimates of the distribution of possible wealth
outcomes for a given contribution history, we need to repeat our basic iteration many times. We found
that with 200,000 replications, we could obtain estimates of the outcome distribution that did not vary
substantially from one simulation to another. For each one of the 759 households in our sample,
therefore, we simulate their 401(k) balance at age-63 200,000 times. We then summarize these
200,000 outcomes either with a distribution of wealth values at retirement, or by calculating the
expected utility associated with this distribution of outcomes.
5. The Distribution of 401(k) Account Balances Under Different Portfolio Strategies
Table 7 shows the distribution of 401(k) plan balances in thousands of year 2000 dollars,
averaged across the 759 households in our sample. Households are stratified by education group. The

16
first row in Table 7 shows the results associated with a 100 percent index bond investment. Since the
real bond return is certain, there is no uncertainty about the final wealth in this investment scenario.
The value of 401(k) wealth varies somewhat across education categories: $172,700 for those with less
than a high school degree, $230,400 for those with high school and/or some college, and $248,200 for
those with a college degree. As all three groups are assumed to have the same contribution rates out of
earnings, these disparities reflect differences across groups in age-earning profiles. The assumption
that all households contribute nine percent of their earnings to their 401(k) account is a critical
determinant of the overall magnitudes of the final account balances. Account balances could be scaled
up or down for alternative assumptions about the contribution rate.
The next two panels of Table 7 show the distribution of 401(k) balances when half, and then
when all, of the 401(k) account is invested in corporate stock. The table shows the value for each
tenth percentile of the distribution. For households with a high school education, simulated 401(k)
wealth is $299,200 at the 20th percentile, and $591,200 at the 80th percentile when the 401(k) account
is invested 50 percent in corporate stock.
Figure 3.1.A shows the ratio of 401(k) wealth to final earnings for households with a high
school or some college education, for the all-index bond, the mixed, and the all-stock portfolio
strategies. Over most of the distribution of possible stock returns, the ratio of wealth to final earnings
is higher when the portfolio is half in corporate stock than when it is completely in index bonds. The
figure shows that if a household holds the all-equity portfolio, the chance is slightly greater than ten
percent that the wealth outcome at retirement will fall below below the outcome for the index bond
portfolio. The scale of Figure 3.1.A illustrates why we focus on dollar amounts of the simulation in
our tables and analysis. Some households’ earnings decline before retirement, resulting in very low
final earnings and correspondingly very high ratios of 401(k) balances and other wealth components to
final earnings. Taking means over a distribution that includes such extreme values can lead to
spurious findings. To highlight this issue, Figure 3.2.A shows the same data as in Figure 3.1.A, but
with dollar amounts instead of ratios to final earnings.

17
One potential difficulty with our simulation procedure is that the historical period over which
we measure equity returns may have been abnormal. Mehra and Prescott (2002) discuss this
possibility along with other potential explanations for the “equity premium puzzle.” To allow for the
possibility that the historical distribution of equity returns may overstate the prospective returns on
stocks, we also consider a reduced equity return scenario, in which we reduce the expected return on
corporate stock by 300 basis points, while leaving the dispersion of returns the same as in the base
case. The results of this modification, for both half and all of the 401(k) account invested in corporate
stock, are shown in the lower two panels of Table 7 and in Figures 3.1.B and 3.2.B. The results
indicate that with a lower equity return, the index bond investment strategy looks more attractive
relative to the equity investment strategy. Even with the reduced equity return, however, there is still a
relatively low probability that the all-index bonds strategy will outperform a 50-50 mix of index bonds
and corporate stock. With the reduced equity return, the retirement wealth in the all index bonds case
for a household with high school and/or some college education falls at around the 22nd percentile of
the outcome distribution for the 50-50 mix of index bonds and stocks. It falls at around the 31st
percentile in the outcome distribution with only stock investment, which attests to the greater
volatility, as well as the greater average return, from holding all stocks rather than a 50-50 mix. .
Similar patterns emerge in the retirement wealth distributions for the other educational groups.
Evaluating the absolute magnitude of retirement assets as reported in Table 7 is complicated
by the fact that assets in the 401(k) account are measured on a pretax basis. Withdrawal of these
assets would trigger income tax liability for the beneficiary. Simple corrections for this, such as
multiplying by (1-t) where t is a plausible estimate of the marginal tax rate on ordinary income, are not
sufficient, because if the assets remain in the 401(k) account for many years after the head of
household turns 65, the effective tax burden may be relatively low. Poterba (2003a) presents
illustrative calculations on the conversion between balances in taxable and tax-deferred accounts.
6. Certainty Equivalent Measures of the Cost of Uncertain Returns

18
Table 7 and Figures 3.2.A and 3.2.B are examples of the use of the entire distribution of
retirement wealth outcomes to describe the effects of different portfolio strategies. They present
information on how different portfolio strategies will affect the average level of retirement wealth, as
well as its dispersion. The fraction of retirement wealth outcomes in the all stock or 50-50 stock/index
cases that fall below the outcome in the all-index bond case provides some insight on the risks
associated with the various strategies. Results similar to these are a key component of “outcomes
based” financial planning software that enables clients to determine the probability of reaching
retirement wealth goals. These software programs are based on Monte Carlo simulations of future
wealth accumulations, and their results provide a “picture” of the risk associated with different
investment strategies. Presumably, different investors with different tolerances for risk would prefer
different investment strategies.
Results that portray the “picture” of retirement wealth risks provide no a priori way to
describe how households or groups of households might evaluate these two distributions and thereby
decide which portfolio strategy to pursue. At the heart of this difficulty is the question of how
households evaluate small probabilities of low retirement plan balances. The “picture” approach does
not attempt to evaluate the cost to a household of achieving a retirement wealth outcome below the allbonds level.
The last part of our analysis is directed to this issue. We compute the expected utility
generated by the distribution of retirement resources for each portfolio strategy, using a standard
household utility function. We then convert this expected utility to a certainty equivalent wealth
measure to value the potential outcomes of different portfolio strategies. Table 8 presents these results
assuming that the 401(k) balance is the household’s only wealth. By excluding other wealth and
assuming that the household is dependent on 401(k) wealth only, these calculations exaggerate the true
level of risk faced by the household. Since household consumption risk during retirement is tempered
by the existence of non-401(k) wealth, we relax this counterfactual assumption below.

19
The values in the first panel in Table 8 are based on linear utility (α=0) and are thus the
expected values of each investment choice represented in Table 7. The second panel shows that for a
household with no wealth outside the retirement account, and whose preferences over wealth are given
by U(W) = log W, (α=1) the certainty equivalent value of a portfolio invested in the large-cap equity
portfolio is nearly three times as great as the value of the all-index-bond portfolio for a household
with a high school education. For a 50/50 index bond and stock portfolio, the certainty equivalent is
between 80 and 85 percent larger than the value of the all-index bond investment strategy. As risk
aversion rises, the certainty equivalent value for the stock portfolio declines relative to the value of the
index bond portfolio. When the household has a relative risk aversion of two, for example, the
certainty equivalent of the all stock investment declines to about twice that of the all index bond
portfolio, while the certainty equivalent of the 50/50 portfolio falls to around 70 percent of the value of
the index bond investment. At a risk aversion of four, the certainty equivalent of an all-stock portfolio
allocation is only slightly greater than that of an all-index bond allocation, but the value of a 50/50
portfolio remains considerably larger in certainty equivalent terms.
Figure 4 shows the cumulative distribution of the utility values of the wealth outcomes in the
simulated distribution for four different levels of risk aversion. These are transformed values of the
constant relative risk aversion utility function in equation (2) for each of the simulated outcomes. The
utility values are scaled using a linear transformation, such that zero is the worst empirical outcome
and one is the best outcome for each value of α. When α = 0, so that the household is risk neutral, the
plot of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) for utility levels is the same as the cumulative
distribution of the values of wealth at retirement. The 90th percentile outcome is less than 10 percent
of the level of the best possible outcome, reflecting the very long upper tail of the empirical
distribution. The cumulative density function for the risk neutral household is convex. As risk
aversion increases, the distribution of utility diverges more and more from the distribution of wealth,
and it becomes clear that raising risk aversion puts more weight on the negative outcomes in the left

20
tail of the potential retirement wealth distribution. The second derivative of the CDF rises as risk
aversion increases. When α=4, the CDF is highly concave, as the low retirement wealth outcomes
generate very low utility outcomes. As a result, by the fifth percentile of the utility outcome
distribution, household utility is already 99 percent of the level of the best utility outcome.
Figures 5.1.A – 5.3.B show the distribution of certainty equivalent wealth values, measured in
dollars at age 63, for different levels of risk aversion and for each of our investment strategies. We
restrict attention in these figures to households with a high school education. The three sets of figures
differ in the assumptions that they make about the household’s non-401(k) wealth at retirement.
Figure 5.1.A shows that an all-stock portfolio is preferred to an all-index bond portfolio by
investors with risk aversion (α) below approximately 4.25. This is not surprising, since the empirical
distribution of historical stock returns has a much higher mean than the index bond portfolio. Thus
only a small number of 401(k) wealth outcomes under the partial- or full-equity strategies fall below
the value of the index bond portfolio. The variability of returns on corporate stock does not create
enough low utility outcomes to lead households with modest risk aversion to choose index bonds over
a portfolio with some equity exposure. A 50/50 mixture of stock and index bonds is preferred to an
all-bond portfolio by investors at all levels of risk aversion shown in the figure. The value of α that
would make a household indifferent between the all-index bonds portfolio strategy and each of the
equity exposure strategies can be found at the intersections of the various curves. A value of α greater
than eight is needed for a household to prefer all index bonds to a 50-50 index bond-stock mix. For α
> 2.75, a household prefers the 50/50 mix to an all-stock portfolio.
Figure 5.1.B. shows that the certainty equivalent of the 50 percent and 100 percent equity
allocations declines if the expected return on corporate stock is assumed to be 300 basis points lower
than historical returns. The effects are most pronounced at high levels of risk aversion. For α = 4, for
example, the certainty equivalent of an all-stock allocation falls substantially below that of the allindex bond portfolio when the expected equity return is 6.4 percent, while it is just under 10 percent

21
higher than the certainty equivalent of the bond portfolio when an average equity return of 9.4 percent
(the historical mean) is assumed. Even with α = 2, however, the expected utility of following the allstock investment strategy exceeds that of the all-index bonds strategy when the expected equity return
is 6.4 percent. When we reduce the average return by 300 basis points, the levels of α for which
stocks and the 50/50 mix are preferred to the index bond portfolio are lower. Investors with α < 2.25
prefer the all-stock portfolio strategy over all-index bonds in this case, and those with α < 4.5 prefer
the 50/50 mix to the all-index bond portfolio even when the expected return on stocks is reduced.
The results in Table 8 and Figures 5.1.A and 5.1.B assume that the 401(k) balance is the only
wealth that the household accumulates to provide for retirement support. A sequence of stock market
returns that delivers a very low retirement wealth is therefore very costly in terms of household utility.
Yet the summary statistics in our earlier tables show that essentially all households have Social
Security wealth and a large fraction of households have other wealth as well. To explore the
importance of these other sources of retirement income, we repeated our stochastic simulations, taking
account of other wealth. In Table 9 and Figures 5.2.A and 5.2.B, we assume that each household in
our simulations holds non-401(k) wealth at retirement equal to the present discounted value of their
Social Security wealth, DB plan wealth and income annuity wealth. In Table 10 and Figures 5.3.A
and 5.3.B, each simulation household receives non-401(k) wealth at retirement equal to their total net
worth — including Social Security wealth, DB wealth, and income annuity wealth — but excluding
the value of retirement account assets that they report.
Table 9 thus presents findings like those in Table 8, but from simulations that account for the
presence of social security, DB wealth, and other income annuities, in addition to simulated 401(k)
wealth. The first row of each panel in Table 9 shows that for a couple with a high school education,
the index bond portfolio generates the utility level associated with $230,400. This is identical to the
index bond portfolio certainty equivalents in Table 8, and it is independent of α, as there is no
uncertainty associated with this simulated investment strategy. Comparing the other results in Table 9

22
with those in Table 8 shows that the certainty equivalent from holding a risky stock portfolio is larger
when the household has other sources of financial support than when it does not. For example,
households with a high school education and with log utility (α = 1) have certainty equivalent wealth
equal to $669,300 for the stock portfolio in Table 8, where we assume no non-401(k) wealth. But the
certainty equivalent of the 401(k) account rises to $743,600 when Social Security, defined benefit
pension wealth, and other income annuity wealth are included as non-401(k) wealth as in Table 9.
Including another non-stochastic wealth component for non-401(k) wealth raises the certainty
equivalent of the 401(k) account still further, as shown in Table 10, where all non-retirement account
assets reported in the HRS are included in the utility evaluation for each household. For the household
with a high school education and log utility, the all-stock portfolio now has a certainty equivalent of
$779,600. Therefore, relative to the all-index bond case where the certainty equivalent is $230,400,
the all stock investment generates a certainty equivalent that is 2.9 times greater if there is no wealth,
3.2 times greater than the case with Social Security, DB, and other annuity wealth, and 3.4 times
greater than if non-401(k) wealth consists of all HRS wealth excluding retirement accounts. This
increase in certainty equivalent wealth with larger levels of non-stochastic wealth is a feature of the
constant relative risk aversion utility function.
At higher levels of risk aversion, the assumptions that we make about non-401(k) wealth are
more important than at lower risk aversion values. The all stock strategy has a certainty equivalent of
$252,800 for α=4 when we assume households have no non-401(k) wealth as in Table 8. This is only
ten percent higher than the certainty equivalent of the all index bond strategy, $230,400. However, the
certainty equivalent of the all stock strategy rises to $443,300 in Table 9 and $517,600 in Table 10.
These values are 1.9 times and 2.2 times the values with the all index bond portfolio.
7. Conclusions and Directions for Further Work
This paper presents new evidence on the valuation of risky retirement saving assets when
investors have a choice between investing in corporate stocks and index bonds. We find that the

23
historical return distribution for equities leads investors to earn higher expected utility, in most cases,
if they invest primarily in stocks rather than in index bonds. We have explored the robustness of this
finding to reducing the expected return on corporate stocks by 300 basis points per year. While this
shifts the distribution of retirement balances to lower values, and reduces the expected utility of
holding stocks, we still find that only highly risk averse investors would choose not to hold corporate
stocks.
Data on asset allocation in retirement accounts is broadly consistent with the expected utility
results that emerge from our simulations. Bergstresser and Poterba (2003) report that of the 51.1
million households in the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances with some assets in a tax-deferred
account, just over twenty percent (10.4 million) hold only bonds. The overall allocation between
stocks and bonds in tax-deferred accounts is similar to that in defined benefit plans, which are
managed by professional investment managers. One important difference is that there is a higher
concentration of company stock in defined contribution plan accounts.
One of our goals is to compare two alternative approaches to evaluating the riskiness of
portfolio strategies for retirement wealth accumulation. First, we presented “pictures” of the
distribution of wealth outcomes for different investment allocation rules. This approach is closely
related to the techniques used by many financial planners, who show clients the set of outcomes that
they might achieve under a given set of assumptions about future returns and investment strategy. It is
also the approach that we, and others, have used in past studies that considered the returns to different
investment strategies. Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001) use a related approach to summarize the
potential returns associated with different investment strategies in a partially-privatized Social
Security system. Second, we tried to synthesize the information in the distribution of wealth outcomes
by computing an expected utility measure corresponding to each distribution. This approach allows
for the possibility that the marginal utility of wealth declines with wealth, so that a given increment to
wealth is more valuable when wealth is at a low level than when it is high.

24
Both the “picture” and the parametric utility function approaches are useful. The “picture”
provides the information that any household that is considering retirement saving needs to evaluate the
various investment strategies. It could be used, and sometimes is used, by financial planners who are
trying to elicit a household’s preferences with respect to risk. The planner can show the household
several distributions of potential wealth outcomes, and then ask which of these outcome distributions
is preferred. In such a setting, different households would be expected to reach different conclusions
about which strategy to pursue. This would reflect heterogeneity in their risk preferences.
The parametric utility function approach starts from the premise that a household’s relative
risk aversion can be characterized by a single parameter. Conditional on this parameter, it is
straightforward to characterize the optimal portfolio strategy for the household. This approach
assumes away the problems associated with eliciting a household’s preferences with regard to risk and
it requires strong parametric assumptions about the form of the household’s utility function. When it
is reasonable to maintain these assumptions, however, the parametric utility function approach delivers
simple rankings of different portfolio strategies.
The parametric utility function approach can potentially provide some guidance on the extent
to which observed portfolio choices can be reconciled with the optimizing choices of households that
are trying to maximize their expected utility. Any analysis of such choices requires data on assets held
outside retirement accounts as well as inside these accounts, since there are important asset location
issues that combine tax planning with investment choices in both taxable and tax-deferred accounts.
If we are prepared to assume that past returns will characterize future returns on various asset classes,
we can make estimates of how risk averse a household would have to be to forego any investment in
corporate stock, or to hold only one quarter of its overall portfolio in stock. From these calculations,
one could implicitly evaluate the fraction of households in the overall population that would need to
have risk aversion above a given level in order to rationalize observed portfolio holdings.
The findings in this paper suggest a number of promising directions for future work. One is to
develop a richer stochastic structure for the determination of 401(k) balances as well as the other

25
components of the household balance sheet. The states of nature in which defined contribution plan
balances are low are likely to be states of nature in which other wealth balances are also low, for
example because aggregate stock market returns have been low. To the extent that fluctuations in real
interest rates affect 401(k) values, and that such movements also affect the present discounted value of
Social Security benefits and defined benefit pension benefits, virtually all of the balance sheet
components may exhibit some covariance.
It should also be possible to extend our framework to consider other assets that could be held
in the retirement account. There is particular interest in the role of employer stock in 401(k) plans, as
indicated in Mitchell and Utkus (2003), Munnell and Sunden (2002), and Poterba (2003b). While we
have focused on index bonds as a low-risk investment strategy for 401(k) investors, we could also
consider investments in corporate bonds, which expose investors to inflation risk. Our earlier work on
portfolio holdings in 401(k) plans, Poterba, Venti and Wise (2001b), considered the risk of investment
portfolios with nominal bonds and corporate stock.
A second natural direction for further work concerns the comparison between the risks
associated with defined benefit and defined contribution pension arrangements. Samwick and Skinner
(2001) use data from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to compare the risks of the two types of
retirement schemes from the standpoint of retirement income security. The SCF includes detailed
information on the structure of pension arrangements for survey respondents, through the Pension
Provider Survey, but it does not include data on the earnings history for survey participants. Yet the
risks associated with defined benefit plans depend significantly on the pattern of job changes, job loss,
and retirement decisions for individual worker, as documented in a series of papers by Kotlikoff and
Wise and reviewed in Kotlikoff and Wise (1989). The HRS data, linked with Social Security
Administration earnings records, make it possible to assess these risk sources in defined benefit plans.
We are currently developing an algorithm to evaluate DB plan risk.
Finally, further work can explore the extent to which simple utility functions, such as power
functions of wealth, provide an adequate description of the criterion that individuals use to evaluate

26
their choices in the face of asset price risk. There is a long tradition, as indicated by many studies that
are cited in surveys by Rabin (1998) and Starmer (2000), of finding inconsistencies with standard
expected utility analysis. Kahneman and Tversky (1979) is a seminal example. Even within the
framework of parametric CRRA utility functions, there is little consensus on the “correct” value of the
relative risk aversion coefficient. We are concerned more generally that choices predicted by the
CRRA function may be a poor guide to actual behavior when the distribution of wealth outcomes
includes values near zero. We hope to gain a better understanding of individual preferences over
uncertain levels of future retirement assets by developing a set of survey questions designed to elicit
respondent preferences over alternative wealth outcomes. We hope to include these questions on
household surveys like the Health and Retirement Survey. Kapteyn and Teppa (2002) have had some
success in using a similar approach to explain household portfolio choices as a function of risk
preference, as revealed by a set of survey questions. Ultimately, we aim to improve our ability to
judge how individuals rank the distributions associated with different asset allocation and saving
strategies.

References
Bell, Felicitie, and M. Miller, 2002, Life Tables for the United States Social Security Area 1900-2100,
Social Security Administration Actuarial Study 116.
Bergstresser. Daniel and James Poterba, 2003, “Asset Allocation and Asset Location: Evidence from
the Survey of Consumer Finances,” mimeo, MIT.
Feldstein, Martin and Elena Ranguelova, 2001, “Individual Risk in an Investment-Based Social
Security System,” NBER Working Paper 8074.
Ibbotson Associates, 2003, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation: 2003 Yearbook: Market Results for
1926-2002. (Chicago: Ibbotson Associates).
Kahnemann, Daniel and Amos Tversky, 1979, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decisions Under
Risk,” Econometrica 47, 313-327.
Kapteyn, Arie and Federica Teppa. 2002, “Subjective Measures of Risk Aversion and Portfolio
Choice,” RAND Report DRU-2902, February.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and David A. Wise, TheWage Carrot and the Pension Stick, W.E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1989.
Mehra, Rajneesh and Edward Prescott, 2002, “The Equity Premium Puzzle in Retrospect,” in G.
Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, eds., Handbook of Economics of Finance
(Amsterdam: North Holland).
Mitchell, Olivia, and Stephen P. Utkus, 2003, “The Role of Company Stock in Defined Contribution
Plans.” In Olivia Mitchell and Kent Smetters, eds., The Pension Challenge: Risk Transfers
and Retirement Income Security. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Munnell, Alicia and Annika Sunden, 2002, “401(k)s and Company Stock: How Can We Encourage
Diversification?” Issue Brief 9, Center for Retirement Research, Boston College, July.
Poterba, James, 2003a, “Valuing Assets in Retirement Saving Accounts,” mimeo, MIT.
Poterba, James, 2003b, “Employer Stock and 401(k) Plans.” American Economic Review 93 (May
2003).
Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise, 1998, “Implications of Rising Personal Retirement
Saving," in D. Wise, ed., Frontiers in the Economics of Aging (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise, 2001, “The Transition to Personal Accounts and
Increasing Retirement Wealth: Macro and Micro Evidence," in D. Wise, ed., Perspectives on
the Economics of Aging (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).
Rabin, Matthew, 1998, “Psychology and Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature 36 (March), 1146.
Samwick, Andrew, and Jonathan Skinner, 2001, “How Will Defined Contribution Pension Plans
Affect Retirement Income?,” mimeo, Dartmouth College.

28
Starmer, Chris, 2000, “Developments in Non-Expected Utility Theory: The Hunt for a Descriptive
Theory of Choice Under Risk,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 38, no. 2, pp332-382.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise, 2001a, “Choice, Chance, and Wealth Dispersion at Retirement,”
in S. Ogura, T. Tachibanaki, and D. Wise (ed.) Aging Issues in the United States and Japan.
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise, 2001b, “Aging and Housing Equity,” in Zvi Bodie, Brett
Hammond, and Olivia S. Mitchell (eds.), Innovations for Financing Retirement (Philadelphia:
Pension Research Council and the University of Pennsylvania).
Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, forthcoming, “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look,” in
David A. Wise (ed.) Analyses in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.

29

Table 1: Sample Composition and Education Attainment, Health and Retirement Survey
Survey
Population
Households
Counterpart
HRS Wave 1 (1992)
7580
18.6 million
HRS Wave 5 (2000)
6074
n/a
Excluding households with missing birth years
6195
16.7 million
and accounting for household splits (Wave 5)
Head < high school
1823
4.3 million
Head high school or some college
3103
8.6 million
Head college degree or more
1269
3.8 million
With Social Security earnings history
4233
11.6 million
Head < high school
1228
3.0 million
Head high school or some college
2123
6.0 million
Head college degree or more
882
2.7 million
Source: Authors’ tabulations from HRS.

30
Table 2: Average Income Trajectories for HRS Households in 2000
Median Including Zeros
Households Households
Couples
Couples with
Age Range

Mean Including Zeros

with SS

with Final

with Final

Final Earnings,

Households
with SS

Histories

Earnings

Earnings

M ale 63-67

Histories

Less than High School Education ($ thousands)
25-27
9.8
12.3
21.2
18.6
28-30
14.4
16.9
25.4
24.4
31-33
17.3
20.3
26.8
28.2
34-36
19.9
22.9
29.5
33.1
37-39
21.7
24.8
34.4
34.9
40-42
22.8
26.3
37.6
42.1
43-45
21.6
26.1
40.0
42.3
46-48
20.8
24.7
42.0
41.2
49-51
19.8
24.2
40.0
41.2
52-54
17.6
21.7
38.4
40.1
55-57
13.8
18.7
32.7
33.7
58-60
6.1
11.8
25.8
29.2
61-63
0.0
1.1
6.6
11.6
64-66
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
High School Degree and/or Some College ($ thousands)
25-27
20.4
21.8
26.5
26.4
28-30
24.9
25.7
28.3
26.8
31-33
26.3
26.7
33.6
34.6
34-36
28.4
30.2
36.4
36.3
37-39
32.9
34.0
41.2
41.5
40-42
34.0
35.6
45.6
47.5
43-45
34.7
37.0
48.0
49.7
46-48
34.9
38.0
50.6
51.6
49-51
33.7
36.7
51.2
50.7
52-54
31.0
33.9
49.0
50.3
55-57
26.0
29.1
44.7
44.3
58-60
15.0
18.6
32.8
37.3
61-63
0.0
0.1
4.6
19.9
64-66
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
College Degree and/or Some Post-Graduate ($ thousands)
25-27
20.9
22.4
24.8
24.8
28-30
26.2
26.5
28.7
26.8
31-33
27.4
29.1
33.6
32.5
34-36
34.0
34.7
37.0
36.0
37-39
36.6
37.7
42.5
41.1
40-42
41.9
43.7
48.4
48.1
43-45
46.2
47.3
54.5
53.8
46-48
49.0
51.8
59.1
58.1
49-51
53.0
56.9
63.1
62.7
52-54
51.7
56.0
63.5
65.5
55-57
46.5
51.2
62.0
59.8
58-60
24.2
30.2
40.8
44.8
61-63
0.0
0.4
3.1
21.7
64-66
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Sample Size Information by Education Group
Less Than HS
1228
1027
595
180
HS / Some College
2123
1912
1116
390
College / Postgrad
882
810
564
189
Total
4233
3749
2275
759
Weighted Sample Size by Education Group (Millions of Households)
Less Than HS
3.0
2.5
1.5
0.4
HS / Some College
6.0
5.4
3.2
1.1
College / Postgrad
2.7
2.5
1.8
0.6
Total
11.6
10.4
6.4
2.1

Households
with Final

Couples
with Final

Couples with
Final Earnings,

Earnings

Earnings

M ale 63-67

13.0
15.8
18.1
20.6
22.8
24.5
25.2
25.7
25.1
24.2
21.7
17.9
11.3
4.2

14.2
17.1
19.7
22.4
25.0
27.1
28.0
28.6
28.2
27.3
24.7
20.6
13.3
4.9

19.5
23.7
26.9
30.4
34.3
37.4
38.9
40.3
39.6
38.4
34.6
28.8
18.1
7.3

17.6
21.5
26.8
30.7
34.0
38.2
40.4
39.4
40.1
38.7
34.9
31.1
20.3
4.2

18.8
21.5
23.8
26.7
30.0
32.5
34.3
35.8
35.8
35.2
33.2
27.4
15.7
6.2

19.6
22.4
24.9
28.0
31.7
34.4
36.3
37.9
38.1
37.5
35.6
29.6
17.0
6.8

26.3
30.0
33.1
36.8
41.4
44.8
47.4
49.9
50.3
49.8
46.8
39.1
22.8
9.3

25.2
27.9
33.9
36.4
41.0
45.8
48.3
48.6
49.1
49.5
48.0
46.5
33.5
8.6

19.5
23.5
26.2
30.2
34.3
38.7
42.7
46.7
48.6
50.7
53.0
40.3
23.4
11.0

20.3
24.5
27.7
31.9
36.4
41.2
45.5
50.0
52.0
54.4
56.9
43.2
25.2
11.8

23.6
29.0
32.5
37.0
42.2
47.9
52.8
58.5
60.5
63.5
64.4
49.6
30.3
14.9

22.1
26.4
30.8
33.5
39.4
47.1
51.2
53.8
56.6
59.4
59.4
55.0
45.4
12.8

1228
2123
882
4233

1027
1912
810
3749

595
1116
564
2275

180
390
189
759

3.0
6.0
2.7
11.6

2.5
5.4
2.5
10.4

1.5
3.2
1.8
6.4

0.4
1.1
0.6
2.1

31
Table 3: Household Balance Sheets, HRS Households in 2000 (Thousands of Dollars)
Wealth Component
All
Households Households Couples
Couples with
Households with SS
with Final
with Final Final Earnings,
Histories
Earnings
Earnings
Male 63-67
Medians
Social Security
159.9
162.1
172.3
222.3
DB Pension
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.6
Other Annuity
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Retirement Accounts
4.5
4.6
8.0
24.5
IRA
0.0
0.0
0.0
8.0
401(k) and Other DC
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Financial Wealth
30.0
29.0
35.0
70.0
Housing Equity
70.0
65.0
69.0
87.0
Other Wealth
15.0
15.0
16.0
26.0
SS + DB + Other Annuity
215.3
218.4
225.9
285.4
+ other financial
286.3
285.5
300.1
405.3
Total Excl. Retirement Accts 422.0
414.5
436.6
582.4
Total
454.8
447.6
470.7
636.4
Final Earnings
—
—
35.1
48.2
Means
Social Security
160.7
163.2
170.8
207.2
DB Pension
136.3
145.8
145.0
195.3
Other Annuity
5.0
5.2
4.8
5.2
Retirement Accounts
94.3
94.5
101.4
135.0
IRA
66.0
65.6
69.4
92.5
401(k) and Other DC
28.3
28.9
31.9
42.5
Other Financial Wealth
181.6
187.6
200.3
253.3
Housing Equity
104.2
95.5
97.8
121.3
Other Wealth
129.5
108.0
113.3
141.9
SS + DB + Other Annuity
302.0
314.3
320.5
407.8
+ other financial
483.7
501.9
520.8
661.1
Total Excl. Retirement Accts 717.4
705.4
732.0
924.3
Total
811.7
799.9
833.3
1059.3
Final Earnings
—
—
44.6
56.0
Sample Size
Number of Households
6195
4233
3749
2275
Weighted Size ('000s)
16709.5
11648.1
10390.1
6403.2
Source: Authors’ tabulations from 2000 wave of the Health and Retirement Survey.

242.0
35.4
0.0
30.0
11.0
0.0
88.8
91.0
30.0
316.4
460.6
652.3
713.2
45.8
228.9
182.6
5.1
154.3
106.8
47.5
287.2
123.7
141.6
416.6
703.8
969.1
1123.4
55.1
759
2084.4

32
Table 4: Household Balance Sheets, HRS Households with Final Earnings, Males Aged 63-67

Medians
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accts
Total
Final Earnings
Means
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accts
Total
Final Earnings
Sample Size
Number of Households
Weighted Size ('000s)

All Education
Levels

Less than
High School
Degree

High School
and/or
Some College

College
and/or
Postgraduate

242.0
35.4
0.0
30.0
11.0
0.0
88.8
91.0
30.0
316.4
460.6
652.3
713.2
45.8

217.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
8.1
60.0
18.0
240.8
267.3
362.3
378.7
35.7

248.5
46.6
0.0
29.0
9.5
0.0
71.0
87.0
25.0
323.6
441.2
601.7
673.6
46.2

248.8
100.0
0.0
126.1
80.0
0.0
328.0
130.0
70.0
375.5
838.9
1102.4
1303.4
56.8

228.9
182.6
5.1
154.3
106.8
47.5
287.2
123.7
141.6
416.6
703.8
969.1
1123.4
55.1

206.8
57.2
1.1
39.5
31.2
8.3
68.9
71.9
78.0
265.1
334.1
484.0
523.5
37.5

234.4
112.6
5.7
114.2
89.0
25.2
180.4
106.7
92.9
352.7
533.1
732.7
846.9
55.0

235.0
416.7
7.1
321.4
200.0
121.4
665.1
197.1
286.2
658.8
1323.9
1807.2
2128.6
68.7

759
2084.4

180
428.8

390
1097.7

189
557.9

33
Table 5: Distribution of Household Balance Sheet Items as a Ratio to Final Earned Income
HRS Married Households with Final Earnings and Males Aged 63-67 in 2000

20th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accounts
Total
40th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accounts
Total
60th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accounts
Total
80th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accounts
Total

All
Education
Levels

Less than
High School
Degree

High School
and/or Some
College

College and/or
Postgraduate Degree

3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.8
0.2
4.2
5.8
8.1
8.6

3.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.1
4.5
4.9
6.7
6.8

3.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.8
0.2
4.2
5.8
8.1
8.8

2.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
1.5
1.2
0.4
3.5
7.4
10.7
12.4

4.4
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
1.1
1.6
0.5
5.2
7.3
12.6
13.5

4.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
1.2
0.3
6.3
6.8
8.9
9.1

4.6
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
1.0
1.5
0.5
6.3
9.1
12.3
13.5

3.4
0.0
0.0
1.4
0.7
0.0
4.5
2.2
1.0
6.1
13.8
19.2
22.8

5.7
1.7
0.0
1.3
0.7
0.0
3.3
2.5
1.3
8.8
13.7
18.3
21.2

6.7
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.6
1.8
0.9
8.3
9.3
12.9
13.4

5.9
1.7
0.0
1.2
0.7
0.0
3.0
2.3
1.0
8.6
12.7
17.4
19.9

4.9
2.8
0.0
3.5
2.3
0.0
9.2
3.1
2.5
9.7
20.9
28.3
33.3

9.2
4.6
0.0
4.6
3.3
0.5
9.1
4.8
4.0
14.0
23.0
32.5
38.9

9.8
2.9
0.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
2.9
4.3
2.3
11.8
15.7
21.2
22.7

9.4
4.4
0.0
3.8
2.9
0.3
7.4
4.3
3.0
13.2
20.1
26.9
30.9

7.6
7.3
0.0
11.2
6.6
2.0
19.3
8.6
6.6
17.3
46.5
59.0
63.8

34

Table 6: Distribution of Household Balance Sheet Items ($ thousands)
HRS Married Households with Final Earnings and Husbands Aged 63-67 in 2000

20th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accts
Total
40th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accts
Total
60th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accts
Total
80th Percentile
Social Security
DB Pension
Other Annuity
Retirement Accounts
IRA
401(k) and Other DC
Other Financial Wealth
Housing Equity
Other Wealth
SS + DB + Other Annuity
+ other financial
Total Excl. Retirement Accounts
Total

All
Education
Levels

Less than
High School
Degree

High School
and/or Some
College

College and/or
Postgraduate

151.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.0
39.0
10.0
199.7
241.1
347.5
357.5

138.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0
7.0
2.8
151.2
148.6
202.0
203.1

176.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.8
44.0
10.0
214.1
253.7
374.7
384.7

136.3
0.0
0.0
11.0
0.0
0.0
94.0
80.0
16.0
229.3
455.7
675.2
718.4

216.5
0.0
0.0
11.0
0.0
0.0
40.0
78.0
20.5
272.3
374.5
536.3
575.4

194.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
45.0
10.0
217.9
229.6
311.8
313.6

224.8
8.9
0.0
12.0
0.0
0.0
39.0
73.0
20.0
277.4
376.3
527.7
565.0

215.4
0.0
0.0
93.0
40.0
0.0
242.0
105.0
47.0
320.7
729.5
1007.7
1097.2

261.1
84.8
0.0
59.0
34.0
0.0
156.0
105.0
51.0
353.9
559.5
812.5
882.5

235.7
10.4
0.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
75.0
28.0
277.0
311.9
424.9
430.6

265.1
84.8
0.0
50.0
31.0
0.0
124.5
100.0
40.0
358.7
496.7
708.6
811.5

284.6
192.0
0.0
185.0
133.0
0.0
411.3
175.0
114.5
477.4
945.3
1393.9
1641.8

311.7
221.4
0.0
220.0
150.0
20.0
400.0
170.0
147.0
504.4
888.4
1212.8
1422.4

277.0
132.0
0.0
36.0
19.5
2.0
90.0
110.0
90.0
364.5
440.9
657.6
772.3

309.7
191.2
0.0
180.0
106.9
13.0
285.8
150.0
127.0
462.0
707.9
1001.0
1134.4

327.4
389.0
0.0
448.9
310.0
104.5
960.0
300.0
295.0
660.4
1754.9
2299.5
3312.0

35
Table 7: Simulated Distribution of 401(k) Balance at Retirement in Thousands of Year 2000
Dollars
Investment
Less than High
High School and/or
Strategy/Percentile
School Degree
Some College
100% Riskless Bonds
172.7
230.4
50% Riskless Bonds, 50% Large-Cap Corporate Stocks
1
54.6
75.5
5
162.9
217.9
10
188.4
251.3
20
225.1
299.2
30
256.0
339.7
40
286.0
378.8
50
317.2
419.7
60
352.0
465.1
70
393.6
519.3
80
448.7
591.2
90
538.1
707.9
Mean
345.8
456.9
100% Large-Cap Corporate Stocks
1
15.8
22.8
5
127.7
172.0
10
171.5
229.6
20
246.6
328.2
30
321.7
426.6
40
404.6
535.1
50
502.1
662.6
60
623.8
821.7
70
787.8
1035.9
80
1036.2
1360.8
90
1517.0
1989.7
Mean
730.1
960.9
50% Riskless Bonds, 50% Large Cap Stocks (Risk Premium Reduced by 300 basis points)
1
41.8
58.4
5
120.4
162.0
10
138.7
186.0
20
164.8
220.3
30
186.9
249.2
40
208.2
277.1
50
230.4
306.1
60
255.0
338.2
70
284.4
376.6
80
323.3
427.3
90
386.3
509.4
Mean
250.3
331.9
100% Large Cap Stocks (Risk Premium Reduced by 300 basis points)
1
10.0
14.8
5
70.8
96.8
10
93.4
126.8
20
131.7
177.3
30
169.6
227.1
40
211.1
281.4
50
259.5
344.8
60
319.6
423.3
70
400.2
528.4
80
521.7
687.0
90
755.5
991.9
Mean
369.4
487.8

College and/or
Postgraduate
248.2
83.4
233.4
267.8
316.9
358.1
397.9
439.2
485.1
539.7
611.8
728.6
475.8
26.4
185.4
244.8
345.7
445.4
554.7
682.5
841.2
1053.8
1374.7
1992.8
972.9
65.7
176.4
201.5
237.0
266.8
295.5
325.2
358.1
397.2
448.6
531.7
350.8
17.9
107.7
139.6
192.7
244.4
300.5
365.5
445.5
552.0
711.4
1016.2
506.6

36
Table 8: Certainty Equivalent Wealth in Thousands of Year 2000 Dollars for Different Portfolio
Allocation Rules and Expected Stock Returns, Assuming no Wealth Other than 401(k)
Investment Strategy / Risk Aversion

alpha = 0
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 1
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 2
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 4
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp

Less than
High School
Degree

High School
and/or
Some College

College
and/or
Postgraduate

172.7
345.8
730.1
250.3
369.4

230.4
456.9
960.9
331.9
487.8

248.2
475.8
972.9
350.8
506.6

172.7
317.8
506.2
230.9
262.7

230.4
420.7
669.3
306.9
349.6

248.2
440.4
690.3
326.2
370.8

172.7
292.3
355.5
213.2
190.1

230.4
387.7
473.3
284.1
255.5

248.2
408.0
498.0
303.5
276.6

172.7
248.1
186.1
182.4
106.0

230.4
330.4
252.8
244.3
146.0

248.2
351.4
276.4
263.8
164.0

37
Table 9: Certainty Equivalent Wealth in Thousands of Year 2000 Dollars for Different Portfolio
Allocation Rules and Expected Stock Returns, Assuming Non-401(k) Wealth = Social Security +
Defined Benefit + Other Annuities
Investment Strategy / Risk Aversion

alpha = 0
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 1
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 2
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 4
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp

Less than
High School
Degree

High School
and/or
Some College

College
and/or
Postgraduate

172.7
345.8
730.1
250.3
369.4

230.4
456.9
960.9
331.9
487.8

248.2
475.8
972.9
350.8
506.6

172.7
328.7
562.0
239.9
301.5

230.4
435.1
743.6
318.6
400.8

248.2
455.7
772.9
338.4
425.5

172.7
313.4
454.0
230.4
256.3

230.4
415.5
603.9
306.6
342.6

248.2
437.5
641.4
327.1
370.0

172.7
287.2
330.1
214.0
200.8

230.4
381.9
443.3
285.7
270.9

248.2
406.0
485.6
307.1
299.5

38
Table 10: Certainty Equivalent Wealth in Thousands of Year 2000 Dollars for Different
Portfolio Allocation Rules and Expected Stock Returns, Assuming Non-401(k) Wealth = All
HRS Wealth Excluding Retirement Accounts
Investment Strategy / Risk Aversion

alpha = 0
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 1
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 2
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp
alpha = 4
100% Riskless Bonds
50% Bonds 50% Stocks
100% Stocks
50% Bonds, 50% Equity Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Equity Return Reduced 300bp

Less than
High School
Degree

High School
and/or
Some College

College
and/or
Postgraduate

172.7
345.9
730.6
250.4
369.6

230.4
456.8
960.9
331.9
487.8

248.2
475.8
973.1
350.9
506.7

172.7
331.7
580.5
241.9
311.7

230.4
440.8
779.6
322.6
420.3

248.2
464.2
831.2
344.2
455.6

172.7
319.0
483.2
234.3
272.3

230.4
426.2
660.9
314.0
373.5

248.2
453.5
734.1
337.9
418.3

172.7
297.0
368.5
220.9
222.4

230.4
400.7
517.6
298.8
312.3

248.2
434.4
609.8
326.7
366.6

39
Appendix Table A-1: Household Sample Counts
HRS
SS
2000*
Earnings
Only

Final
Earnings
Only

Couples
w/ Final
Earnings

Couples with
Final Earnings
and Male Aged
63-67

Total

6195

Unweighted Observations
4233
3749
2275

Couples
Singles
At Least One Person Working
Couples with Both Working
Receives DB Pension
Expects DB Pension
Receives Social Security
Has IRA
Has DC

3838
2357
3269
899
2293
478
3681
2531
1333

2446
1787
2194
592
1609
370
2550
1737
884

Total

Weighted Observations (Millions of Households)
16.7
11.6
10.4
6.4

2.1

Couples
Singles
At Least One Person Working
Couples, Two People Working
Receives DB Pension
Expects DB Pension
Receives Social Security
Has IRA
Has DC

10.4
6.4
9.0
2.6
6.3
1.4
9.7
7.5
3.8

2.1
0.0
1.3
0.5
1.0
0.2
1.6
1.2
0.6

6.8
4.8
6.2
1.8
4.5
1.1
6.9
5.2
2.6

2275
1474
2096
581
1430
364
2203
1618
862

6.4
4.0
5.9
1.7
4.0
1.0
6.0
4.9
2.5

0
0
1413
581
1027
270
1411
1192
629

6.4
0.0
4.0
1.7
2.8
0.8
3.9
3.6
1.9

759
0
0
459
166
373
72
575
417
216

* Accounting for household splits and excluding households with missing birthdays. Each HRS
household is defined uniquely by its household identifier (HHID) and wave 5 sub-household identifier
(GSUBHH).

40
Figure 1A: Median Household Income in the HRS Relative to Age 28 Earnings,
Three-Year Moving Average
2.5

Multiple of Age 28 Income

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5
Less than High School
High School and/or Some College
College and/or Postgraduate

0.0
28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65
Age

Figure 1B: Median Household Income in the HRS in Year 2000 Dollars,
Three-Year Moving Average
70,000

60,000

$, Year 2000

50,000

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000
Less than High School
High School and/or Some College
College and/or Postgraduate
0
28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65
Age

41
Figure 2: Empirical Distribution of Real S&P 500 Equity Returns
20

18

16

Number of Years

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
-0.4<x<-0.3

-0.3<x<-0.2

-0.2<x<-0.1

-0.1<x<0.0

0.0<x<0.1

0.1<x<0.2

Real Return

0.2<x<0.3

0.3<x<0.4

0.4<x<0.5

0.5<x<0.6

42
Figure 3.1.A: Cumulative Density Functions of 401(k) Wealth Relative to Final Earnings for
Households with High School or Some College Education
150
140

100% Bonds
50% Bonds, 50% Stocks
100% Stocks

130

Account Balance as Multiple of Final Earnings

120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

Figure 3.1.B: Cumulative Density Functions of 401(k) Wealth Relative to Final Earnings for
Households with High School or Some College Education
150

Account Balance as Multiple of Final Earnings

140
130

100% Bonds

120

50% Bonds, 50% Stocks
Expected Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Expected Return
Reduced 300bp

110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

43
Figure 3.2.A: Cumulative Density Functions of 401(k) Wealth for Households
with High School or Some College Education
3,000,000
2,750,000
100% Bonds
50% Bonds, 50% Stocks
100% Stocks

2,500,000
2,250,000

Account Balance (2000 $)

2,000,000
1,750,000
1,500,000
1,250,000
1,000,000
750,000
500,000
250,000
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

95

100

Figure 3.2.B: Cumulative Density Functions of 401(k) Wealth for Households
with High School or Some College Education
3,000,000
2,750,000
100% Bonds
2,500,000

50% Bonds, 50% Stocks
Expected Return Reduced 300bp
100% Stocks, Expected Return
Reduced 300bp

2,250,000

Account Balance (2000 $)

2,000,000
1,750,000
1,500,000
1,250,000
1,000,000
750,000
500,000
250,000
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

44
Figure 4: Cumulative Density Functions of Different Utility Functions for Households with High
School or Some College Education
1.0

0.9

Utility (0 = worst outcome, 1 = best outcome)

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

Percentile

alpha = 0 (linear)

alpha = 1 (log)

alpha = 2

alpha = 4

This figure shows the cumulative distribution of the utility values of the wealth outcomes in the
simulated distribution for four different levels of risk aversion. The initial scale of the utility values
varies that comes from the simulation model depends on the risk aversion parameter. In this figure, all
utility values are scaled so that zero is the worst outcome for a given alpha and one is the best outcome
for a given alpha. The Von-Neumann Morgenstern (VNM) utility function over which expected
utility is calculated is unique up to an affine transformation. The linear transformation necessary to
put each utility value on a 0-1 scale is therefore a legitimate transformation that preserves the VNM
function’s properties. Furthermore, since the actual utility magnitudes of outcomes across different
alphas are not comparable, the scale on which we represent the distribution of outcomes can be
arbitrary as long as the VNM ordering is preserved.

45
Figure 5.1.A: Certainty Equivalents and Risk Aversion for Households with High School or
Some College Education, Baseline Equity Returns and No Wealth Other than 401(k)
1,200,000

1,000,000

100% Bonds

certainty equivalent in dollars ($)

50% Stock / 50% Bonds
100% Stock
800,000

600,000

400,000

200,000

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

5.25

5.00

4.75

4.50

4.25

4.00

3.75

3.50

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

0

alpha = coefficient of relative risk aversion

Figure 5.1.B: Certainty Equivalents and Risk Aversion for Households with High School or
Some College Education, Reduced Equity Premiums and No Wealth Other than 401(k)
600,000

100% Bonds
50% Stock with Expected
Return Reduced 300bp /
50% Bonds
100% Stock with Expected
Return Reduced 300bp

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

alpha = coefficient of relative risk aversion

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

5.25

5.00

4.75

4.50

4.25

4.00

3.75

3.50

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0

0.00

certainty equivalent in dollars ($)

500,000

46
Figure 5.2.A: Certainty Equivalents and Risk Aversion for Households with High School or
Some College Education, Baseline Equity Returns and SS + DB + Annuity Wealth
1,200,000

1,000,000

100% Bonds
50% Stock / 50% Bonds

certainty equivalent in dollars ($)

100% Stock
800,000

600,000

400,000

200,000

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

5.25

5.00

4.75

4.50

4.25

4.00

3.75

3.50

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

0

alpha = coefficient of relative risk aversion

Figure 5.2.B: Certainty Equivalents and Risk Aversion for Households with High School or
Some College Education, Reduced Equity Premiums and SS + DB + Annuity Wealth
600,000

100% Bonds
50% Stock with Expected
Return Reduced 300bp /
50% Bonds
100% Stock with Expected
Return Reduced 300bp

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

alpha = coefficient of relative risk aversion

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

5.25

5.00

4.75

4.50

4.25

4.00

3.75

3.50

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0

0.00

certainty equivalent in dollars ($)

500,000

47
Figure 5.3.A: Certainty Equivalents and Risk Aversion for Households with High School or
Some College Education, Baseline Equity Returns and All Non-401(k) Wealth
1,200,000

1,000,000

100% Bonds
50% Stock / 50% Bonds

certainty equivalent in dollars ($)

100% Stock
800,000

600,000

400,000

200,000

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

5.25

5.00

4.75

4.50

4.25

4.00

3.75

3.50

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

0

alpha = coefficient of relative risk aversion

Figure 5.3.B: Certainty Equivalents and Risk Aversion, for Households with High School or
Some College Education Reduced Equity Premiums and All Non-401(k) Wealth
600,000

100% Bonds
50% Stock with Expected
Return Reduced 300bp /
50% Bonds
100% Stock with Expected
Return Reduced 300bp

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

alpha = coefficient of relative risk aversion

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

5.25

5.00

4.75

4.50

4.25

4.00

3.75

3.50

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0

0.00

certainty equivalent in dollars ($)

500,000

