INVENTORY INFORMATION
H. Henry Cao
Martin D. D. Evans
Richard K. Lyons
Working Paper 9893

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVENTORY INFORMATION
H. Henry Cao
Martin D. D. Evans
Richard K. Lyons
Working Paper 9893
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9893
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

We thank the following for valuable comments: an anonymous referee, Bruno Biais, Doug Breeden, Jennifer
Carpenter, Chris D’Souza, Rick Green, Frank Hatheway, David Hirshleifer, Burton Hollifield, Jonathan
Karpoff, Ananth Madhavan, Michael Melvin, Maureen O’Hara, Steve Slezak, James Wang, Ingrid Werner,
and seminar participants at CMU, Duke, Harvard, Washington, Ohio State, USC, UNC, Penn State, Florida,
Arizona State, UC Riverside, Insead, Oslo, Copenhagen, HEC, Toulouse, and the 1999 WFA. Evans and
Lyons thank the National Science Foundation for financial assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by H. Henry Cao, Martin D. D. Evans, and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Inventory Information
H. Henry Cao, Martin D. D. Evans, and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 9893
August 2003
JEL No. G12, G14, F31
ABSTRACT
In a market with symmetric information about fundamentals, can information-based trade still arise?
Consider bond and FX markets, where private information about nominal cash flows is generally
absent, but participants are convinced that superior information exists. We analyze a class of
asymmetric information – inventory information – that is unrelated to fundamentals, but still
forecasts future price (by forecasting future discount factors). Empirical work based on the analysis
shows that inventory information in FX does indeed forecast discount factors, and does so over both
short and long horizons. The immediate price impact of shocks to inventory information is large,
roughly 50 percent of that from public information shocks (the latter being the whole story under
symmetric information). Within about 30 minutes the transitory effect dies out, and prices reflect
a permanent effect from inventory information that ranges between 15 and 30 percent of that from
public information.
H. Henry Cao
University Of North Carolina-Chapel Hill
Department of Finance
Kenan-Flagler Business School
McColl Bldg. cb #3490
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
caoh@bschool.unc.edu
Martin D.D. Evans
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
Washington DC 20057
and NBER
evansm1@georgetown.edu

Richard K. Lyons
Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lyons@haas.berkeley.edu

Inventory Information

In a market with symmetric information about fundamentals, can information-based trade still
arise? The question is central to our understanding of some important markets, e.g., government
bond and FX markets, where the premise of symmetric information about fundamentals is
natural, yet participants are convinced that superior information exists (see, e.g., Cheung and
Wong 2000, Ciccotello and Hatheway, 2000, Massa and Simonov 2003, Green 2002). To resolve
the puzzle we address a class of information that we call inventory information. Inventory
information is orthogonal to fundamentals (that is, orthogonal to cash flows from holding the
asset, e.g., future coupons and principal in the case of a bond and future interest differentials in
the case of FX). At the same time, inventory information has the power to forecast future price. It
does so by forecasting future discount factors (over both short and long horizons).1 Inventory
information is also asymmetric: initially it manifests in marketmaker positions, which are
privately observed, and is only subsequently impounded in price. These two features—ability to
forecast price and private observation—provide the basis for information-based trade.
Beyond clarifying this information-based trade, our analysis shows that price effects from
non-fundamental trades are of three distinct types. The first is idiosyncratic to individual
marketmaker prices and is transitory—the so-called inventory effects from microstructure theory.
The second type is common to all marketmaker prices (intraday risk premia) and is also
transitory. In traditional models with a single marketmaker, the first and second of these are
effectively the same. The third type of price effect from non-fundamental trade is common to all
marketmaker prices and is permanent. This third price effect persists even after marketmaker
inventories are fully shared economy-wide (e.g., permanent portfolio effects across assets that are
imperfect substitutes; see, e.g., Scholes 1972 and Branson and Henderson 1985). Traditional
models of securities trading do not address this third effect: in most models, inventory risk is
assumed diversifiable at the economy-wide level.2 Our empirical methodology is designed to
accommodate this third, permanent effect.
Our empirical strategy for isolating price effects from inventory information is based on
the FX market, a market where superior information about future cash flows is generally absent.
1

The asset pricing literature addresses permanent price effects from changing discount factors, but without the
information-based trading that is our focus here. For example, Duffie and Constantinides (1996) show that permanent
shocks to endowments cannot be insured against and therefore affect prices. That permanent shocks to endowments are
relevant empirically is shown by Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2003).
2
This third type of effect also arises in the models of Lyons (1997) and Saar (1999) and is addressed empirically in
equity markets by Kaul, Mehrotra, and Morck (2000) and Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002).

1

This feature of FX is not shared by the equity market. For equities, empirical findings that order
flow induces permanent price changes is generally interpreted as evidence that initiating
counterparties have more information about future cash flows than is impounded in price. This
interpretation is sensible because (i) many factors affecting equity cash flows—e.g., earnings—
are well understood, and (ii) it is credible that some traders have superior information about these
factors. Neither condition applies to the FX market. The factors affecting cash flows to holding
major currencies are, empirically, unknown: movements in spot rates are almost completely
disconnected from the macroeconomic fundamentals that determine these cash flows (Meese and
Rogoff 1983, Frankel and Rose 1995).3 Moreover, even in the few cases where macro news
events do have significant (but small) effects on spot rates (Andersen et al. 2003), there is no
evidence that individuals have access to information prior to scheduled public release. In fact, the
only instance where asymmetric information about future cash flows might become an issue in
FX is when a central bank places an intervention trade. However, our sample period contains no
interventions, so even this potential source of trade-related cash-flow information is not present.
(In any event, most central bank intervention trades are “sterilized” as a matter of course,
meaning that their effects on macroeconomic variables like interest rates and money supplies are
neutralized.) In sum, the empirical case that FX trades do not contain information about cash
flows is a strong one.
We find that inventory information has both transitory and permanent price effects. The
immediate price impact from shocks to inventory information is about 50 percent of that from
shocks to public information (the latter being the whole story under symmetric information).
After 30 minutes the transitory effect of shocks to inventory information dies out, and prices
reflect a permanent effect that ranges between 15 and 30 percent of that from public information
(depending on model variations). These effects are precisely estimated and economically
significant. They imply that a $1 billion positive shock to interdealer order flow permanently
increases the deutschemark price of a dollar by 0.25 to 0.45 of a pfennig. Transitory price effects
are also significant: of the total variance of price changes from inventory information, transitory
effects account for between 43 and 89 percent at horizons from 30 minutes to two hours.4
One implication of our analysis is that past empirical work finding that order flow has
permanent effects on price may have misinterpreted this as evidence of private information about
3
As Meese (1990) put it in his survey, “the proportion of (monthly or quarterly) exchange rate changes that current
models can explain is essentially zero”. This is echoed in the later survey by Frankel and Rose (1995): “To repeat a
central fact of life, there is remarkably little evidence that macroeconomic variables have consistent strong effects on
floating exchange rates”. The consensus remains true today.
4 Transitory inventory effects on price are documented in Lyons (1995), Hansch et al. (1998), Madhavan and Sofianos
(1999), and Reiss and Werner (1999).

2

fundamentals, when in reality some permanent effects reflect dispersed information about
discount rates (for example, analysis using the methodology of Hasbrouck 1991).5 Our empirical
results are a first step in addressing these issues more fully.
From a modeling perspective, two main features distinguish our paper from earlier work.
The first is the question we address, which is not posed clearly elsewhere in the literature, to our
knowledge (whether information-based trade can still arise in a market with symmetric
information about fundamentals). That the question warrants posing is evidenced by recent
analysis of bond markets (e.g., Massa and Simonov 2003 and Green 2002) that uses the analysis
below as its driving theoretical motivation. We extend the Lyons (1997) model to address the
forecasting of discount factors (not an issue addressed in that paper). Our analysis demonstrates
that inventory information is not special, but relies instead on two rather generally present
ingredients: less than perfect transparency and risk aversion. Less than perfect transparency
insures that inventory information is not instantly symmetrized. Risk aversion insures that
inventory information is relevant to prices. The combination allows for information-based trading
even when fundamental information is symmetric.
The second feature that distinguishes our modeling is our information structure. There is
but a single source of information-based trade in the model: marketmakers’ private knowledge of
their own inventories, which are, by construction, orthogonal to fundamentals. This distinguishes
our work from all three of the leading theoretical approaches to securities trading: the rational
expectations approach, the microstructure information approach, and the microstructure inventory
approach. Our model differs from rational expectations models (e.g., Diamond and Verrecchia
1981 and Hellwig 1980) in that if one were to remove private cash-flow information from those
models, aggregate endowment shocks would be fully revealed, leaving no scope for trading based
on superior endowment information.6 This same property is true of the recent generation of
microstructure information models (e.g., Gennotte and Leland 1990, Roell 1990, Fishman and
Longstaff 1992, Kumar and Seppi 1992, Madrigal 1996, and Naik, Neuberger, and Viswanathan
1999). Though designed to address quite different issues (e.g., crashes, dual trading, and

5

Both the permanent and transitory price impacts from dispersed, non-fundamental information would show up (and be
interpreted) as fundamental information under structural empirical approaches like that of Madhavan and Smidt (1991).
The reason is straightforward in the case of permanent price impacts. For transitory price impacts, which in our model
are a function of dealer inventories on average, so long as individual dealer inventories do not correlated perfectly with
the average, then including a dealer’s own inventory in the regression will not fully account for the price effect.
6 Our analysis is not the first to use endowment-type information as conditioning information (early examples include
Diamond and Verrecchia 1981, Hellwig 1980, and Spiegel and Subrahmanyam 1992). The difference, as noted, is
whether this constitutes superior information for speculative trade when fundamental information is symmetric (and it
does not in all these other models). A more recent rational expectations analysis by Kraus and Smith (1989) shows
that—for certain equilibria—prices can move between periods even though it is common knowledge that no new
fundamental information has arrived. They do not address the implications of private non-fundamental information.

3

transparency), all these models include private information about fundamentals as an essential
ingredient: in each, superior information about some feature of the trading environment (such as
risky-asset endowments or liquidity-motivated demand) allows one to forecast how price is
misinterpreting cash flows. If these models excluded private information about cash flows, then
knowledge of the trading environment that is unrelated to fundamentals would not be useful in
forecasting price. (These models assume risk neutrality, so that direct effects on price from nonfundamental information cannot arise.) Our model departs from the microstructure inventory
approach in that those models generally do not allow, or do not address, how agents would
exploit their evolving inventory information via speculative position-taking (e.g., Biais 1993,
Vayanos 1999, Viswanathan and Wang 2000).7
The rest of the paper is in five sections. Section I presents a trading model designed to
isolate inventory information. Sections II and III describe the model’s equilibrium and present
results on how inventory information motivates speculative trade. Section IV presents our
empirical analysis. Section V concludes.

I. A Model of Interdealer Trading
Our multiple-dealer model corresponds most closely to trading in the largest multipledealer market—the market for spot foreign exchange (FX).8 This market is an interesting target
because, as noted, superior information about fundamentals—e.g., future interest differentials—is
generally absent, despite market participants being convinced that superior information exists
(see, e.g., Cheung and Wong 2000) and despite empirical findings consistent with information
asymmetries.9
We consider an infinitely lived, discrete-time trading environment with three agent types:
n dealers (who behave strategically), a continuum of liquidity-demanding customers, and a
continuum of liquidity-supplying customers. All agents maximize the following utility function:
∞

(1)

U t = ∑ −δ τ −t exp(−γ cτ )
τ =t

where ct is the agent’s consumption in period t, γ is the coefficient of (absolute) risk aversion, and
7

Though there is no information asymmetry across dealers in Vayanos (1998), that model does include a large nondealer participant who trades strategically based on his endowment (which is cash flow unrelated). There is now a large
literature on interdealer trade. On the theory side, see for example Ho and Stoll (1983), Vogler (1997), and Werner
(1997).
8
The model should not be viewed as applying to this market only, however. Most bond markets and many equity
markets share a similar multiple-dealer structure.
9
Though there is strong evidence that information asymmetries exist, these empirical results are not specific regarding
their nature. See, e.g., Lyons (1995), Yao (1998), Ito et al. (1998), Covrig and Melvin (2002), Payne (1999), Evans
(2002), and Evans and Lyons (2002).

4

δ is the rate of time preference (the latter two parameters assumed equal for all agents). We
assume that δ (1+r) = 1, where r is the net return on the riskless asset (this assumption greatly
simplifies the algebra in the dynamic programming problem).
Each day includes four trading rounds (see Figure 1). The day opens with a round of
trading between dealers and liquidity-demanding customers, which is followed with a round of
interdealer trading. After the first round of interdealer trading, order flow information is observed
and there is a second round of interdealer trading. After the two interdealer trading rounds there is
a final round of customer-dealer trade (this time with liquidity-supplying customers) to share risk
with the public more broadly. Indeed, the dealers will end each day with no net risky position,
leading them to maximize expected utility over intraday returns. Daily closing prices change due
to the permanent inventory shifts of the liquidity-demanding customers on the one hand and to
the willingness of the liquidity-supplying customers to absorb them on the other.
A key feature of the model is that trading within a round occurs simultaneously. This
simultaneous-trade approach is in the spirit of simultaneous-move games (cf, sequential-move
games). Simultaneous trading has the effect of constraining dealers’ conditioning information:
within any round dealers cannot condition on that round’s realization of others’ trades. We
consider this level of conditioning information more realistic than that implicit in rationalexpectations models (see Hellwig 1982 for another method of relaxing the strong assumption
about conditioning information in rational-expectations models). Realism aside, though, the
essential implication is that constraining conditioning information in this way allows dealers to
trade on inventory information before it is reflected in price. Thus, unlike traditional trading
models, in our model dealers can exploit inventory information in their trading.10
There are two assets, one riskless and one risky. The daily interest rate (net) on the
riskless asset is r.11 The cash flow in period t, Rt, on the risky asset is realized prior to the last
round of trading between the public and the dealers, where Rt is normally distributed about 0 with
known variance σ R2 :
(2)

(

Rt ~ N 0, σ R2

)

The cash flows on the risky asset are serially uncorrelated and the risky asset is in zero supply

10 The lack of an opportunity to exploit inventory information in traditional microstructure models may help explain
why that literature has paid so little attention to it for so long. Less than complete transparency is another means of
allowing dealers to trade on inventory information before it is impounded in price.
11
We assume that interest accrues between trading rounds 3 and 4. This does not affect any of our results and is
assumed for simplicity of exposition.

5

initially.12 Each day there are ten events, which occur in the following sequence (see Figure 1):
Round 1
Dealers quote
Customers trade with dealers
Round 2
Dealers quote
Dealers trade with dealers
Interdealer order flow is observed
Round 3
Dealers quote
Dealers trade with dealers
The cash flow Rt is realized
Round 4
Dealers quote
Dealers trade again with the public to share risk
Quoting Rules
The first event in all rounds is dealer quoting. Let Pijt denote the quote of dealer i in round
j on day t. The rules governing dealer quotes are:
(R1)
(R2)
(R3)

Quoting is simultaneous, independent, and required
Quotes are observable and available to all participants
Each quote is a single price at which the dealer agrees buy and sell any amount13
Rule 1 places this model in the simultaneous-trade approach to dealer markets (c.f., the

sequential trade approach of Glosten and Milgrom 1985). Though the sequential-trade approach
is popular for single-dealer modeling, it becomes unwieldy in multiple-dealer settings. (As an
empirical matter, simultaneous moves in the foreign exchange and bond markets occur, for
example, via electronic dealing systems that allow simultaneous quotes and simultaneous trades.)
The key implication of rule R1 is that the quote of dealer i in a given round j cannot be
conditioned on the round-j quotes of other dealers. That quotes are required prevents a dealer
from exiting the game at times of informational disadvantage; it squares with the fact that in
actual multiple-dealer markets, refusing to quote violates an implicit contract of reciprocal
immediacy and can be punished (e.g., by reciprocating with refusals).
12 In the introduction we noted that in order to isolate (and clarify) the role of non-fundamental information we specify
our model such that cash flow expectations never change. Constant cash flow expectations is a product of both the
simple specification of cash flows in equation (2) and the lack of any variable that can forecast those cash flows.
Adding dynamics to equation (2) would not change the essential economics of our analysis.
13
In the FX market, this assumption of a single price is much less extreme than in other markets: bid-ask spreads are
typically only 1-2 basis points for $10 million trades. In any event, our basic results go through in a variation of the
model in which each interdealer quote is a price schedule, but is observable and available to only one other dealer.
Though this variation is quite near to reality, it is a good deal more cumbersome. These results are available from the
authors on request.

6

Rule R2 defines the first of the model’s three dimensions of transparency: quotes are
fully transparent, which includes quotes for customer trades and for interdealer trades. Regarding
rule R3, note that it would be straightforward to add a commission or size-dependent spread for
customer trades in order to model the entry decision and endogenize the number of participating
dealers. Given the focus of this paper, modeling the entry decision is a distraction so we abstract
from it here.
Customer Trades
Market orders from liquidity-demanding (LD) customers arrive in round one and are
independent of the daily cash flow Rt. They are cleared at the receiving dealer’s round-one quote
Pi1t. Each customer trade is assigned—or preferenced—to a single dealer (possibly due to
unmodeled bilateral relationships). The total (net) customer order received by a particular dealer
is distributed normally around 0, with known variance σ x2 :

(

xit ~ N 0, σ x2

(3)

)

We use the convention that xit is positive for net customer purchases and negative for net sales.
Though the assumptions of preferencing and exogeneity of xit appear strong at this stage, we show
below that equilibrium dealer quotes in round one are all the same, and conditional on public
information this price is also unbiased, so LD customers are not being exploited at these prices.
LD customer trades embody the second of the model’s three dimensions of transparency:
xit is not observed by other dealers. This is important—these customer trades are the private nonfundamental information in the model. In foreign exchange, dealers have no direct information
about other banks’ customer trades.14
Interdealer Trading
The model’s four-round structure is designed to highlight the two rounds of interdealer
trading that occur in the middle of each day (as this is where price discovery occurs). Let Tijt
denote the net outgoing interdealer order placed by dealer i in round j (j=2,3); let T′ijt denote the
net incoming interdealer order received by dealer i in round j, placed by other dealers. The rules
governing interdealer trading for both rounds are as follows:
(R4)
(R5)
(R6)

Trading is simultaneous and independent
Trading with multiple partners is feasible
Trades are divided equally among dealers with the same quote (if any transaction is
desired at this quote).

14

Our specification accords well with practitioner survey responses that “better information” and “large customer base”
are the two main sources of competitive advantage for large players in the FX market (Cheung and Wong 2000).

7

Rule R4 generates an interesting role for T′ijt in the model: because interdealer trading is
simultaneous and independent, Tijt is not conditioned on T′ijt, so T′ijt is an unavoidable disturbance
to dealer i’s position in round j that must be carried into the following round. The restriction in
rule R6—that trades are split equally if quotes are common—can be relaxed. For example,
allowing a split into k<n equal fractions is straightforward as long as k is known. (An unknown m
generates a non-normal position disturbance.) This relaxation would provide less risk sharing, but
would not affect the path of price, nor would it affect dealers’ incentive to speculate on the basis
of private non-fundamental information (as we will see below).
Consider now the determination of dealer i’s outgoing interdealer orders in rounds 2 and
3 of each day. We sign all orders according to the party initiating the trade. Thus, Tijt is positive
for dealer i purchases, and T′ijt is positive for purchases by other dealers from dealer i.
Consequently, a positive xit or T′ijt corresponds to a dealer i sale. Letting Dijt denote dealer i’s
speculative demand, we have by definition:
(4)

Ti 2t = Di 2t + xit + E[Ti′2t | Ωi 2t ]

(5)

Ti 3t = ( Di 3t − Di 2t ) + (Ti′2t − E[Ti′2t | Ωi 2t ]) + E[Ti′3t | Ωi 3t ]

where Ωi2t and Ωi3t denote dealer i’s information sets at the time of trading in round two and
three, respectively. Equation (4) clarifies that dealer orders include both a speculative component
Di2t and two inventory control components xit and E[T′i2t|Ωi2t]. Di2t, the speculative demand, is
purely information driven: dealers use information from their private observation of customer
demand xit to forecast subsequent price changes. The first inventory control component, xit, must
be fully offset in interdealer trading to establish the desired position Di2t. The second inventory
control component E[Ti ′2 t | Ωi 2 t ] reflects that dealers also do their best to hedge against the
incoming dealer order T′i2t (the realization of which they cannot know ex-ante due to
simultaneous trading). In round three, establishing the speculative demand Di3t implies that the
trade rule for Ti3t has three components. It must account for the change in speculative demand
(Di3t –Di2t) plus two inventory control components, the first reflecting the unexpected component
of the realized incoming round-two order and the second reflecting the hedge of the round-three
incoming order (the plus sign preceding T′i2t in equation 5 reflects that T′i2t > 0 is a dealer i sale in
round two).
Interdealer Order Flow
The last event in round two defines the third of the model’s three dimensions of
transparency – that applying to interdealer trades. At the close of round two all dealers observe
round-two interdealer order flow:

8

N

Z t ≡ ∑ Ti 2t .

(6)

i =1

This sum over Ti2t is net interdealer demand – the difference in buy and sell orders. In bond and
FX markets, Zt is the information on interdealer order-flow provided by interdealer brokers (see
Lyons 2001 for details). Actual dealers in these markets describe this is an essential source of
real-time information.
Note that we specify this as a noiseless measure, which maximizes the transparency
difference across trade types (customer-dealer with zero transparency and interdealer with
complete transparency). As noted above, FX trades between customers and dealers do indeed
have zero transparency. It is not the case, however, that the actual transparency of interdealer
trades is complete. Nevertheless, it will be clear from our results that adding noise to equation (6)
has no qualitative impact, so we stick to this simpler specification.
Trading with the Public
Liquidity-supplying (LS) customer trades in round four are non-stochastic: these agents
are induced to trade conditional on past price movements and other information available to them.
These trades are the means by which dealers share overnight risk with the non-dealer public.
Round four begins with each dealer quoting (simultaneously and independently) a scalar price Pi4t
at which he agrees to buy and sell any amount. These quotes are observable and available to all
LS customers.
The mass of public investors on the interval [0,m] is large relative to the n dealers. This
implies that the dealers’ capacity for bearing overnight risk is small relative to the public’s
capacity (despite dealers and public investors having the same coefficient of risk aversion).
Nevertheless, the public is assumed to have finite risk-bearing capacity. Under these assumptions,
dealers will optimally set prices such that the public willingly absorbs dealer inventory
imbalances, and each dealer ends the day with no net position.15 These round-four prices are
conditioned on the interdealer order flow Zt. The interdealer order flow informs dealers of the
total size of the position that the public needs to absorb to bring the dealers back to a position of
zero.
Dealer Objectives and Information Sets
Each dealer determines quotes and speculative demand by maximizing the utility
function shown in equation (1). Because dealers hold no overnight positions, and because dealers

15 Technically, these assumptions would drive dealers’ overnight demand arbitrarily close to zero, but not to zero, since
dealers’ aggregate mass is not zero. That we treat their overnight demand as exactly zero must therefore be considered
an assumption.

9

face a daily stochastic environment that is time invariant, solution to the corresponding oneperiod problem is intertemporally optimal. Letting Wi4t denote the end-of-day t wealth of dealer i,
we can write this problem as:

E [ − exp(−γˆWi 4t | Ωi1t ) ]

MAX

(7)

,

,

,

,

,

{ Pi1t Pi 2 t Pi 3 t Pi 4 t Di 2 t Di 3 t }

s.t.

Wi 4t = (Wi0t + xit Pi1t +Ti'2t Pi 2t +Ti3' t Pi3t −Ti2t Pi'2t −Ti3t Pi3' t )(1+ r)

+ (−xit −Ti'2t +Ti2t −Ti3' t + Ti3t )(Pi'4t + Rt )

where γˆ is the intertemporal risk aversion coefficient (i.e., that which applies to wealth, as
opposed to the γ in equation 1 that applies to periodic consumption).16 Pijt is dealer i’s round-j
quote, a ′ denotes a quote or trade received by dealer i. The first term in brackets in the constraint
reflects the aggregate position in the risk free asset at the time of the net cash flow on that asset
(that cash flow being r). The final term in brackets reflects the round-four liquidation of any
remaining risky-asset position. The conditioning information Ωijt at each decision node is
summarized in Appendix A.
Market Clearing
Since dealers end the day without any net position, market clearing requires that the LS
customers’ demand dt absorbs all the orders of the customers in the first round. Therefore,

d t + xt = 0

(8)

where we have defined xt =Σixit as the aggregate LD customer flow in round one.
To solve the model, we first conjecture the pricing and trading strategies for dealers and
public investors and then show that the proposed equilibrium is consistent with dealers’ and
public investors’ maximizing behavior. (Detailed proofs are provided in Appendix A.) Let ht-1
denote the aggregate holdings of the LS customers at the end of day t-1. Remember that, by
assumption, dealers hold zero inventory at the end of each trading day. Thus we must have:
ht = ht-1 + dt

(9)

The LS customers trade dynamically in the fourth round of each day to maximize their expected
utility (equation 1).

The appendix shows that γˆ = γ r (1 + r ) . Intuitively, consumption effects from changes in wealth are smoothed
across a perpetuity of consumption, which is why γˆ < γ . In continuous time, γˆ = rγ .

16

−1

10

II. Equilibrium
The equilibrium concept we use is that of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium (PBE). Under
PBE, Bayes rule is used to update beliefs and strategies are sequentially rational given those
beliefs.
Solving for the symmetric PBE, first we consider properties of optimal quoting strategies.
Consider first the sequence of end-of-day prices:

PROPOSITION 1: There exists an equilibrium in which end-of-day price is a linear function of
the aggregate LS customer holdings:

P4t = − aht
Proofs are in the appendix. The intuition is the following: Because the aggregate speculative
demand of LS customers is not perfectly elastic, and given the unchanging stream of expected
risky-asset cash flows (Rt), LS customers will only hold a larger position (higher ht) if they are
induced to do so with a lower price, i.e., with a higher expected return.
This first proposition is crucial for understanding how inventory information (i.e., nonfundamental information that is first impounded in dealer inventories) can be useful for
forecasting permanent price components. LS customers will forever need a lower price to induce
them to hold larger positions ht indefinitely (and these positions do need to be held indefinitely
because LD customer flows are not mean reverting). Information about increments to ht is
impounded in dealer inventories and revealed to the market by via interdealer trading.
Consider now the three price quotes within each trading day. The following proposition
addresses quotes in rounds one and two:

PROPOSITION 2: A quoting strategy is consistent with symmetric PBE only if the round-one
and round-two quotes are common across dealers and both are unbiased
predictors of the following round’s price conditional on public information:

P1t = E[ P2 t | Ω1t ]
P2t = E[ P3t | Ω 2t ]
To understand why the quote P1t to customers in round-one is an unbiased predictor of the
interdealer quote P2t in round two, let us suppose it is not, which we will see is inconsistent with

11

market clearing.17 Market clearing in round one requires a price at which expected dealer
demands and expected customer demands sum to zero. Now, if the price change expected from
round one to round two is not zero (i.e., if P1t is a biased predictor of P2t), then dealers’ aggregate
demand in round one would not be zero. But because customer demand xt is an exogenous, meanzero variable, before its realization the expectation of xt is necessarily zero. Therefore, any biased
price cannot be an equilibrium price. The logic for understanding why the price in round two
needs to be an unbiased predictor of the round-three price is the same: in that case, unbiasedness
is necessary for market clearing in interdealer trading.
An implication of common quotes is that in round two each dealer receives a 1/n share of
the orders submitted by other dealers (per trading rule R6). This order corresponds to the position
disturbance T′i2t in the dealer’s problem in Eq. (7). The next proposition addresses round-three
quotes:

PROPOSITION 3: A quoting strategy is consistent with symmetric PBE only if the common
round-three quote is:

P3t = E[ P4t /(1 + r ) | Ω3t ] + λZ t
The value of the constant λ (λ > 0) is presented in the appendix. The no-arbitrage argument that
establishes common quotes is the same as that for proposition 1. Like P1t and P2t, P3t necessarily
depends only on public information (because quotes must be common). Here, the additional
public information is the interdealer order-flow Z t.
Intuition for λ > 0 is important because P3t is what motivates dealers’ information-based
speculation. The market clearing condition is similar to that in round two:
n

(10)

∑ (T
i =1

n

i 3t

− Ti ′3t ) = ∑ ( Di 3t + xit + E[Ti ′2 t | Ω i 3t ] − Ti′3t ) = 0
i =1

Taking the expectation using public information in round three (price being set on the basis of
this expectation), we get:
n

(11)

∑ ( E[ x
i =1

it

| Ω3t ] + E[ Di 3t ( P3t ) | Ω3t ]) = 0

In this case, however, E[xit|Ω3t]≠0 since interdealer order flow Zt is contained in Ω3t and provides
information about the realized xit. A negative Zt, for example, means that average Ti2t is negative –
dealers are selling in interdealer trading. This implies that, prior to interdealer trading, customers
17

That the Nash equilibrium in price quotes is based on public information only (i.e., dealers optimally put zero weight

12

sold on average; i.e., the negative Zt reflects dealers’ laying off long positions they acquired from
customers – the xit term in Eq. (11). If customers sold in round one then in round two dealers are
long. To clear the market in round three, expected P4t-P3t(1+r) must be positive to induce dealers
to hold this long position. P3t must therefore fall below E[P4t /(1+r)|Ω3t] to provide the positive
intraday return needed to compensate dealers.18 The end result is that the negative Zt drives a
reduction in price, that is, λ >0, as we set out to show. As in proposition 1, any price other than
P3t = E[P4t /(1+r)|Ω3t]+ λZt is incompatible with equilibrium since dDi3t/dP3t < 0. In the fourth
round, dealers trade with the public to clear their inventory.
Notice that the price change between the second and third rounds of trade will be
positively correlated with inter-dealer order flows Zt. Moreover, the price change between the
third and fourth rounds will be negatively correlated with inter-dealer order flows Zt, i.e., price
exhibits high frequency mean reversion. If the round-one customer flow had been publicly
observed, then dynamics would be unrelated to the interdealer flows.

Trading Strategies
Given the quoting strategy described in propositions 1 and 2, the following optimal
trading strategy corresponds to symmetric linear equilibrium:
PROPOSITION 4: The following trading strategy profile ∀i ∈ {1,...,n} is a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, where β2>1 and β3<0:

Ti 2t = β 2 xit
Ti 3t = β 3 xit
The values of the β coefficients are presented in the appendix.19 Recall that the quoting
rules for P2t and P3t are linear in E[P3t], and in E[P4t] and Zt, respectively. The trading rules have a
corresponding linear structure deriving from exponential utility and normality, which generate
linear speculative demand. The derivations in the appendix insure that the quoting and trading

on their private information in setting quotes) is shown in a similar setting in Lyons (1997).
18
Recall that the day’s random payoff Rt (equation 2) is realized between the determination of P3t and P4t, so dealers
are exposed to intraday risk here. At the same time, the expectation of Rt is always zero (i.e., there is no private
information about fundamentals), which is why we do not include Rt in this discussion of the dealers’ expected return.
19 The result that β >1 is reminiscent of results from the dual trading literature (see, e.g., Roell 1990 and Fishman and
2
Longstaff 1992). The dual trading literature is set in a context of risk-neutral agents so it is not equipped to address
non-fundamental information. That a setting without any private information about fundamentals can produce trading
behavior similar to settings that include such information is part of what we set out to show in this paper.

13

strategies are mutually consistent and sequentially rational. These strategies impound dealer
recognition that their own actions affect price.
Here is the intuition behind the result. Recall from propositions 2 and 3 that the return
P3t–P2t is wholly a function of public information revealed in that time interval. Recall too that
within that interval interdealer order flow Zt is the only public information revealed. The positive
value of the coefficient λ in proposition 3 ensures that the return P3t–P2t is positively related to
the realization of Zt. At the time of trading in round two, individual dealers do not know the
realization of Zt. But since Zt is simply the sum over all the dealers’ round-two trades Ti2t, each
dealer does know one component of Zt, namely his own trade (and dealers are fully strategic
about their own effect on prices). This creates a risk-return tradeoff that would not otherwise
exist, the risk being uncertainty about other dealers’ trades in Zt (and there is nothing in the model
that helps a dealer forecast those other components of Zt). To see why β2 is larger than 1, i.e., why
the dealer rides herd on his customer order, notice that the positive λ driving P3t means that price
will move in the same direction as the dealer’s order Ti2t. After receiving a positive customer
trade xit, the dealer is short. A non-speculative dealer would buy just enough in the interdealer
market to cover that short. A speculative dealer buys more than this because the long position will
profit from the price increase his trade induces. Moreover, β3 < 0, as dealers adjust their roundtwo positions in the third round (per equation 5). This indicates that price (P3t-P2t) will be
positively correlated with contemporaneous order flows (Ti2t) but negatively correlated with
lagged order flows (Ti3t).

III. Speculation Based on Inventory Information
The trading strategies in proposition 4 have implications for the role of private nonfundamental information, and more specifically, for the role of inventory information. For
example, the coefficient in the rule for round-two trading implies that non-fundamental
information motivates dealer speculation.

PROPOSITION 5: Under some regularity conditions, the proposed equilibrium characterized in
propositions 1-4 exists. In addition, though the model contains no private
fundamental information, dealers can still speculate based on private nonfundamental information.
This proposition follows directly from the expression for β2 in proposition 4. Specifically, the
appendix shows that β2 >1 (under some regularity conditions). In the “no speculation” case, β2= 1
14

since a non-speculative dealer would simply offset his round-one customer trade with an
interdealer trade, one-for-one. Instead, the dealer chooses to open a risky position, using his
private information as the basis.
The next proposition generalizes our simple example.
PROPOSITION 6: Superior information about other determinants of P3t also qualifies as private
non-fundamental information, in particular superior information about n, γ,

σ x2 , or σ R2 .
This proposition follows directly from the proof of proposition 2, which shows that P2t is a
function of all these parameters, none of which provides information about cash flows. Though
our model focuses on inventory information as one element within the larger non-fundamental
class, proposition 6 clarifies that many other partitions of the non-fundamental class exist (indeed,
there are many partitions beyond those specified in the proposition).
The reason we specify the model without private fundamental information is to establish
that our results are not based on trades that are cash-flow irrelevant being mistaken for cash-flow
relevant trades, as occurs in many other models in the literature. Given this specification choice, it
is helpful to link our result to more familiar contexts, in particular those with private fundamental
information. The next proposition makes this link by addressing the robustness of private nonfundamental information as a motive for speculation.

PROPOSITION 7: Introducing private fundamental information does not preclude dealers from
speculating based on private non-fundamental information.

This proposition also follows directly from the earlier propositions. Specifically, introducing
private information about Rt does not alter the two risk-premium effects on P3t necessary to clear
the interdealer market (the first being the transitory component that clears the interdealer market
and the second being the permanent component that anticipates the P4t that clears the wider
market). Clearly, introducing private fundamental information will alter the demand function
described following appendix equation (A7), but one component of that demand function will still
represent non-fundamental information.
Before turning to the empirical model of the next section, let us review some key features
of our analytical findings. First, when customer order flows (and dealer inventories) are not
publicly known, interdealer order flow is the means by which information impounded in dealer

15

inventories is subsequently impounded in price. Second, one of the price components that
inventory information produces is a transitory, intraday effect (corresponding to P4t-P3t). Third,
the other price component that inventory information produces is permanent, corresponding to
P4t-P4t-1 (i.e., the daily return). This sharp distinction between transitory and permanent
components contrasts with analysis of finite-horizon models (e.g., Lyons 1997 and Evans and
Lyons 2002) where the meaning of permanent is unclear since price ultimately converges to the
ultimate payoff value in these models.

IV. Empirical Model and Results
Our empirical strategy is the following. First, we choose a financial market—foreign
exchange—for which both theory and empirics line up strongly against the presence of private
information of the fundamental type (as described in the introduction; for this statement we have
in mind the major currencies like the $/DM or $/Yen). Second, we provide a flexible empirical
model for decomposing price into the components highlighted in previous sections. Third, we
design the empirical model so that price discovery is driven by the same order-flow concept that
drives our analytical work, namely interdealer order flow Zt.
We begin by breaking transaction prices into three parts:

(12)

Pt = Pt PI + Pt II + wt ,

The observed price level includes a component of public fundamental information (PI), Pt PI , a
component of inventory information (II), Pt II , and a serially uncorrelated sampling error, wt .20
(Though Et[Rt+1] is by design not changing in our theoretical model, an empirical model needs to
accommodate such changes, hence the introduction of Pt PI .) The public information component
follows a random walk:

(13)

∆Pt PI = ε t

This error is present because at any given moment our dataset provides a single price from what is in reality a crosssectional distribution of prices (see Evans 2002 for analysis of this cross-sectional property of these data). One cause of
this distribution is idiosyncratic effects of inventory on individual dealer prices (described in our introduction as the
first of the three price effects from non-fundamental trades). These transitory, idiosyncratic effects do not arise in our
theoretical model, nor are they the focus here. Our focus is instead on the price effects from inventory information that
are common to all dealers (both transitory and permanent effects).

20

16

The inventory information component Pt II is impounded in price through interdealer trading; this
is where dispersed information about customer demands xit is aggregated in observable order
flow. We model the inventory information component as following the (quite flexible) movingaverage process:

∆Pt II = Γ( L)et .

(14)

where et is the innovation in aggregate interdealer flow Zt during period t and Γ(L) is a lag
polynomial (as yet unspecified). This innovation et can be estimated from realized interdealer
flow Zt as a moving-average process:

(15)

Z t = Θ( L)et .

where Θ(L) is another lag polynomial (as yet unspecified). Per our model above, the et shocks are
reflections of (unmeasured) innovations in aggregate LD customer orders xt. Importantly, these
shocks are independent of the public information shocks ε t and the sampling errors wt .
To disentangle transitory and permanent effects of inventory information, we decompose
that component of price change Pt II into two parts, one transitory and one permanent. In
particular, we assume that (14) can be written as:

(16)

∆Pt II = Γ( L)et + Γ(1)et

where the lag polynomial Γ ( L) is defined as Γ ( L) ≡ Γ( L ) − Γ (1) . The notation Γ (1) is standard
for denoting the sum of all coefficients in a moving-average polynomial Γ(L). As such, Γ (1)

identifies the permanent change in Pt II induced by an et shock (i.e., once et has passed through all
of the moving-average coefficients, the final net effect is the sum of all those coefficients). Thus,
the first effect of inventory information Γ( L)et is transitory and the second Γ (1)et is permanent.
In our earlier theoretical model, these two parts correspond to the two price effects engendered by
the initial impact of λZ. The transitory part in that model corresponds to an intraday risk premium
(in the spirit of Spiegel and Subrahmanyam 1995), whereas the permanent part is that which

17

remains even after dealer inventories are shared marketwide (i.e., P4t-P4t-1).21 Both parts are
driven by order flow shocks but differ in their long-run impact on the price level. The focus of
our empirical analysis will therefore be on estimating Γ(1) and Γ( L ) . If inventory information
plays a role in determining prices, we should expect to find significant coefficients in both Γ(1)
and Γ( L ) .22

Estimation
To estimate equations (12) – (15) we need to restrict the form of the moving-average
polynomials Γ( L ) and Θ( L ) . We begin with the following flexible forms (and provide results for
more restricted forms, which ensures robustness has not been compromised):

(17)

(18)

Γ( L ) =

B ( L) b0 + b1 L + b2 L2
=
A( L) 1 − a1 L − a 2 L2

Θ( L ) =

D( L) 1 + d1 L + d2 L2
=
C( L ) 1 − c1 L − c2 L2

where the roots of A( z ) = 0, and C( z ) = 0 lie outside the unit circle. Thus, the inventory
information component in prices, ∆Pt II , and interdealer order flow Zt are assumed to follow
covariance stationary processes. Substituting these restrictions into equations (12) – (15) allows
us to write the model’s reduced form as:

(19)

∆Pt = A( L ) −1 B( L)et + ε t + wt − wt −1 ,

(20)

Z t = C ( L) −1 D ( L)et .

21

As noted in the introduction, inventory effects on price are of three types: transitory effects idiosyncratic to
individual prices, transitory effects common to all dealer prices, and permanent effects common to all dealer prices that
persist even after dealer inventories are shared economy-wide. This empirical specification is designed to separate the
permanent effects from the transitory effects. (Our theoretical model did not admit the first type because idiosyncratic
price effects were ruled out by no-arbitrage.)
22
One might argue that a finding of significant Γ ( L ) is not sufficient to establish the presence of speculative
opportunities of the kind described by our model. For example, if customer trades are perfectly transparent then
superior information would not exist, even in a world where the estimated Γ ( L ) is positive. But it is an institutional
fact that FX dealers have private information about their customers’ trades, so this critique of our findings is of little
practical relevance.

18

The parameters to be estimated include the coefficients of the lag polynomials

A( L), B ( L), C ( L), and D( L) , and the variances of the shocks wt , ε t , and et . Estimates of these
parameters are obtained by the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) using the autocovariance matrix for Yt = [ ∆Pt Z t ]' . In particular, let Ω( j ) = E[Yt Yt'− j ] denote the covariance

matrix of Yt at lag j. GMM estimates are obtained by matching the theoretical values for Ω( j )
implied by (19) and (20) against sample estimates of Ω( j ) for j = 0, 1,…,12 (see appendix for
details).
Our empirical model differs in several respects from those in earlier studies based on
time-series models for price changes and order flow, most notably Hasbrouck (1991), and more
recently in the context of FX by Payne (1999). Hasbrouck’s calculations of the share of
permanent price changes attributable to order flow are derived from estimates of a VAR. This
approach assumes that the Wold (Vector Moving Average) representation for price changes and
order flow is invertible. In our model, by contrast, the VMA process is not invertible due to the
presence of the sampling-error component (i.e., the wt shock) in transaction prices. (Evans, 2002
shows that this component is economically quite significant, a finding confirmed by the
parameter estimates in Table 1 below.) The second important difference in our approach is that it
allows us to place theoretical restrictions on the VMA representation for price changes and order
flow implied by theory. In particular, our model implies that there are no lagged values of ε t in
the VMA representation. It is not possible to place these restrictions on the VMA representation
implied by a VAR (without parameter restrictions). Thus, even if our model had an invertible
VMA representation, the VAR method would yield less efficient estimates of the price change
and order flow process (under the null of a correctly specified model). Our model also differs
from Evans (2002) in that we jointly estimate the price change and order flow processes. This
allows us to conduct inference on the response of price to inventory shocks; and, in particular,
assess the significance of any permanent price effects.

Data
We use transactions prices and interdealer order flow from Reuters Dealing 2001
observed at a five-minute observation interval. (See Evans 2002 for more detail on the Reuters
source of these data.) Pt is the last deutsche mark purchase price for dollars during observation
interval t. (Using only purchase prices, i.e., only transactions at the ask, eliminates noise from
bid-ask bounce.) This is the transaction price of buyer-initiated transactions between two dealers.

19

Interdealer order flow, Zt, is the difference between the number of buyer- and seller-initiated
orders between the midpoints of intervals t and t+1.23
Results
Table 1 reports results for 6 alternative specifications for the lag polynomials

A( L), B ( L), C ( L), and D( L) . Panel A reports the GMM parameter estimates and asymptotic
standard errors corrected for the presence of conditional heteroskedasticity. Models I-III assume
that order flow follows an ARMA(2,1) process, while models IV – VI assume an ARMA(2,2)
process.24 Estimates of the process ∆Pt II (price increments from inventory information) are
reported in the first four rows of the table. The estimate of b0 is approximately 0.30 in every
model and is highly statistically significant. This implies that shocks to interdealer order flow
affect prices contemporaneously. The next four rows report estimates of the interdealer order flow
process Zt. These estimates imply that Zt is a persistent but stationary process.
Panel B reports implications for permanent and transitory price effects from inventory
information. The first row captures the permanent impact. It reports the implied estimate of
Γ(1) .25 The estimates range from 0.00108 to 0.00189 and are all highly statistically significant.
Given an average trade size of $3.9 million, these estimates imply that a $1 billion positive shock
to interdealer order flow permanently increases the deutsche mark price of the dollar by 0.25 to
0.45 of a pfennig. The next rows report the estimates of Γ(0), which correspond to the total

initial impact of order flow shocks (i.e., the permanent and transitory combined). These estimates
range from 0.00270 to 0.00306 and are all significantly different from zero. They imply that a $1
billion positive shock to interdealer order flow contemporaneously increases the deutsche mark
price of a dollar by 0.69 to 0.78 pfennig.
For further perspective on the economic significance of shocks to inventory information,
we compare the response of price to this information relative to the price response to public
information. Specifically, we use the model estimates to compute IR(k): the response of the price
level at t+k to a one standard deviation shock in inventory information et, relative to the effects of
a one standard deviation shock in public information ε t . As the table shows, the immediate

23

Our dataset does not include information on trade size, only trade sign. Even in instances where past researchers have
had data on both sign and size, however, they have chosen to measure order flow as the net number of trades (e.g.,
Hasbrouck 1991).
24 As shown in equation (17), we allowed for the lag polynomial B(L) to be second order, but there is no evidence that
b2≠0, so our results are based on B(L) being first order.
25
See Appendix B for details on our econometric identification of the permanent and transitory components of the lag
polynomial Γ(L). Specifically, we examine specifications flexible enough to allow short lags (up to 15 minutes) before
the permanent effects of order flow are fully reflected in prices.

20

impact of a typical inventory shock is approximately 45 percent the size of a typical public news
shock. Over the next 30 minutes, the transitory contribution of the inventory shock subsides.
Thereafter, prices reflect the permanent effect of the inventory shock, which range between 15
and 30 percent (according to the model specification). These estimates of permanent effects
indicate that inventory shocks play an economically significant role in the determination of spot
rates at macroeconomic frequencies.
Note that the long-run price effects are precisely estimated and highly statistically
significant.26 We attribute this level of precision to the four-month span of our data. Though this
time span is short relative to many macroeconomic half-lives (i.e., the half-lives of stationary
macro time-series), it is orders of magnitude longer than the half-lives of variables associated
with trading.27 For example, Lyons (1995) estimates the half-life of an FX dealer’s positions to be
approximately 10 minutes. On par with this, our estimates of the impulse response functions show
that the half-life of transitory effects from inventory shocks is about 15 minutes. Compared
against this trading time scale, four months of trading data constitute a rather long sample,
providing further assurance that our inferences concerning persistent effects are reliable.
We examine the temporal impact of inventory shocks more closely in the remaining rows
of the table. Here we report the share of the total price effect from inventory information that
comes from the transitory component. For this purpose we calculate the ratio:

(21)

R(k ) =

var(∆ k PtTrans )
var(∆ k Pt II )

26

The precision of the estimates differentiates our results on permanent effects from others in the literature. In
particular, Payne (1999) computes the contribution of order flow shocks to exchange rates from a VAR using one week
of data. Though his were the only data on brokered interdealer trading available at that time, they offer less information
on permanent price effects than our four-month sample. In one section of his paper, Evans (2002) reports variance
decompositions indicating that shocks to order flow affect prices at various frequencies, but does not address the
statistical significance of permanent effects. (Froot and Ramadorai 2002 address permanent effects from portfolio
flows, but their data do not include measures of order flow, i.e., there is no way to distinguish buyer- from sellerinitiated trades, which is essential for disentangling demand curves shifts—news—from price-induced movement along
demand curves.)
27
To elaborate, consider the half-life of departures from the macro relation called purchasing power parity (PPP). The
consensus estimate of that half-life is 4 years (Froot and Rogoff 1995). With such a long half-life, how large a sample
would be needed to estimate PPP with as many half-lives in the sample as we have in our sample? The estimated halflife of transitory inventory effects in our sample is 15 minutes. Our four-month sample implies about 3500 of these
half-lives (based on trading between 7:00 am and 5:00 pm). The comparable time span for macro PPP data would be
approximately 14,000 years (3500 x 4 years). It is hard to believe that there would be much debate about the long-run
properties of macro time series over so long a time span. In any case, while we cannot claim that inventory shocks
literally affect the exchange rate forever (since that would require infinite data series), we feel justified in asserting that
our model provides precise estimates of the persistent effects.

21

where ∆k denotes the k-difference operator and Pt Trans is the transitory component Γ( L)et (from
equation 16). The table reports ratios ranging from k = 6 to 24 (5 minutes to 2 hours), together
with asymptotic standard errors.
If transitory effects from inventory information are not an economically important factor
driving prices in the short run, the estimates of R(k) should be insignificantly different from zero
for all horizons k. The table shows that this is not the case (for any of the models): the transitory
effect of inventory information appears to contribute between 43 and 89 percent of the standard
deviation in inventory information price changes over horizons from 30 minutes to two hours.

22

Table 1: Model Estimates
Model Variations
I

II
III
IV
V
VI
Coeff. (S.E.) Coeff. (S.E.) Coeff. (S.E.) Coeff. (S.E.) Coeff. (S.E.) Coeff. (S.E.)

Panel A
a1
a2

b0 (x100)
b1 (x100)
c1
c2

d1
d2

σe
σε
σω

-0.646 (0.048) -0.529 (0.073) -0.341 (0.346) -0.623 (0.048) -0.457 (0.076) -0.374 (0.319)
0.123 (0.251)
0.063 (0.225)
0.291 (0.035) 0.274 (0.036) 0.270 (0.036) 0.306 (0.034) 0.290 (0.036) 0.288 (0.036)
-0.100 (0.037) -0.153 (0.088)

-0.124 (0.037) -0.147 (0.088)

1.039 (0.081) 1.049 (0.089) 1.057 (0.094) 0.423 (0.153) 0.424 (0.151) 0.428 (0.155)
-0.129 (0.035) -0.125 (0.036) -0.128 (0.036) 0.363 (0.107) 0.382 (0.104) 0.379 (0.106)
-0.850 (0.073) -0.876 (0.081) -0.885 (0.087) -0.211 (0.151) -0.226 (0.149) -0.231 (0.152)
-0.442 (0.088) -0.473 (0.089) -0.470 (0.090)
4.233 (0.080) 4.217 (0.080) 4.212 (0.080) 4.231 (0.081) 4.215 (0.080) 4.215 (0.081)
0.038 (0.002) 0.037 (0.002) 0.037 (0.002) 0.038 (0.002) 0.039 (0.002) 0.038 (0.002)
0.034 (0.002) 0.033 (0.002) 0.034 (0.002) 0.034 (0.002) 0.033 (0.002) 0.033 (0.002)

Panel B
Γ(1) (x100)
Γ(0) (x100)

0.177 (0.025) 0.114 (0.032) 0.096 (0.042) 0.189 (0.025) 0.114 (0.032) 0.108 (0.040)
0.291 (0.035) 0.274 (0.036) 0.270 (0.036) 0.306 (0.034) 0.290 (0.036) 0.288 (0.036)

IR(0): impact
IR(3): 15 min.

0.463 (0.052) 0.436 (0.051) 0.430 (0.052) 0.482 (0.051) 0.440 (0.049) 0.448 (0.050)
0.357 (0.036) 0.253 (0.051) 0.225 (0.057) 0.369 (0.036) 0.229 (0.050) 0.228 (0.056)

IR(6): 30 min.
IR( ∞ ): perm.

0.261 (0.042) 0.170 (0.049) 0.141 (0.068) 0.279 (0.042) 0.168 (0.047) 0.160 (0.064)
0.281 (0.037) 0.181 (0.049) 0.153 (0.065) 0.297 (0.038) 0.173 (0.047) 0.167 (0.060)

R(6): 30 min.

0.796 (0.013) 0.864 (0.038) 0.892 (0.064) 0.790 (0.012) 0.866 (0.038) 0.878 (0.058)

R(12): 1 hr.
0.591 (0.013) 0.689 (0.059) 0.736 (0.111) 0.585 (0.012) 0.698 (0.060) 0.715 (0.093)
R(24): 2 hrs.
0.430 (0.011) 0.525 (0.061) 0.576 (0.125) 0.425 (0.010) 0.535 (0.064) 0.554 (0.101)
Notes: The table reports GMM estimates of the model:
Z t = Θ( L )et
∆Pt = Γ ( L )et + ε t + wt − wt −1 ,
where Γ( L ) = (b0 + b1 L ) (1 − a1 L − a2 L2 ) and Θ( L ) = (1 + d1 L + d2 L2 ) (1 − c1 L − c2 L2 ) . Pt is the last DM purchase
price for dollars during observation interval t. Interdealer order flow, Zt, is defined by the difference between the
number of buyer-initiated orders and seller-initiated orders between the midpoints of intervals t and t+1. In Panel B,
Γ(1) measures the permanent price effect of shocks to inventory information, whereas Γ(0) measures the initial price
impact of shocks to inventory information. IR(k) is the impulse response of the price level at t+k to a one standard
deviation shock to inventory information et relative to the effects of a one standard deviation shock to public
information ε t . R(k) is the contribution at horizon k of transitory price changes from inventory information to the
standard deviation of total price changes from inventory information (measured in 5 minute intervals).

R (k ) =

(

var(∆ k PtTrans )

)(

var(∆ k Pt II )

)

−1

,

Estimation details are described in Appendix B. Asymptotic standard errors, corrected for conditional heteroskedasticity, are reported in parentheses.

23

V. Conclusion
We posed a specific question at the outset: In a market with symmetric information about
fundamentals, can information-based trade still arise? This paper shows the answer is yes and
provides some conceptual room for why. That there is any need for this conceptual room is due at
least in part to models of trading that historically define private information rather narrowly. The
inventory information we introduce here is unrelated to fundamentals, yet still provides a motive
for speculation because it correlates with future price. As is well known, many factors affect
future price not by affecting expected cash flows, but by affecting discount rates. Examples
include features of the economy like traders’ endowments, risk aversions, trading constraints, and
many others. What we have done here is add superior knowledge of these factors. Note that our
model does not rely on non-fundamental trades masquerading as fundamental information; to
make this distinction clear we specified the model without any private fundamental information.
In effect, the paper occupies a space between literatures in asset pricing and microstructure, the
former treating permanent endowment effects on price but without information asymmetries (e.g.,
Duffie and Constantinides 1996 and Storesletten et al. 2003), whereas the latter treats information
asymmetries but only those relating to cash flows.
The idea of inventory information is not special, but relies instead on two rather generally
present ingredients: less than perfect transparency and risk aversion. Less than perfect
transparency insures that inventory information is not instantly symmetrized. Risk aversion
insures that inventory information is relevant to prices. The combination allows for trading based
on superior information even when fundamental information is symmetric.28
Our analysis clarifies that the effects of non-fundamental trades on prices are of three
distinct types. The first is transitory and idiosyncratic to individual dealer prices—the so-called
inventory effects from microstructure theory. The second type is transitory and common to all
dealer prices (intraday risk premia). The third type is permanent and common to all dealer prices.
This third effect on price persists even after dealer inventories are fully shared economy-wide
(i.e., the portfolio effects that arise from imperfect substitutability across risky assets; see, e.g.,
Branson and Henderson 1985). These traditional models do not address the third type of effect
because inventory risk in these models is assumed diversifiable at the economy-wide level (or
because these models do not allow market-wide risk sharing to occur—dealers are forced to hold

28

As noted, for readers concerned about the single-price assumption used for interdealer trade, our basic results go
through in a variation of the model in which each dealer quotes a price schedule to one other dealer that is not
observable market-wide.

24

the risky asset at the time of cash flow realization). Our empirical methodology is designed to
accommodate this third, permanent effect.
We find that inventory information has both transitory and permanent price effects. For
permanent effects, our estimates imply that a $1 billion positive shock to interdealer order flow
increases the DM price of a dollar in the long run by 0.25 to 0.45 of a pfennig (depending on
model variations). These permanent effects also contribute significantly to the variance of
permanent price changes, ranging from 15 to 30 percent. Transitory price effects from inventory
information are also significant: of the total variance of price changes from inventory
information, transitory effects account for between 43 and 89 percent at horizons from 30 minutes
to two hours. In the end, these results suggest that past empirical findings that trades do indeed
convey private information (whether in FX or other security markets) may have been picking up
information that is non-fundamental, at least in part, despite the traditional interpretation as
wholly fundamental.

25

Figure 1
Model Timing (each day)

Round 1

Pi1t

xit

Round 2

Pi2t

Ti2t

Round 3

Pi3t

Zt

Round 4

Ti3t

Pi4t

Rt

Notation
Pi1t: dealer i’s quote in round one of day t.
xit: net customer order received by dealer i.
Pi2t: dealer i’s quote in round two.
Ti2t: dealer i’s net outgoing order to other dealers in round two.
Zt :

net interdealer order flow in round two.

Pi3t: dealer i’s quote in round three
Ti3t: dealer i’s net outgoing order to other dealers in round three.
Rt: risky asset cash flow realized.
Pi4t: dealer i’s quote in round four.
d t:

aggregate customer orders in round four (market clearing requires

∑x

it

i

26

=dt)

dt

References

Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, C. Vega, 2003, Micro effects of macro announcements:
Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange, American Economic Review, 93, 38-62.
Biais, Bruno, 1993, Price formation and equilibrium liquidity in fragmented and centralized
markets, Journal of Finance 48: 157-184.
Branson, William, and Dale Henderson, 1985, The specification and influence of asset markets,
in Handbook of International Economics, vol. 2, R. Jones and P. Kenen (eds.), North
Holland: Amsterdam.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Clement Wong, 2000, A survey of market practitioners’ views on
exchange rate dynamics, Journal of International Economics, 51, 401-423.
Ciccotello, C. S. and F. Hatheway, 2000, Indicating Ahead: Best Execution and the NASDAQ
Preopening, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 9, 184-212.
Covrig, V., and M. Melvin, 2002, Asymmetric information and price discovery in the FX market:
Does Tokyo know more about the Yen? Journal of Empirical Finance, 9, 271-285.
Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia, 1981, Information aggregation in a noisy rational expectations
economy, Journal of Financial Economics, 9: 221-235.
Duffie and Constantinides, 1996, Asset Pricing with heterogeneous consumers, Journal of
Political Economy, 104: 219-240.
Evans, Martin, 2002, FX trading and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Finance, 57: 24052448.
Evans, Martin, and Richard Lyons, 2002, Order flow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy, 110: 170-180.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1988, Permanent and temporary components of stock prices,
Journal of Political Economy 96, 246-273.
Fishman, M., and F. Longstaff, 1992, Dual trading in futures markets, Journal of Finance, 47:
643-672.
Foster, Douglas, and S. Viswanathan, 1990, A theory of interday variations in volumes,
variances, and trading costs in securities markets, Review of Financial Studies 3, 593624.
Foster, Douglas, and S. Viswanathan, 1993, Variations in trading volume, return volatility, and
trading costs: Evidence on recent price formation models, Journal of Finance 48, 187211.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, 1995, Empirical research on nominal exchange rates, in G.
Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier Science:
Amsterdam, 1689-1729.

27

French, Kenneth, and Richard Roll, 1986, Stock return variance: The arrival of information and
the reaction of traders, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 99-117.
Froot, Kenneth, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2002, Currency returns, institutional investor flows, and
exchange rate fundamentals, NBER Working Paper 9101, August.
Froot , Kenneth, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real Exchange
Rates, in G. Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics,
Elsevier Science: Amsterdam, 1647-1688.
Gennotte, Gerard, and Hayne Leland, 1990, Market liquidity, hedges, and crashes, American
Economic Review, 80, 999-1021.
Glosten, Lawrence, and Lawrence Harris, 1988, Estimating the components of the bid-ask spread,
Journal of Financial Economics 21, 123-142.
Glosten, Lawrence, and Paul Milgrom, 1985. Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed agents, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71-100.
Green, C., 2002, Economic news and the impact of trading on bond prices, typescript, Emory
University, May, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Grossman, S., 1976, On the efficiency of competitive stock markets when agents have diverse
information, Journal of Finance, 31: 573-585.
Grossman, S., and M. Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of Finance, 43: 617633.
Grossman, S., and J. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets,
American Economic Review, 70: 393-408.
Hansch, O., N. Naik, and S. Viswanathan, 1998, Do inventories matter in dealership markets?
Evidence from the London stock exchange, Journal of Finance 53, 1623-1656.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1991, Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of Finance 46,
179-208.
Hellwig, Martin, 1980, On the aggregation of information in complete markets, Journal of
Economic Theory, 26: 279-312.
Hellwig, Martin, 1982, Rational expectations equilibrium with conditioning on past prices: A
mean-variance example, Journal of Economic Theory 26, 279-312.
Ho, Thomas, and Hans Stoll, 1981, Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return
uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics, 9, 47-73.
Ho, Thomas, and Hans Stoll, 1983, The dynamics of dealer markets under competition, Journal
of Finance 38, 1053-1074.

28

Holden, Craig, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1992, Long-lived private information and
imperfect competition, Journal of Finance 47, 247-270.
Hsieh, D., and A. Kleidon, 1996, Bid-ask spreads in foreign exchange markets: Implications for
models of asymmetric information, in J. Frankel et al. (eds.): The Microstructure of
Foreign Exchange Markets (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 41-65.
Ito, Takatoshi, Richard Lyons, and Michael Melvin, 1998, Is there private information in the FX
market? The Tokyo experiment, Journal of Finance 53, 1111-1130.
Kaul, A., V. Mehrotra, and R. Morck, 2000, Demand curves for stocks do slope down: New
evidence from an index weights adjustment, Journal of Finance, 55: 893-912.
Kim, O., and R. Verrecchia, 1991, Trading volume and price reactions to public announcements,
Journal of Accounting Research 29, 302-321.
Kraus, Alan, and Maxwell Smith, 1989, Market created risk, Journal of Finance, 44: 557-569.
Kyle, Albert, 1989, Informed speculation with imperfect competition, Review of Economic
Studies 56, 317-356.
Lyons, Richard, 1995, Tests of microstructural hypotheses in the foreign exchange market,
Journal of Financial Economics, 39: 321-351.
Lyons, Richard, 1997, A simultaneous trade model of the foreign exchange hot potato, Journal of
International Economics 42, 275-298.
Lyons, Richard, 2001, The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press: Cambridge,
Massachusetts, (chapters at haas.berkeley.edu/~lyons).
Madhavan, Ananth, and Seymour Smidt, 1991, A Bayesian model of intraday specialist pricing,
Journal of Financial Economics 30, 99-134.
Madhavan, Ananth, and George Sofianos, 1997, An Empirical Analysis of NYSE Specialist
Trading, Journal of Financial Economics, 48, 189-210.
Madrigal, Vicente, 1996, Non-fundamental speculation, Journal of Finance 51, 553-578.
Massa, M., and A. Simonov, 2003 , Reputation and interdealer trading: A microstructure analysis
of the treasury bond market, Journal of Financial Markets, 6, 99-141,
Meese, Richard, 1990, Currency fluctuations in the post-Bretton Woods era, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 4: 117-134.
Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies,
Journal of International Economics, 14: 3-24.
Mendelson, Haim, 1987, Consolidation, fragmentation, and market performance, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 189-208.

29

Naik, N., A. Neuberger, and S. Viswanathan, 1999, Trade disclosure regulation in markets with
negotiated trades, Review of Financial Studies, 12: 873-900.
Pagano, Marco, and Ailsa Roell, 1997, Front running: Market professionals as quasi-insiders,
typescript, Tilburg University.
Payne, R., 1999, Informed trade in spot foreign exchange markets: An empirical investigation,
typescript, London School of Economics, Journal of International Economics,
forthcoming.
Radner, Roy, 1968, Competitive equilibrium under uncertainty, Econometrica 36, 31-58.
Reiss, Peter, and Ingrid Werner, 1998, Does Risk Sharing Motivate Interdealer Trading? Journal
of Finance, 53, 1657-1703.
Roberts, H., 1967, Statistical versus classical prediction of the stock market, unpublished
manuscript, Center for Research in Security Prices, University of Chicago.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean-Luc Vila, 1994, Insider trading without normality, Review of
Economic Studies 61, 131-152.
Roell, A., 1990, Dual capacity trading and the quality of the market, Journal of Financial
Intermediation, 1: 105-124.
Saar, G., 1999, Demand Uncertainty and the Information Content of Order Flow, typescript,
Johnson School, Cornell University, July.
Scholes, Myron, 1972, The market for securities: Substitution versus price pressure and the effect
of information on share price, Journal of Business 45, 179-211.
Snell, Andy, and Ian Tonks, 1995, Determinants of price quote revisions on the London stock
exchange, Economic Journal 105, 77-94.
Spiegel, Matthew, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1992, Informed speculation and hedging in a
non-competitive securities market, Review of Financial Studies 5(2).
Spiegel, Matthew, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1995, On intraday risk premia, Journal of
Finance 50, 319-339.
Storesletten, Kjetil, Christopher Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2003, Cyclical dynamics in
idiosyncratic labor market risk, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, 1991, Risk aversion, market liquidity, and price efficiency, Review of
Financial Studies 4, 417-442.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 2001, Strategic trading in a dynamic noisy market, Journal of Finance, 56,
131-171.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 1999, Strategic trading and welfare in a dynamic market, Review of Economic
Studies 66, 219-234.

30

Viswanathan, S., and James D. Wang, 2000, Inter-dealer trading in financial markets, Working
paper, Duke University.
Vitale, Paolo, 2000, Speculative noise trading and manipulation in the foreign exchange market,
Journal of International Money and Finance 19, 689-712.
Vogler, K., 1997, Risk allocation and interdealer trading, European Economic Review 41, 417441.
Werner, Ingrid, 1997, A double auction model of interdealer trading, Research Paper No. 1454,
Stanford University, September.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for
stocks? Journal of Business, 75, 583-608.
Yao, Jian, 1998, Market making in the interbank foreign exchange market, New York University
Salomon Center Working Paper #S-98-4.

31

Appendix A: Model Solution
This appendix repeatedly uses certain information sets and conditional expectations. To
simplify notation, we present these at the outset for reference.
Information Sets:

Ωi1t ≡ { i =n1{Pi1t } }
Ωi2t ≡ {xit,

n
i =1

Ωi3t ≡ {xit,

n
i =1

Ωi4t ≡ {xit,

n
i =1

{Pi1t , Pi 2t } }

{Pi1t , Pi 2t , Pi 3t } ,Ti2t,T′i2t,Zt}
{Pi1t , Pi 2t , Pi 3t , Pi 4t } ,Ti2t,T′i2t,Zt,Ti3t,T′i3t,Rt}

Ω1t ≡ { i =n1{Pi1t } }
Ω2t ≡ { i =n1{Pi1t , Pi 2t } }
Ω3t ≡ { i =n1{Pi1t , Pi 2t , Pi 3t } ,Zt}
Ω4t ≡ { i =n1{Pi1t , Pi 2t , Pi 3t , Pi 4 t } ,Zt,Rt}
The first four are the information sets available to individual dealers i at the time trades are
determined in each of the four rounds. The second four are the public information sets available
at the time trades are determined in each round.

A.1. Proof of Proposition 1: Public Investors
Proposition 1 asserts that the end-of-day price is P4t= –aht. To show this, recall that the
liquidity-supplying (LS) investors have the following utility defined over intertemporal
consumption ct (per equation 1):
∞

(1)

U t = ∑ −δ τ −t exp ( −γ cτ )
τ =t

We begin by conjecturing a value function, which we show below is consistent with optimizing
behavior on the part of LS investors:

(

Vt = −α exp −γˆWt − ψ ht2

)

where Wt is the LS investors’ nominal wealth at the end of day t and ht is the total holding of the
risky asset at the end of day t (defined in equation 9). We need to determine the conditions under
which ht is willingly held by the LS investors.
Given the proposed price function P4t= –aht in text proposition 1, our task is to begin
with the Bellman equation corresponding to the maximum of equation (1) and derive explicit

32

expressions for the three coefficient values γˆ , ψ, and α, in this conjectured value function, as
well as an expression for the parameter a in the price function. We shall show that we must have:

 r 
γ
 1+ r 

γˆ = 

1


(aγˆ + 2 )[(1 + r )a − σ R2γˆ ] 

 1 
 σ R2γˆ 
nσ x


ˆ
(1
)
r
a
ψ= 
+
+
γ
−
−



2
2a

  2 
 2nσ x 




1

 γˆ
1+ r
α =  α 1 + 2nσ x2ψ  +
γ


 γˆ

2
 α 1 + 2nσ xψ 
γ


−

r
1+ r

 α

1 + 2nσ x2ψ 

 1+ r



  1
 r
a 2γˆ − ma
+ 2ψ γˆσ R2 = 0
+ 2ψ + 2rψ  + 
2
2

  nσ x
 nσ x

and

To prove these conditions, write down the Bellman equation:

(

)

Vt = Max − exp ( −γ c t ) − δ E t α exp −γˆ Wt +1 −ψ h 2t +1 
{ct ,Dt }
where

Wt +1 = (1 + r ) (Wt − ct ) + Dt ( Pt +1 + Rt +1 − (1 + r ) Pt )
and where we have used Dt to denote the LS investors’ demand for the risky asset. The first order
condition with respect to ct is:

γ exp ( −γ ct ) = δγˆ (1 + r ) Et α exp ( −γˆWt +1 −ψ ht2+1 ) 
Notice that the consumption decision is unaffected by the investment decision Dt, due to CARA
utility. To get an explicit expression for the right-hand side, we calculate the following
expectation with respect to the two random variables Rt+1, and xt+1, both of which are normally
distributed with mean zero and respective variances σ R2 and σ x2 :
(A1)

−

(

(

)

Et  − exp −γˆWt +1 − ψ ht2+1  =

2


ht 

 a γˆD t +

2 

nσ x 
 γˆ 2 D t2 σ

1 + 2 n σ x2ψ exp  − γˆ (1 + r )( W t − c t ) + 
+
4ψ + 2 /( n σ x2 )
2





)

33

2
R

 h

 − (1 + r ) a γˆD t h t − 

 2nσ
2
t

2
x




 




Maximizing with respect to the choice of risky asset demand Dt, we get
−1

 a  1
 
 a (1 + r ) −  2   2 + 2ψ  

 nσ x   nσ x
 h
Dt = 
−1
 t


1
2
2
 γσ

ˆ R + a γˆ  2 + 2ψ 


σ
n
 x




For market clearing we must have mDt= ht, so:

 a  1


+ 2ψ 
a (1 + r ) − 
2 
2
 nσ x  nσ x

1= m
−1
 1

γˆσ R2 + a 2γˆ 2 + 2ψ 
 nσ x


−1

This is equivalent to the expression for the pricing parameter “a” presented above. To get the
coefficient ψ on ht2 in the value function, we collect terms in equation (A1) involving ht2 :

 aγˆ
σ R2γˆ 
1 




+
+
−
a
(
1
r
)
2
m  σ R2γˆ 2
1
a (1 + r )γˆ  m nσ x 
−
+
−
ψ=
2nσ x2
m
2a
2m 2
Substituting the expected value function in the next period back into the Bellman equation, we get
the expression for α:
1

 γˆ
1+ r
α =  α 1 + 2nσ x2ψ  +
γ


 γˆ

2
 α 1 + 2nσ xψ 
γ


−

r
1+ r

 α 
2

 1 + 2nσ xψ
 1+ r 

It is easy to show that when the coefficient of risk aversion γ is sufficiently small, there exists a
positive solution for the parameters. Finally, that a value function with this simple exponential
form exists ensures that the linear equilibrium pricing rule described in proposition 1 also exists
(recall that the mean cash flow on the risky asset is zero). Q.E.D.

34

A.2. Proof of Propositions 2 and 3: Price Determination in the First Three Rounds
First consider why in any given trading round all dealers i ∈ {1,...,n} choose to offer the
same price. As shown in a similar setting in Lyons (1997), this is necessary to avoid unbounded
arbitrage demands given that quotes are singleton prices and available to all participants (see
quoting rules R1-R3 and trading rules R4-R6). For risk-averse dealers, an equilibrium that
includes such arbitrage trading cannot be optimal. A common price, then, must depend only on
commonly observed information, i.e., public information.
The equilibrium level of the round-one price is Pi1t=P1t=E[P2t|Ω1t], i.e., quotes to
customers in the first round are an unbiased estimate of the round-two price (conditional on
public information available at the time of quoting Ω1t). Two main features of the model produce
this result: dealers cannot forecast customers’ trades and dealers are risk averse. To prove this
formally, based on the value function from the previous appendix section (with positive constants
A1 and A2) one can demonstrate that:

E[Ui (Pi1t)]

(A1)

= E[E[Ui|Ωi1t]] = E[-A1 exp(- γˆ (Pi1t – P2t ) xit - A2xit2)]
= E[E[-A1 exp(- γˆ (Pi1t – P2t ) xit - A2xit2)| xit2]]

≤ E[Ui (E[P2t|Ω1t])]
= E[-A1 exp(-A2xit2)]
= E[-A1 exp(- γˆ (P2t – P2t )E[xit |xit2 ] - A2xit2)].
Here, the inequality in the third line arises because absorbing a random position of -xit at a price

Pi1t that is conditionally biased relative to the unwinding price P2t can only add to risk (with no
effect on expected return). The inequality is strict for any price Pi1t≠E[P2t|Ω1t], so it is optimal for
the dealer not to deviate from the proposed equilibrium strategy.
The equilibrium level of the round-two price is Pi2t=P2t=E[P3t|Ω2t], i.e., quotes to other
dealers in the second round are an unbiased estimate of the round-three price. To see this, note
that at the beginning of the second round of trading—the first purely interdealer round—the
expected current holding of dealers conditional on public information is still zero (since there is
no new public information useful for estimating dealer positions). Since the round-two market
must clear among dealers alone, the only price not expected to generate excess dealer demand is
the expected future price. Specifically, the price P2t in proposition 2 is pinned down by the
relation:

35

n

∑ ( E[ x

(A2)

i =1

it

| Ω 2t ] + E[ Di 2t ( P2t ) | Ω 2t ]) = 0

where Ω2t is public information available for quoting. (Since P2t is common across dealers i it is
necessarily conditioned on public information only.) At the time of quoting in round two there is
nothing in Ω2t that helps estimate xit so E[xit|Ω2t]=0. The only value of P2t for which E[Di2t
(P2t)|Ω2t]=0 is P2t=E[P3t |Ω2t] since Di2t(E[P3t |Ω2t] )=0 and D′i2t < 0.
As proposition 3 asserts, in the third round a bias in P3t is necessary for the analogue of
Eq. (A2) to hold:
n

∑ ( E[ x

(A3)

i =1

it

| Ω3t ] + E[ Di 3t ( P3t ) | Ω3t ]) = 0

First consider the term E[xit|Ω3t]. Given P1t, P2t

and P3t are common across dealers and

conditioned only public information, the only variable in Ω3t relevant for determining P3t is Zt,
interdealer order flow from round two. We have:
E[xit|Ω3t] = E[xit|Zt] = E[xit| Σ β2xit] = (nβ2)-1Zt
i

To determine E[Di3t (P3t)|Ω3t] in Eq. (A3), we use normality and exponential utility to write:

ˆ R2 )= -(1+r)λΖt/( γσ
ˆ R2 ).
E[Di3t|Ω3t] = E[P4t+Rt-(1+r)P3t|Ω3t]/( γσ
These expressions in Eq. (A3) imply:

ˆ R2 /[(1+r)nβ2]
λ = γσ
with λ >0 unambiguously.

A.3. Proof of Proposition 4: Optimal Dealer Trading Strategies

The derivation of dealer trading strategies has 3 steps. First we determine the round-three
trading strategy given actions in earlier rounds. (We do not start with round-four trading because
dealers’ round-four trading is passive: they simply take the other side of LS-customer trades,
ending the day with a net position of zero.) Next we determine the expected utilities of possible
trading strategies in round 2. Finally, we solve this maximization problem.

A.3.1. Step One: Maximization in the Third Round

To solve the dynamic programming problem we first determine the dealer’s round-three

36

desired position for use in the round-two first order condition. Under normality and negative
exponential utility the round-three desired position takes the well-known form:

ˆ R2 )= E[P4t –(1+r)P3t]/( γσ
ˆ R2 )
Di3t = E[P4t +Rt–(1+r)P3t]/( γσ
where γˆ is the intertemporal coefficient of absolute risk aversion and σ R2 denotes Var[Rt].
Notice that from proposition 3 that we have:

P
− a (ht −1 − Z t / β 2 )
P3t = E[ 4t | Ω3t ] + λZ t =
+ λZ t
1+ r
1+ r
P4t = − a[ht −1 − xit − ( Z t − Ti 2t ) / β 2 ]

Thus, we have:

P4t − (1 + r ) P3t = a ( xit − Ti 2t / β 2 ) − (1 + r )λZ t

and
(A4)

Di3t =[a(x it - Ti2t /β2)-(1+r)λΖt

ˆ R2 )
]/( γσ

Omitting terms unrelated to Di2t, we can write the dealers’ problem as:
(A5)

Max
Di 2 t

(

)

E  − exp −γˆ (1 + r )( Di 2t − Ti′2t ) ( P3t − P2t ) − ( P4t − (1 + r ) P3t ) σ R−2 ( P4t + Rt − (1 + r ) P3t ) Ωi 2t 

A.3.2. Step Two: Expected Dealer Utility after Second Round Trading
We can use the moment generating function for the normally distributed variable Rt to re-express
the last term in the exponential function so that the full problem is now:
(A6)

M ax
Di 2 t

2


P4 t − (1 + r ) P3 t )
(
E  − exp  − γˆ (1 + r )( D i 2 t − Ti ′2 t ) ( P3 t − P2 t ) −

2σ R2





 Ω i2t 




which leaves the objective function focused on the random variable P3t.
Now, notice that interdealer order flow Zt can be written as the sum of two components,
dealer i’s interdealer order plus the sum of all the other dealers’ interdealer orders:

Z t = Ti 2t + (n − 1)Ti′2t

where

Ti′2t =

∑β
i '≠ i

x

2 i 't

n −1

=

Z t − Ti 2t
n −1

and the product ( n − 1)Ti ′2 t arises because dealer i receives a share 1/(n-1) of all other dealers’
outgoing trades (by trading rule R6). Moreover, we have:

37

− a (ht −1 − Z t / β 2 )
+ λZ t ,
1+ r
− aht −1
P2t = E[ P3t | Ω 2t ] =
.
1+ r

P3t =

As a result the price change is:



a
P3t − P2t = 
+ λ  Zt .
 (1 + r ) β 2

After substituting the expressions for P2t, P3t, and P4t into (A6) and taking expectations with
respect to Zt, dealer i’s expected utility as a function of his speculative demand Di2t is:


Ti 2 t

2


 [ a ( xit − β ) − (1 + r ) λ Z t ]


−
Z
T
a


2
∫  − exp  −γˆ (1 + r )  Di 2 t − tn − 1i 2 t   (1 + r ) β 2 + λ  Z t − 
2σ R2
−∞






∞


  [ Z − T ]2
t
i 2t
−
2 2
  2( n − 1) β 2 σ x




 
  dZ t
 



A.3.3. Step Three: Maximization in the Second Round
Notice that Ti 2 t = β 2 xit = Di 2 t + xit . After ignoring irrelevant terms, with some algebra the
maximization problem reduces to:

Max
Di 2 t

B 2 − 4 AC
4A

where A, B, and C are the second, first and zero-order coefficients of Zt, respectively:


 [(1 + r )λ ]2 


γˆ  a
1
A=
+ λ (1 + r )  − 

 − 
2
2 2 
n −1  β2

 2σ R 
 2(n − 1) β 2 σ x 
a


D +x   D +x   a
D +x 
B = −γˆ  + λ(1+ r) D2it + 2it it  +  2it 2it 2  +  2 (1+ r)λ  xit − 2it it 
β2 
n −1   (n −1)β2σx   σR
 β2


a2
C=− 2
2σ R

2

 ( D2it + xit )2 

D2it + xit 
x
.
−
−
 it


2 2 
β2 

 2(n − 1) β 2 σ x 

The maximization problem reduces to a quadratic maximization problem. Assuming that A is
negative (which we return to below), we take the first order condition for the maximization
problem (noting that A does not depend on Di2t) to get:

(A7)

2B

∂B
∂C
− 4A
=0.
∂Di 2t
∂Di 2t

Noting that:

38

Di 2t = ( β 2 − 1) xit

λ=

and

ˆ R2
γσ

(1 + r )n β 2

substituting these expressions for λ and Di2t in (A7) gives the following quadratic equation:

(A8)


ˆ R2
ˆ 2
ˆ R2   2 A(n − 1) β 22 
γσ
γσ
1 
1 (n − 1)a γσ
][nβ 2 − n + 1] + 2  γˆ[a + R ]nβ 2 + 2 −
[
] − 
 −γˆ[a +
=0
n
n
n  
σ x 
σx
σ R2
σ x2



When the number of dealers n goes to infinity and the pricing coefficient a goes to zero, the
quadratic equation (A8) reduces to:


γˆ 2σ R2 ( β 2 − 1)  γˆ 2σ R2 β 2 +


1 
1
= 0.
−
σ x2  σ x4

There exists a solution β2 in the interval (1, ∞) when n is infinity and a is zero. Since the
coefficients of β2 in (Α8) is continuous in n and a, there exists a unique solution for β2 in the
interval (1, ∞), for large n. Further, it is easy to check that the assumption that A is negative is
satisfied for large n. Q.E.D.

39

Appendix B
The model to be estimated takes the form
= PtP I + PtII + wt

(B1)

Pt

(B2)

∆PtP I

= εt

(B3)

∆PtII

= Γ(L)et

(B4)

Zt

= Θ(L)et

where Γ(L) and Θ(L) are polynomials in the lag operator, and wt , εt and et are mean zero shocks. Pt is the
last DM purchase price for dollars during observation interval t, and Zt is inter dealer order ßow over the
same interval.
In our theoretical model LD customer orders are reßected in interdealer order ßow before they aﬀect
prices. This means that all the price-implications of aggregate LD customer ßows can be identiÞed by the
eﬀects of inter dealer order ßow on prices (see Proposition 3). In actual markets the transmission of customer
ßow information may be a little more subtle. In particular, some dealers (i.e. those working for large money
center banks) have access to a large customer base that may enable them to make inferences about aggregate
LD customer orders before the information becomes embedded in inter dealer order ßow. These dealers may
then take advantage of the market’s imperfect transparency to revise their prices in anticipation of inter
dealer order ßow. (For a further discussion of transparency in the interdealer market, see Evans 2002).
To allow for this more complex information transmission pattern, we model the shocks to measured inter
dealer order ßow over interval t, Ztm , as follows. Let the shock to order ßow during interval t be comprised of
two components; et = e1t + e2t . We assume that e1t shocks contain information on LD customer ßows that is
embedded in prices one period before being manifest in inter dealer order ßow. This assumption limits the
information advantage of dealers with large customer bases to less than half of the typical inventory half-life
of 10 minutes (Lyons, 1995). Information on LD ßow that becomes embedded in prices via inter dealer order
ßow is represented by e2,t . We can now express the dynamics of measured order ßow and II price changes
by
(B5)

∆PtII

(B6)

m
Zt+1

= Γ(L)(e2t + e1t+1 ),
= Θ(L)(e1t+1 + e2t+1 ).

´
³
´
³
2
1+d1 L+d2 L
0 +b1 L+b2 L
and
Θ(L)
=
so the
For the purpose of estimation, we assume that Γ(L) = b1−a
2
2
L−a
L
1−c
L−c
L
1
2
1
2
model in (B1), (B2), (B5) and (B6) can be written in state-space form as
(B7)

ζt

= Aζ t + Bηt

ξt

= Cζ t

with Eηt = 0 and E (ηt η 0t ) = Ω where
ζ 0t
ξ 0t
η0t

£

II
∆Pt − ∆PtII ∆PtII ∆Pt−1
¤
£
m
,
=
∆Pt Zt+1
¤
£
=
e1,t+1 e2,t+1 εt wt ,

=

m
Zt+1

Ztm

40

e1,t+1

e2,t+1

e1,t

e2,t

e2,t−1

wt

¤

,












A=









C=

·

0 0
0 a1
0 1
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0

0
a2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
c1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
c2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
b1
0
d1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0
b0
0
d1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

0
b2
0
d2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
b1
0
d2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

0
b2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
¸

,

−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0












,





















B=












σ2e
 0
and Ω = 
 0
0

0
b0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0

0
σ 2e
0
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
σ2ε
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


1
0 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


0 

0 

0 
1


0
0 
.
0 
σ2w

The GMM estimates of the parameters (ai , bi , ci , di , and σi ) are computed by equating the sample mo¡
¢
ments, Cov ξ t , ξ 0t−j for j = 0, 1, ...12, against their counterparts implied by the state space form in (B7):
£
¤
CΨ(j)C 0 where Ψ(j) = AΨ(j − 1) with Ψ(0) = vec−1 (I − A ⊗ A)−1 vec(BΩB 0 ) . Further details of this
procedure are described in Evans (2002). To conserve space, Table 1 reports estimates of speciÞcations in
which b2 = 0. Estimates of the model without this restriction were very similar to those reported, and the
estimates of b2 were statistically insigniÞcant.
To compute the contribution of inventory information to the variance of II price changes, we Þrst need
to decompose II price changes into their inventory and non-inventory components:
∆PtII

= Γ(L)e∗t
= (Γ(L) − Γ(1))e∗t + Γ(1)(1 − Lτ )e∗t + Γ(1)e∗t−τ
= (Γ(L) − Γ(1)Lτ )e∗t + Γ(1)e∗t−τ
= Γ̄(L)e∗t + Γ(1)e∗t−τ

where e∗t = e1t+1 + e2,t .We identify the transitory component of the ∆PtII process as ∆PtT rans = Γ̄(L)e∗t .
This decomposition is slightly more general than the one given in the text because it allows there to be a
lag of τ periods before the permanent eﬀects of the shock e∗t are reßected in prices. Table 1 reports results
for the τ = 3 case (i.e., a lag of 15 minutes), but the results we obtain for the cases where τ = 0, 1, and 2
are very similar. In particular, the estimates of Γ̄(0) are statistically signiÞcant in every case.
To compute the variance contributions, we use the GMM estimates to write the ∆PtII and ∆PtT rans
processes as a new state space system.
Zt
Yt

= AZ t−1 + Be∗t
= CZ t

´
³ P
¤
¡
¢
£
k−1 0
where Yt0 = ∆PtII , ∆PtT rans . With this system we can now compute V ar ∆k PtII = V ar h1 i=0 Yt−i
´
³ P
¢
¡
0
where ∆PtII = h1 Yt and ∆PtT rans = h2 Yt . For the τ = 3 case,
and V ar ∆k PtT rans = V ar h2 k−1
Y
t−i
i=0
the state space form is given by
Zt =

£

∆PtII

II
∆Pt−1

e∗t
41

e∗t−1

e∗t−2

e∗t−3

¤

,







A=




a1
1
0
0
0
0

a2
0
0
0
0
0

b1
0
0
1
0
0

b2
0
0
0
1
0

0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0







,










B=




b0
0
1
0
0
0











42

and

C=

·

1 0 0 0 0
0
1 0 0 0 0 −Γ(1)

¸

.

