                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                          WHAT, ME VOTE?

                                          Richard B. Freeman

                                          Working Paper 9896
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9896


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




I have benefitted from discussion with Dan Devroye and comments by Christopher Jencks, Lawrence Mead,
and Larry Bartel. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What, Me Vote?
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 9896
August 2003
JEL No. D1, J0

                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper examines the pattern of change in turnout in elections and in the rate of voting
of different socioeconomic groups in the US. It shows that while the changing education and income
structure of the population and changes in laws and regulations that make it easier to register and

to vote should have raised turnout, the proportion of the voting age population that votes has fallen.
This is partly due to the increased proportion of voting age persons who are ineligible to vote, but

it is hard to pin down the magnitude of that effect due to problems with data. It also finds that
turnout has become much more unequal by age, education, and income.

Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard University
freeman@nber.org
       Voting turnout, measured by the number of persons voting relative to the population of

voting age, is lower in the US than in other advanced democracies, including the US’s nearest

neighbor, Canada. From 1945 to the late 1990s, the US averaged 48.3% turnout of the voting

age population while Canada averaged a 68.4% turnout relative to the voting age population. In

the 2000 Presidential election, 51.4% of the voting age population in the US cast ballots. On a

world scale, the US ranks 138th in turnout among countries that hold elections -- far below every

other advanced democracy save for Switzerland (in 137th position).1 Turnout in 2000 was eight

percentage points lower than it was in 1960, when President Kennedy appointed a commission to

study the “low” turnout then.

       What explains low and declining turnout?

       Does low turnout skew the voting population toward more advantaged social groups,

defined by education, income, age, or occupation?

       What institutional features of the electoral process affect turnout?

       In this paper I examine what social science knows about these question. Most studies

that examine voting rely on the National Election Studies (NES, www.umich.edu/~nes/), which

conducts surveys of the American electorate in presidential and midterm election years, before

and after elections; the November voting supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS,

www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/voting.html), which asks respondents their

registration and voting status in national elections; and administrative counts of votes divided

by the voting age population, as published by the Census Bureau and the Congressional

Quarterly.2 Some of the studies rely on other sources as well: tabulations of votes in particular

areas, experiments with get out the vote campaigns, exit polls, and so on.

       The NES and CPS record the answers of individuals to questions about whether or not

                                                -1-
they voted in the most recent election. Both data sets record higher turnout than does the

administrative vote counts. One reason for the discrepancy between the self-reported and

administrative data is that some people report casting ballots when they did not do so3. Another

reason is that the surveys, particularly the NES, disproportionately undercount low turnout

groups. Burden (2000) reports that this problem has grown over time in the NES for

Presidential elections4, in part due to declining response rates of those surveyed. The level and

trend in the discrepancy between the NES and administrative counts is also affected by

differences in the populations covered: the administrative turnout figures are based on voting

age population, while the NES sample is limited to eligible voters, and to the greater impact of

measurement error at lower levels of turnover5. But rates of turnout based on administrative

data are themselves imperfect. The number of votes counted differs from votes cast due to

technical difficulties relating to voting machines, voter errors in recording their vote, and so

on6. Most important for assessing turnout, administrative turnout figures relate the number of

votes to the voting age population, which exceeds the population eligible to vote. Given

available data it is difficult to estimate the proportion of eligible voters in the voting age

population over time.

       This review has four major findings regarding turnout and the level and trend in

inequality in turnout in the US.

       1. No single factor explains why Americans in such low proportions. Turnout in the US

is low in part because the country has a large population of non citizen immigrants who cannot

legally vote; in part because many states disenfranchises ex-felons from voting; in part because

increased family or time demands deter some potential voters from going to the polls; and in

part because of changes in political mobilization.

                                                  -2-
       2. The level and trend in turnout is related to socioeconomic status. Persons having

higher income, occupational standing, education, and age are more likely to vote than

otherwise comparable persons with lower income, occupational standing, education, and age.

From the 1960s to the present, inequality in the rate of voting by socioeconomic group has

increased.

       3. Policies that make it easier to register, such as increasing the venues for registering,

reducing the time between registration and voting, allowing voters to register on voting day;

and policies that make it easier to vote, such as mail balloting, opening polling booths for more

hours, or for more days have modest positive impacts on turnout. Get out the vote campaigns,

particularly face to face canvassing, have a somewhat larger impact on turnout.

       4. In contrast to the US proper, one part of the country, Puerto Rico, has an extremely

high rate of turnout. In the 1990s, Puerto Rico had a 78 percentage point turnout in

Presidential election years, compared to just over 50% turnout in the 50 states. An important

reason for this high turnout is that the island makes Tuesday elections a holiday and the

political parties mobilize voters extensively on that day.



                                I. MAGNITUDE OF TURNOUT

       As noted, turnout in the US for elections is low by international standards. Advanced

democracies average a 73% rate of turnout, so that even the highest turnout rates in the US in

post-World War II years, on the order of 60%, fall short of the rates in comparable countries.7

As in other countries, turnout in the US varies by socioeconomic group. Better educated, higher

paid, and older citizens invariably have higher turnout rates than others8. This means that

differences in turnout rates across countries and changes in turnout in the same country over time

                                                -3-
occur largely because of variation in the voting rates of the less advantaged part of the

population.9 The low turnout of lower income persons in the US than in other democracies

means that the median voter is higher in the social strata in the US than elsewhere.10

       Cross-country comparisons suggest three reasons for low turnout in the bottom parts of

the US distribution. The first is the weakness of trade unions in the US compared to other

countries – unions usually organize lower income workers to vote, often for labor-oriented

parties, so that countries with greater union density tend to have higher turnouts.11 The second

reason is that US has a first past the post two party system, which elicits smaller turnouts than

proportional representation systems of voting, where minority opinions vote so that they can

have a voice in legislatures. The third is the congressional/presidential system, which elicits

smaller turnouts than parliamentary systems.12

       Historically, institutional features of the US voting process made it harder for Americans

to vote than citizens in most other democracies. The U.S. is almost alone among major

democracies in requiring citizen-initiated registration to vote. In most countries, citizens have

the right to vote without going through a special registration system.13 The US has never

mandated voting, say by fining those who fail to vote, as some countries do (Lijphart, 1997).

The US has never introduced voting on weekends or made weekday voting days holidays, as

some countries (and Puerto Rico) do. Finally, rather than having a national voting procedure,

each of the US states determines its own regulations, which creates variation in registration rules

and in determination of eligible voters. The close 2000 Presidential election highlighted

differences in state regulations of voting by ex-felons, as well as the ability of local officials to

bend rules in ways that affect turnout.



                                                  -4-
       Turnout in the US relative to the voting age population fell noticeably in the latter part of

the 20th century, despite diverse policy and regulatory changes that have made it easier for

citizens to vote. Exhibit 1 shows that since the 1950s the turnout rate based on administrative

data has declined in both congressional and presidential election years. The numerator in this

statistic is the number of persons who vote for the highest office in each year; while the

denominator is the voting age population – the population aged 21 and above until 1972 when

the franchise was extended to 18-20 year olds. The drop in turnout in 1972 is partially due to the

change in the voting age population in that year. Because a larger proportion of the population

votes in years when the nation selects a President than in years when it does not, the exhibit

differentiates between Presidential year and non Presidential year elections. Because more

people vote for President than for Congress in the same election, it also differentiates between

the voting rate for the two types of offices.

       The proportion of the population that votes varies from election to election. It was low in

the 1948 election, when presumably everyone thought Dewey was a sure winner. It was higher

in the 1992 campaign when Ross Perot ran than in surrounding years and was a bit higher in

2000 than in 1996. But these variations occur around a general downward trend. From the

1950s to the 1990s the proportion of Americans who vote has declined. Wattenberg’s (2002)

analysis of turnout in other advanced democracies shows a similar pattern throughout the West:

falls in density in the United Kingdom, continental Europe, and in other advanced OECD

countries.14 Country-specific factors might explain the reduction in turnout country by country,

but the broad pattern suggests the operation of similar factors across all advanced countries.

       The downward trend in density in the US occurred despite government efforts to make it

easier for citizens to register and vote. The most important franchise-increasing law was

                                                -5-
the1965 Voting Rights Act, which helped re-enfranchise blacks in the US South, many of whom

had effectively lost the ballot due to the actions of politically dominant whites. Another

important act was the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (so-called motor voter act), which

increased the venues through which they could register, including state car registration offices.

Many states enacted other laws or regulations that reduced the burden of registering and voting.

That turnout fell during a period when the country made it easier for citizens to vote rules out

any institutional or legal explanation of the trend.

       Analysts have examined the impact on turnout of a variety of factors: changes in

proportion of the voting age population eligible to vote; changes in family status; changes in

mobilization by political groups, and changes in legal and administrative regulations that

influence the burden of voting. While research has greatly illuminated the factors that affect

voting, it has not turned up a simple clear reason for the decline in turnout.



The role of demography

       As noted, the fact that the US population has become more educated, works in higher

status occupations, and has higher family income than in the past operates to raise turnout. One

important demographic factor, however, works in the opposite direction. This is the rising

proportion of the adult population that cannot legally vote. The vast majority of this group

consists of immigrant non-citizens. In the 1950s non-citizens made up about 2% of the voting

age population. In 2000, they made up about 8 % of the voting age population. In addition, the

number of incarcerated persons, who generally cannot vote, and ex-felons, who cannot vote in

many states, has risen sharply enough to become a political issue. On the order of 1% of the

voting age population cannot vote due to their being ex-felons.15

                                                 -6-
       In an important study McDonald and Popkin (M&P) (2002) calculated the turnout rate

for eligible citizens by replacing the population of voting age by an estimate of the number of

citizens with the franchise. In the 1990s their turnout rate of voters divided by eligible voters

was some 4 percentage points higher than the reported turnout. Casper and Bass (1998) and

Burden (2000) provide comparable estimates for 1996.16 Since 1972 (when 18-20 year olds

became eligible to vote), M&P estimate that the number of voters divided by the number of

eligible voters barely fell in Presidential years and increased modestly in Congressional

elections.

       If data on the non-citizen population were perfect, these calculations would go a long

way to resolving the question of why turnout fell after 1972, while still leaving a pre-1972

decline in turnout to be explained by other factors. But estimates of the non-citizen population

are highly imperfect. One reason is that from 1966 to 1993, the Current Population Survey

(CPS) did not ask respondents directly if they were citizens but allowed for the response “not a

citizen” to a question about why they were not registered to vote. From 1994 on the CPS asked

directly “what is your citizenship status”. Thus, we do not have the same data over time to

calculate the number of non-citizens and citizens in the adult population. Equally important, the

CPS figures show considerable year to year variability in the estimated number of non-citizens –

the signature of considerable measurement error. Table 1 of the M&P article, which records

their adjustments for turnout, shows a surprising 4.6 million person drop in the number of non-

citizens from 1992 to 1994 (see Appendix Table A for the key non-citizens series). This drop

presumably reflects changes in the way the CPS posed the question about citizen status between

the two years, not a genuine fall in the number of non-citizens. The data also shows large jumps

in the numbers of non-citizens between 1980 and 1984 and between 1998 and 1990. In addition,

                                                -7-
there are measurement problems in estimating the number of citizens who lack the franchise

because of criminal behavior. We have accurate counts of the prison and jail populations but do

not have survey data on the number of ex-felons who are legally ineligible to vote, and must

make various assumptions to make this adjustment.

       To see how well the rising proportion of non-citizens in the voting age population can

explain declining turnout, I estimate a small time series model that links the number of voters

and the population of voting age to the estimated number of persons eligible to vote for the

period, 1948 to 1998. My analysis shows that the measurement problem with non-citizens of

voting age makes it difficult to determine their contribution to the trend decline in turnout.



Model of the trend in turnout

       Let P be the population of voting age; V be the number of voters; E be the estimated

population eligible to vote; D be a dummy variable for whether the election is in a Presidential

year and let T be a trend counter. Then V/P is the standard turnout rate; V/E is the turnout rate

relative to eligible voters; and E/P is the proportion of the voting age population eligible to vote.

To estimate the trend in turnout for the voting age population, I regress the log of the ratio of the

number of voters to the voting age population on a trend term and whether the election is a

presidential contest or not. The coefficient b on the trend term measures the magnitude of the

drop in turnout:

       (1) ln (V/P) = a + b T + c D.

        Line 1 of table 1presents estimates of this equation for the period, 1948 to 2000. The

estimated coefficient (x 100) on trend is -0.81, which translates roughly into 0.8 percentage



                                                 -8-
points in turnout per year (i.e. a drop in turnout from a 0.500 to 0.492 in the next year). This

implies a 4 percentage point drop in turnout per decade, given five elections in a decade.

       Next, I estimate a turnout equation using the estimated population legally eligible to vote

as the denominator (V/E). The coefficient b’ on the trend term in this equation measures the

magnitude of the drop in turnout relative to the new population base, E. To the extent that the

drop in turnout is due to the changing proportion of the voting age population eligible to vote,

the coefficient b’ should be smaller in absolute terms than the coefficient b.

       2) ln (V/E) = a’ + b’D + c’T

       Line 2 of table 1 gives the estimate of this equation. Adjusting for the eligible population

in the denominator produces a coefficient on trend (x 100) of -0.48. Changing the base for the

turnout statistic to persons eligible to vote thus reduces the downward trend in turnout from 0.81

to 0.48, a reduction of 41% (= .81-.48/.81). By this calculation, 41% of the trend decline in

turnout appears due to rising proportion of persons without the franchise.

       But there is an alternative, less restrictive, way to examine the effect of the proportion of

the voting age population eligible to vote on the trend. Rather than replacing the voting age

population P with the estimated population eligible to vote, E, in the denominator of the measure

of turnout, I add a new term to equation (1) – the ratio of eligible voters to the voting age

population (E/P). This gives the equation:

       3) ln (V/P) = a’‘ + b’‘D + c’‘T + d ln (E/P)

If the number of eligible voters is measured accurately and the model (2) regression is correct,

the coefficient d on ln E/P will be 1. This effectively turns the dependent variable in equation 3

into ln V/E as in equation 2 (since we can move ln E/P to the left hand side of the equation,

where the ln Ps cancel) But if E/P is poorly measured or if it is related to other factors that affect

                                                 -9-
turnout, the coefficient d may vary from 1. This will give a different estimate of the impact of

the rising proportion of ineligible voters on the trend. Line 3 of exhibit 2 shows that the trend in

the turnout drops to -0.27 and is insignificant. But the estimated coefficient on the ln E/P term is

considerably above the coefficient of 1 that we would expect from a correctly specified and

measured model, which raises some doubt about the correction procedure.

       The strongest claim by M&P is that the rising proportion of non-citizens explains all of

the drop in turnout from1972 on. Adjusted for the number of non-eligible persons of voting age,

they find that the drop in turnout was small and statistically insignificant for Presidential year

elections and positive in Congressional year elections. To examine this claim, I estimated

equations (1)-(3) for the period 1972-2000. These results are given in lines 4-6 of table 1. The

coefficient on trend in line 4 is smaller than the trend coefficient in line 1. The drop in the

turnover post-1972 was half as large as that over the 1950-1998 period. Consistent with the

M&P analysis, when I replace the voting age population with the estimated number of citizens

eligible to vote in the denominator of the turnout measure in line 5, the negative trend

disappears completely. When I enter the ratio of eligible persons to persons of voting age in line

6, however, the coefficient on the eligible proportion of the voting age population is negative and

significantly different from unity; and the coefficient on trend jumps to -0.85. The problem is

that the estimated number of non-citizens fluctuates oddly both before and after the Census

change in definition, as can be seen in Appendix A, with odd effects in this small time series.

        From these calculations, I conclude that measurement error in estimating the proportion

of the voting age population eligible to vote weakens the claim that the rising proportion of

ineligibles accounts for the entire drop in turnout post 1972 and makes it unclear what proportion

of the longer term downward trend can in fact be attributed to the changing proportion of

                                                 -10-
eligibles. The rising proportion of ineligible persons of voting age must have reduced the

turnout rate, but the measurement problem does not allow us to determine its contribution to the

trend with any confidence. That depends on the model we use, with the more flexible model

giving the worst results for the 1972-2000 period. But even if we chose to ignore the

measurement problem and accept regressions 2 and 5 as the appropriate ones, the turnout puzzle

would not disappear. The increased education, occupational status, and income of citizens

operated to increase turnout, whereas it fell. The puzzle becomes more severe when we

recognize that throughout the period the US made it easier for citizens to register to vote and for

registered voters to vote, exclusive of ex-felons.



Changing institutional determinants



       Both the federal government and individual states have adopted policies to make it easier

for persons to vote. In 1965 the federal government enacted the Voting Rights Act to help black

citizens overcome discriminatory practices in access to voting in the South. In 1993 the National

Voter Registration Act enabled citizens to register simultaneous with motor vehicle driver's

license application or renewal, to register at diverse government offices that provide public

assistance and services and to register by mail.17 Going further, many states have reduced the

time before elections when citizens must register, with seven states (Idaho, Maine, Minnesota,

New Hampshire, Wisconsin, and Wyoming, and North Dakota) allowing voters to register on

election day. Most states have made absentee ballots easier to obtain, particularly for elderly

citizens, and in the case of Oregon, have created a mail only ballot. Some states open polling

stations before elections, so that there is an election week rather than day. Because different

                                                -11-
states have initiated policies at various times, researchers are able to infer the institutional

determinants of turnout by comparing turnout in states with different policies in a given year and

comparing changes in turnout between states that changed policies and states that did not change

policies.

        Studies of the effect of legal and administrative policies show that easing registration

regulations affects turnout, but only modestly. While early cross section comparisons found that

states with easier forms of registration had considerably higher turnout than other states18,

analyses that relate changes in state laws and changes in turnout show much smaller positive

effects of the form of registration on turnout. Knack’s (1995) analysis of differences in state

registration laws prior to the motor voter act suggest an impact of perhaps 21 to 22 percentage

points, staggered over time.19 The larger cross section difference in turnout between states with

harder/easier forms of registration presumably reflects omitted characteristics of the state that

determines both the policy and the turnout.

        The motor voter act changed the way people register to vote. Thirty-five percent of

persons who registered to vote after January 1, 1995 registered through motor vehicle offices,

2% at a public assistance office, 6% at a school, hospital, or campus,11% by mail, and 6% at the

polls on election day (CPS, 2002, table 14) . Some experts (Piven and Cloward) anticipated that

this would greatly raise registration and turnout. Others experts thought it would have no effect

as motor voter registrants would register but not show up on election day. Overall, the motor

voter act seems to have raised turnout modestly. Wolfinger and Hoffman (2001) found that

people who registered at motor vehicle offices were about 14 percentage less likely to vote than

people who registered in other ways, but that they still voted in sizable numbers that “greatly



                                                 -12-
exceeds the expectations of scholars who thought that motor voter registrants would be largely

abstainers”.20

       Another important changes in state regulations of voting has been liberalizing rules for

absentee balloting. Making it easier for persons to cast absentee ballots has increased the

proportion of the electorate choosing that way to vote. In 2000 some 14% of voters either cast an

absentee ballot or voted at a polling station before election day. Many of the absentee voters

would have voted in any case, but some presumably would not have voted without the absentee

option. The use of absentee ballots varies considerably among states, depending on the states’

election law. California, Texas, and other western states rely extensively on the postal ballot. In

2000, approximately 25% of Californians voted absentee ballots In his study of the effect of

absentee ballots on turnout, Oliver (1996) notes that both the use of the absentee ballot and its

effect on overall turnout varies with the policies of the state political parties, some of whom

seek to mobilize absentee voters while others do not. He uses a logistic model to relate voting to

the individual characteristics of the respondent and various measures of state laws and the

activity of the political parties in the state. The results show that voting is more likely in states

that have more open primaries, that expanded eligibility for absentee ballots, and that have final

registration dates close to the voting day. His bottom line estimate is that provisions that make

absentee balloting easier increase turnout by 1-2 percentage points.

       Local jurisdictions throughout the US have conducted thousands of elections by mail

rather than by having polling booths. This is done largely in small areas, special districts, and

school districts. Hamilton’s 1988 review of mail only balloting shows that this innovation has

raised turnout and lowered the cost of holding elections. After experimenting with voting by

mail Oregon became the first state to adopt this method of voting as its sole way to conduct

                                                 -13-
elections. Surveys of Oregon voters show that they strongly prefer all mail voting to voting at

polling places, while the state saves millions of dollars in costs. Berinsky, Burns and Traugott

(2001) estimated that voting by mail increased turnout in Oregon’s 1996 election by 4-6

percentage points compared to previous elections in the state. They also found that voting by

mail worked by keeping existing voters in the group that voted rather than by attracting new

voters. Traugott and Hammer (2001) find that the high turnout persisted through 2000.

       But not all of the evidence supports the claim that mail balloting raises turnout in larger

elections. Comparing Oregon elections that used polling place voting with elections under the

vote only by mail procedure, Banducci and Karp (2002) found that higher turnout from mail

balloting was slight in major elections, far below the effect of postal balloting on turnout in local

races (table 1). Analyzing voting data in three California counties, Mullin and Kousser (2002)

report little difference between turnout in precincts that used mail-only ballots because the

precincts were too small to have polling places and precincts that had voting by poll and

absentee ballot.

       Finally, comparing turnout in the 2000 election in states that opened their polling booths

earlier and kept them open longer with other statrd. Wolfinger, Highton, and Mullin (2002b)

found modest effects on the turnout of registered voters.

       In sum, diverse analyses show that easing administrative requirements to vote raises

turnout in sensible but modest ways. If these analyses are right, turnout has been increased by 3-

4 points as a result of the diverse changes in registration and voting laws and procedures. This

adds to the mystery of why turnout has fallen.



Time and family commitments

                                                 -14-
       One factor that could have reduced turnout is the increased time constraints people have

as a result of work and family commitments. In contrast to the 1950s, when most families had

two adults, one of whose job was full-time caretaker in the household and the other a full-time

worker, in the 1990s, the majority of married families have two earners, and upwards of 25% of

families were lone parent families. The result is that the average American devotes more time to

work than in the past, making it harder to find time to non-market activities. The time cost of

voting has presumably risen most for persons with children, since they now have both time and

work commitments.

       There is some evidence supporting a “rising time cost” hypothesis. In 1980, 1996, 1998,

and 2000, the Bureau of the Census asked the non-voting registered population why they had not

voted. Table 2 summarizes what non-voters told the CPS in these years. In 1980 7.6%

volunteered that the reason was that they had “no time off from work or school or /were too

busy”. In 1998, 34.9% percent reported that the reason they had not voted was that they had “no

time off from work or school or /were too busy.” In 2000, 20.9% gave the too busy because of

school or work answer. Contrast these responses to the proportion of persons who reported lack

of interest as the reason for not voting. In 1980, 11.2% said they were not interested or did not

care about elections, which is 3.6 percentage points more than the 7.6% who said they were too

busy. In 2000, 12.2% said they were not interested, a modest one percentage point rise. The

increase in the proportion of registrants who cited a time constraint for not voting dwarfs the

increase in the proportion of registrants not voting who gave the lack of interest answer.

       If people are giving their true reason for not voting, one would expect groups facing

especially heavy demands on their time to disproportionately report that they did not vote

because they had no time off or were too busy. Parents– particularly lone parents — are more

                                               -15-
likely to cite this reason than others; and persons with children are less likely to be registered and

vote than others. NES data analyzed by Texiera and summarized in table 3 shows that the

difference in turnout rates by parents and non-parents has risen from 1956 through 1996

(exclusive of 1992). His analysis of the CPS files for 1992 further suggests that the parent/no-

parent gap differs greatly by the position of parents: the gap is huge among the least educated

and low income families while non-existent among college graduates and higher income

families. Wolfinger, Highton, and Mullin (2002b), however, report that voting rates of

employed persons does not vary with the time polling booths are open nor with state laws that

require employers to give workers time off to vote. Since employed persons are more likely to

be time constrained than others, these results are inconsistent with costs of time having a large

impact on turnout.

       Overall, I conclude that rising time cost/family commitment explains at most a minor

part of the trend in turnout. If time commitments were a major factor, voters in states such as

Texas and Tennessee which allowed voters to cast their ballot before election day or by absentee

ballot would have had exceptionally high rates of voting from registered voters, as would

Oregon, which had voting by mail. But the rate of voting by registered voters in these states did

not diverge greatly from the US average in the 2000 election.



Mobilization

       Analysts have examined how factors endogenous to the political process affect voting,

including political mobilization, partisan attitudes, campaign spending, prospective voters’ views

of political efficacy and the expected closeness of elections. Since politicians determine some

of these factors in response to how a campaign is progressing, it is hard to infer their causal

                                                -16-
impact on turnout. If candidate X thinks she can win an election by mobilizing voters through

canvassing or media expenditures, she will do so and possibly increase turnout of her supporters.

If candidate Y thinks that campaign mobilization will not work in his race because voters are too

turned off, he will canvas or spend less. In the 2000 Presidential election, both Bush and Gore

spent much of their budgets on a set of “battleground states” that each felt they had to win to

gain an electoral college majority. McKee (2002) estimates that turnout was 1-2 percentage

points higher in the battleground states than in other states (table 6). But by mobilizing in some

states and ignoring others, this targeting could just as easily have reduced national turnout as

increased it. Why bother to vote in Massachusetts or Texas when neither candidate is seeking

votes there on the assumption that the results are impervious to efforts? To infer the effects of

spending and other campaign policy variables broadly, one needs a good instrument for the

policy or random assignment of policies.

       Gerber and Green (2000), and Green, Gerber, and Nickerson (2003) have used an

experimental design to examine the effect of get-out-the-vote campaigns on turnout. They

organized nonpartisan student and community organizations to canvass a randomly assigned

group of registered voters in several cities to induce them to vote in local elections. The results

of these experiments show that face to face canvassing significantly increased turnout, with

persons contacted by the organizations having on the order of 7 percentage points higher voting

rates than persons not contacted by the groups. However, the canvassers could not contact two-

thirds or so of those assigned to treatment groups, so that the effect of the mobilization campaign

on aggregate turnout were more modest. In a related study, Michelson (2002) reports larger

increases in voting and high rates of contacting the treatment group in a mobilization drive

focused on Latino Democrats in California. Focusing on young voters, whose turnout falls short

                                                -17-
of that of other voters, Nickerson (2002) has found that get out the vote drives raise the turnout

of contacted youths as much as similar campaigns raise the turnout of contacted adults, but that

youths are much harder to reach. The implication is that political parties and nonpartisan

organizations can mobilize young persons (and speculatively other low turnout groups) to vote if

they can locate and speak with them. Examining another mode of galvanizing voters, Wolfinger,

Highton, and Mullin (2002b) have found that states that send sample ballots to registered voters

– a relatively inexpensive way to provide information – had higher rates of voting than other

states in the 2000 election, and that the effect was largely on less educated persons. However,

their analysis is not an experimental design, so that it is possible that some or all of the effect

reflects other unmeasured differences among states. Absent before/after evidence on voting in

states that changed policies, or an actual experiment, we cannot be sure that this relation is

causal or as large as estimated in the cross section comparison.

        CPS and NES data sets show that unionization affects whether someone votes in the US.

Union members have about a 4 percentage point higher probability of voting than nonmembers

(Freeman, 2003), presumably in part because of union efforts to mobilize their members.21 This

suggests that the decline of union density has contributed to the downward trend in density.

Radcliff and Davis (2000) report that higher levels of union density are associated with higher

turnout across countries and among US states. They link this to attitudes and party ideologies.

Hill and Leighly (1996) find modest support for the proposition that the competitiveness of

political races and policies of the Democratic party in a state affect lower-class voter turnout, but

they do not have unionization in their regressions. Higher union density in a state may both

induce voters toward liberal Democratic views and produce more competitive races.



                                                 -18-
       That mobilization can increase turnout does not mean that the decline in turnout is due to

a decline in mobilization. The NES reported a rise in political contacts in the 2000 election, in

which turnout was low for a close election (Banducci and Karp, 2001). Since much of the

contact occurred through direct marketing rather than door to door canvassing and was targeted

at likely voters, this evidence could be consistent with an explanation of falling turnout in terms

of less face to face canvassing of voters. Still, it “questions the conclusion that the lack of party

mobilization is to blame (for the fall in turnout)” (Banducci and Karp, 2001, p 24)




High turnout, the Puerto Rican way

       There is an important but little known anomaly to the pattern of low turnout in the US.

One part of the country votes at high rates. This is Puerto Rico. On mainland US, Puerto Ricans

have a low rate of voting, consistent with their being a disadvantaged minority group. In 1996,

47% of persons who were born in Puerto Rico but resided in the US reported that they voted in

the Presidential election on the CPS - a figure noticeably below the 64% of all Americans who

reported voting in that election on the CPS. Given self-reporting bias, perhaps 40-42% of the

Puerto Rican born actually voted in the presidential election.22 But on the island Puerto Ricans

have a high rate of voting. Throughout the 1990s, Puerto Rican turnout rates exceeded those for

the US and for most other democracies.

       Official Puerto Rican voting data show turnout rates that averaged 84% in the three

general elections held from 1992 to 2000 and rates that were equally high in earlier years

(http://eleccionespuertorico.org/home_en.html). But these rates compare the numbers of

persons voting with the numbers of persons registered rather than with the voting age population.


                                                 -19-
To obtain valid comparison rates, I estimated the population of voting age in the 1990 and 2000

Censuses of Population for Puerto Rico, and then adjusted the turnout rates to be on comparable

basis with the US. Exhibit 2 records my adjusted voter turnout rates for the six commonwealth

wide elections held in Puerto Rico in 1992-2000. Because an average of 92% of persons of

voting age were registered in 1990 and 2000 my adjustment still leaves Puerto Rico with an

extremely high voting rate: 77% in General Elections – some 25 points above rates in the US

presidential elections over the same period and nearly double the voting rate for Puerto Ricans

residing in the US.23 In addition, Puerto Rico has held various plebiscites and referendum on

Sundays in non-General Election years. Exhibit 2 shows that turnout in these elections has also

been high though it falls short of the turnout in the General Elections.

       Why is voter turnout so much higher in Puerto Rico than in the US?

       One reason is that Puerto Rico makes its general elections a holiday and treats the day as

a special political event, with political parties mobilizing their supporters throughout the day.

Since Puerto Ricans can register at the polling place, parties try to bring every single supporter to

the polls, including those who may have let their registrations lapse. Votes on referenda and

plebiscites in the off-Presidential/General Election years are held on Sundays, another non-

working day. In the 1990s, the average turnout rate on Sundays in Puerto Rico was 64% – 13

percentage points less than on Tuesdays. This difference could mean that making voting day a

dedicated holiday rather than a normal weekend day increases turnout. But it could also mean

that Puerto Ricans are more involved in the Governors’ races than in special plebiscites and

referendum, even those may affect the political status of the island.

       In any case, turnout is much higher in Puerto Rico than in the US. Given that

differences in the cost of voting have modest impacts on turnout in the US, I interpret the high

                                                -20-
turnout in Puerto Rico as reflecting more than the ease in voting on a holiday or weekend. The

high turnout also reflects the intense mobilization of voters, which is itself easier to accomplish

on weekends or holidays when the activists for political parties are available to get out the vote

and when citizens may find it difficult to say that they are too busy to vote. The combination of

mobilization and holiday voting offers the best explanation of the otherwise anomalously high

turnout in Puerto Rico.



           II. INEQUALITY AND CHANGES IN INEQUALITY IN TURNOUT

       By inequality in turnout, I mean differences in rates of turnout between groups of voters

from different socioeconomic groups. Virtually every study finds that persons with higher

income, higher occupational standing, greater age, and more years of education have higher

turnout rates than persons from lower status groups. The magnitude of the difference in voting

by socioeconomic group is more difficult to determine, however. This is because the survey data

that link turnout to individual characteristics is subject to measurement error. Many persons

report that they vote on the NES and CPS surveys when they do not. Over reporting of voting

differs, moreover, by demographic characteristics. The NES validates survey reports of voting

by checking whether the respondents name is on a list of registered voters. Silver et al (1986)

found that respondents most inclined to over report voting are highly educated persons -- those

for whom the norm of voting is most salient. This biases upward the difference in voting by

education and presumably has a similar impact on other measures of socioeconomic status. As

the gap between NES turnout and official turnout has risen over time, analyses of the trend in

inequality in voting based on NES reported votes could be erroneous. Self-reported voting on

the CPS November supplements differs less from official turnout figures, making the over

                                                -21-
reporting problem less severe. But self-reports of voting on the CPS have not been validated, so

there is no simple way to estimate the bias in that data set.

       By changes in inequality in voting, I mean differential changes in turnout among

identified socioeconomic groups. Given that groups that have markedly different rates of voting,

the metric by which one measures these changes can be important in determining whether or not

inequality has risen. In assessing trends in inequality of voting, I rely largely on percentage

point changes in turnout rates among groups rather than percentage changes in those rates or on

the level of logistic or probit parameters.24 With groups having equal rates of turnout, equal

percentage point changes in turnout have no effect on the median voter on the relevant

socioeconomic scale; whereas greater falls in turnout by one group will shift the distribution of

voters, and thus the median, against that group. But with groups having different rates of turnout,

even equal percentage point changes in turnout can affect the position of the median voter. A 10

percentage point drop in turnout for a group with a small turnout removes relatively more

persons from that group from the electorate than a 10 percentage point drop in turnout from a

group with a high turnout. This shifts the electorate toward the high turnout group, which means

toward the more advantaged given their higher turnout rate.25

       Metric aside, the fact that higher socioeconomic groups have higher turnout than lower

socioeconomic groups implies that large increases in turnout necessarily reduce inequality in

turnout, while large decreases in turnout raise inequality. If 90% of the upper half of the

population vote and 50% of the lower half of the population vote, giving an aggregate turnout of

70%, an increase in aggregate turnout of 20 points would have to come disproportionately from

the lower half since the upper half cannot increase its turnout beyond 100%. A 20 point increase

in aggregate turnout would the gap in turnout for the two groups from 40 percentage points to a

                                                -22-
minimum of 20 percentage points.26 That large increases in turnout asymptotically reduce

inequality in voting does not, however, mean that modest increases in turnout will do the same.

With turnout on the order of 50%-60%, modest changes in turnover, say 5-10 points, could have

no effect on inequality in voting or could increase it.

         There is considerable disagreement about whether inequality in voting by socioeconomic

group has changed over time. Analysts using different data sets, covering different time periods,

and using different metrics or methodologies have reached different conclusions. Reiter (1979)

and Rosenstone and Hansen (1993) find a trend in inequality in NES data. They use income and

education to measure socioeconomic status. Burnham(1987) found a similar trend in CPS data

using occupations to measure status. But Teixeira (1992) argued that any trend in the CPS is

modest. Leighly and Nagler (L&N) (1992, p. 734) make the strongest case that inequality of

voting by socioeconomic group has not increased. Analyzing CPS and NES data for elections

from the 1960s through the 1980s, they concluded that “class bias has not increased since

1964".

         My reading of the evidence is that inequality in voting has increased. Since L&N’s study

is the most substantive on the other side of this debate, I examine carefully the CPS and NES

data that led them to their conclusion. In addition, I assess the link between various measures of

socioeconomic status and voting in the CPS in the 1990s. I find that L&N’s evidence supports

the claim that inequality in voting has increased, contrary to their interpretation of it. The drop

in turnover has occurred largely among the less educated, lower income, less skilled, and

younger persons, increasing the inequality in voting among those groups.

         For starters, table 4 records the rate of voting by persons in different age and education

groups, as tabulated by the US Bureau of Census. The age data show a huge rise in inequality of

                                                 -23-
voting by age from 1972 (when 18-20 year olds could first vote) to 2000. Turnout for 18-20

year olds and 21-24 year olds falls from 48% and 51% in 1972 to just 28% and 24%

respectively in 2000. The third group with a large drop in turnout are 25-34 year olds, where

turnout drops by 16 percentage points. By contrast, the turnout rate of persons aged 65 and over

rose in this period; and the turnout rate of 45-64 year olds fell relatively modestly. Since older

persons had higher voting rates in the beginning, the table shows that inequality in turnout grew

massively along this dimension.

       Table 4 also records turnout rates by education from 1964 to 2000. Turnout rates fall for

all education groups, but the percentage point drops are larger for the less educated groups: a 32

point drop for persons with less tahn 9 years of schooling versus a 16 point drop for persons with

four years of college or moe. But this is a less meaningful comparison than might at first

appear to be the case. The problem is that the proportion of people in specific education groups

has changed as the population became more educated. In 1964 approximately 30% of persons of

voting age had less than 9 years of schooling and just 8 percent had four or more years of

college. In 2000, just 12% of persons of voting age had less than 9 years of schooling and 23%

had four or more years of college.27 The greater decline in turnout among persons with less than

9 years of schooling could reflect the fact that in 2000 that education group falls lower in the

distribution of the population by education. Perhaps the bottom 30% of the voting age

population had a much smaller fall in turnout. Similarly, perhaps the changing proportion of the

population in the college graduate group may underlie some of the change in turnout there.

       To see whether voting by persons in similar positions in the percentile distribution of

education also reveals rising inequality, I estimated the voting rate for the bottom 30% of the

voting age population in 2000 by taking a weighted average of the rates for persons with less

                                                -24-
than nine years of education, 9-12 years, and high school graduates. The weights reflected the

contribution of each group to the bottom 30%, and these were multiplied by each group’s

reported turnout rate. By my calculation the lower 30% of persons by years of schooling in 2000

had an average turnout of 39.2%. Thus I estimate that at the bottom of the education

distribution, turnout fell from 59.0% to 39.2% – a 19.8 percentage point drop. This is markedly

lower than the 32.2 percentage point drop among persons with less than nine years of schooling

shown in table 4, but is still huge. I did a comparable calculation for persons with college

degrees. Since college graduates made up 23% of the voting age population in 2000, I estimated

the turnout rate of persons in the upper 23% of the education distribution in 1964. By my

calculation, 82.5% of persons in the upper 23% of the education distribution voted in 1964. The

decline in voting of persons at the top of education distribution is thus 10.5 percentage points

(72.0% - 82.5%), which is smaller than the 15.5 percentage point drop shown in table 4. Thus,

looking at the voting rate of persons at similar points in the distribution by years of schooling, I

estimate that there was a 10.5 percentage point drop for highly educated persons compared to a

19.8 percentage point drop for less educated persons. The rise in inequality among persons at

comparable positions in the education distribution was thus huge, though smaller than the rise in

inequality among persons with a fixed number of years of schooling.

       I turn next to the L&N (1992) analysis of the CPS turnout statistics. Table 5, which is

taken from their main table, measures socioeconomic status by quintile of income, by three

occupation groupings, and by level of education from 1964 to 1988. The top line of the table

shows that turnout was stable between 1964 and 1968, fell noticeably from 1968 to 1972 (a drop

of 5.4 points); fell moderately from 1972 to 1976 (2.3 points), was stable from 1976 to 1984, and

then dropped from 1984 to 1988. Overall, turnout trended downward over the period by 10.4

                                                -25-
points. Each measure of socioeconomic status show greater falls in turnout for lower status than

for higher status groups. The smallest increase in inequality occurs among income classes, where

turnout for the highest income group dropped by 8.3 percentage points compared to an 11.0 drop

for the lowest income group – a 2.7 percentage point difference that they note is “only a slight

increase in socioeconomic class bias” (p.728). The occupation and education measures show

much greater increases in inequality, consistent the other studies cited above. The gap between

the white collar workers, who have the highest voting rate, and blue collar workers, who have

the lowest rate, trends upward from 16.5 percentage points in 1964 to 24.0 percentage points in

1988. The differential between college graduates and high school graduates rises from 10.5

points in 1968 to 19.2 points in 1988. All of this evidence shows that there has been a change in

class bias in the electorate since 1964.

       L& N stress the pattern of voting among persons differentiated by income quintile. If the

CPS data gave sufficiently accurate income information to sort the population into income

quintiles correctly, this would indeed be a highly desirable way to measure inequality in turnout.

Unfortunately, however, as Table 6 shows, the proportion of persons in the CPS income quintiles

has varied substantially over the years, rather than being 20% in each year. It is difficult to

know what to make of changes in turnout by quintiles when in 1964 28% of the sample is in the

third income quintile, whereas in 1988, just 19% is in that quintile. The reason for the varying

proportion of persons in the “quintiles” is that the CPS does not ask for actual income but instead

categorizes families into a few income classes. L& N also calculate a Gini coefficients for

inequality in voters by income. Their Ginis show an increase in voting inequality from 1972 to

1988. In a footnote they report Gini coefficients for 1964 and 1968 but exclude them from their

main analysis because they are based on fewer categories. But this excludes the 1968-1972

                                                -26-
period when turnout fell the most. Adding their computed Gini coefficients to table 5 shows a

large trend increase in the Gini coefficient for voters from 0.0856 to .1112.28 Given the problem

of varying shares of eligible voters in income quintiles, these data are weak indicators of actual

changes in turnout by income, but they show rising class bias in voting.

       The NES does not suffer from the problem of varying sizes of quintiles, and the voting

data for the NES show a strong rise in inequality by income class. L&N point out that this could

be due to trends in misreporting of voting by income and occupation29. Since the NES contains

estimates of validated votes, I use L&Ns data to see if this problem invalidate the findings that

inequality in voting increased. Their multivariate probit analysis of voting in the NES uses

validated voting data (their table 5). They estimate how education and income quintile (and

other factors) affect turnout in the elections of 1964, 1976, 1980, 1984, and 1988. They obtain

coefficients on education and income that vary quite a bit among the years but which show no

strong trend and conclude that there is no increase in inequality. But similar coefficients in a

nonlinear form of this type do not imply that a variable has the same percentage point effect for

groups in years when voting turnout changes. The impact of a change in a variable is largest

when the voting rate is around 50% and smaller when the voting rate is very high or very low.

To illustrate this point, consider the following logistic model (written in log odds ratio form):

       (4)ln P/(1-P) = a + b X, where P is the probability of voting and X is some measure of

socio-economic status

       Differentiating to find the impact of a change in socio-economic status, we see that

       (5) dP/dX = b(P)(1-P) or in percentage terms (dP/dX) /P= b (1-P)

The impact of X on the inequality of voting necessarily varies with turnout. Indeed, stable

coefficients in a nonlinear form of this type imply increasing inequality as turnout falls. Thus, I

                                                -27-
interpret their stable coefficients in a period when turnout was falling as evidence for greater

inequality in voting among the relevant groups rather than as evidence for no change in

inequality. 30

        Consistent with my reading of the data, Darmofal (1999)’s analysis of the NES validated

voting sample, summarized in Table 7, shows that inequality in voting increased in that sample

as it does in the total sample from 1964 to 1988. Panel A shows a 14 point drop in turnout

among low income groups compared to a 4.8 point drop in turnout among high income groups.

The decline in turnout is not monotonic across the income groups, but the pattern moves the

median voter up the income distribution. Panel B of Table 7 shows a similar pattern of greater

drops in validated turnout among persons with 12 years of schooling or 12 or less years of

schooling than for those with some college or more.

        Since the decline in turnout has varied over time, I have also contrasted changes in the

inequality of voting in periods when turnout fell substantially to inequality of voting in periods

when turnout was roughly stable. If turnout affects inequality in voting, inequality in turnout

should rise most when turnout falls. The following tabulation of data from L&N, which

organizes the periods by the change in turnout, shows such a relation between changes in

turnout and changes in their measures of inequality:

        period         change in turnout      change in Gini

        1968-72           -5.4                .0164

        1984-88           -3.0                .0127

        1972-76           -2.3                .0043

        1976-80           -0.3                .0013

        1864-68           -0.2               -.0086

                                                -28-
       Finally, using data from the NES, 1948-98, Devroye (2001) has found that in states with

low registration levels, income has a greater positive effect on voting than in states with high

registration levels. This implies that lower registration (and presumably) turnout is associated

with greater income bias in the electorate. He finds similar results in an analysis of the link

between voting and income and voter registration and turnout in CPS files for 1994-1998.

       In sum, the debate over the trend in inequality in voting and its relation to aggregate

turnout and other factors has illuminated the complexities in making inferences from the relevant

data, but the evidence supports the proposition that inequality among voters has risen.



                                       III. CONCLUSION

       “A rational man decides to vote just as he makes all other decisions: if the return

outweighs the cost, he votes: if not, he abstains” (Downs, 1957, p 260)

       Economists are surprised that anyone votes at all. Since no individual vote changes any

election, why should a rational man vote? The cost of voting may be slight for many people – a

few minutes early in the morning or after work or during the day at the polling place or even less

in states with absentee ballots, voting by mail, voting at polling places before election day – but

if there are no benefits, why bother? That many people vote implies that people do see benefits,

perhaps non-pecuniary benefits, but benefits nonetheless.31 If we accept this, economic analysis

has a more sensible message than “what me, vote?” Per the Downs quotation, it suggests that the

decision to vote depends on weighing potential benefits whatever their form and the costs to

voting. In the context of the median voter model, moreover, an individual’s vote could shift the

median by enough to justify the small time cost of voting. In a world where politicians respond

to the median voter the question isn’t “will my vote determine the winner?” but “will my vote

                                                -29-
move the winner enough closer to my position to justify my casting the ballot?”

       Since the administrative cost of voting has declined in the US, the downward trend in

turnout would seem to suggest that citizens see fewer benefits from voting. They could see

fewer benefits because parties move sufficiently close to the median voter to leave little space

between them, or because events make campaign promises irrelevant, or because governments

have only a limited range of variation in policies. If this was the case, and if voters were right,

low and unequal turnout would have little impact on policies.

       But increases in inequality of voting can shift the socioeconomic position of the median

voter. If the voting distribution is skewed in favor of upper income persons, the median voter

will be higher in the distribution, with policy more favorable to them. I estimate that the

increased inequality in US voting from 1964 to 2000 raised the family income of the median

voter from the 53rd percentile of the income distribution in 1964 to the 59th percentile of the

income distribution in 2000. Some analysts argue that the lower voting rate and higher income

status of the median voter in the US than in EU countries explains why the US has a smaller

welfare state and does less income redistribution than the EU. Consistent with this, Hill and

Leighly (1992) show that US states with greater inequality in voting spend less on welfare than

states with less inequality in voting.32 On the other hand, several studies suggest that there is

little attitudinal difference between voters and non-voters (Wolfinger and Rosenstone, 1980;

Verba, Schlozman and Brady, 1996), so that increases in turnout would not have great effects on

policy outcomes. While there is evidence in Europe that high turnouts improve the electoral

chances of left parties (Pacek and Radcliff, 1985), the impact of turnout on party performance in

the US is less clear, presumably because there are so many nonvoters that higher turnout could

come from almost any group. At best, higher turnout seems to favor marginally the

                                                -30-
Democrats.33 Over the long run, however, the level of turnout is unlikely to affect party

performance, since both parties will adjust their policies toward the new median.

       To sum up, my review of what we know about turnout shows that the bulk of the

evidence supports the claims that turnout has fallen in the US, albeit by a magnitude that varies

depending on how one adjusts for the rising number of ineligible voters, and that inequality in

voting among social groups has increased. More likely than not, these changes have had some

impact on government decisions and activities, though research has not conclusively

demonstrated the magnitude and nature of that impact.




                                               -31-
Table 1: Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors for Alternative Models of the Impact of
Ineligible Voters onTurnout, 1948-2000


 1948 to 2000                           Const   Trend      Pres          Ln          N       R2
                                                (x100)     Year     Eligible/VAP
 1. Ln (Voters / Voting Age             -.78      -.81      .30                      27     .86
 Population)                                     (.18)     (.03)
 2. Ln (Voters / Eligible Population)   -.79      -.48      .30                      27     .86
                                                 (.09)     (.03)
 3. Ln Voters / Voting Age              -.79      -.27      .30         1.66         27     .87
 Population                                      (.30)     (.03)        (.93)
 1972 to 1988
 4. Ln Voters / Voting Age              -.88      -.45      .33                      15     .96
 Population                                      (.21)     (.02)
 5. Ln Voters / Eligible Population     -.93      .07       .33                      15     .95
                                                 (.25)     (.02)
 6. Ln Voters / Voting Age              -.85      -.85      .33          -.78        15     .97
 Population                                      (.45)     (.02)        (.77)


SOURCE:
Based on data from McDonald and Popkin (2001), ee Appendix A.
NOTES:
Eligible population is defined as voting age population, minus the number of noncitizens of
voting age, minus the number of ineligible felons, plus the estimated overseas voting eligible
population. Pres year is dummy 1 for every presidential year election




                                                -32-
Table 2: Reported Reasons for Not Voting, Among Persons Registered to Vote, 1980-1998


                                1980              1996           1998           2000
 Too Busy                        7.6              21.5           34.9            20.9
 Not Interested                 11.2              16.6           12.7            12.2
 Ill / Disabled                 17.1              14.9           11.1            14.8
 Dislike Candidates             16.0              13.0           5.5             7.7
 Out of Town                    12.6              11.1           8.3             10.2
 No Transportation               4.1              4.3            1.8             2.4
 All Else                       17.2              15.9           18.5            23.7
 DK / Refused                   14.1              2.7            7.1             7.5


SOURCE:
US Department of Commerce, “Voting and Registration in the Election of November 1996",
Current Population Reports, Series P20-504 July 1998.
US Department of Commerce, “Voting and Registration in the Election of November 1998,"
Current Population Reports, Series P20-523RV August 2000.
US Department of Commerce, “Voting and Registration in the Election of November 2000.”
Current Population Reports, series P20, no.542 February 2002.




                                           -33-
Table 3: Turnout Rates of Parents and Non-parents, 1956 - 1996


                                Parents              Non-parents               Difference
 1956                             69                      78                       -9
 1960                             78                      81                       -3
 1964                             77                      78                       -1
 1968                             75                      76                       -1
 1978                             52                      57                       -5
 1980                             67                      74                       -7
 1982                             57                      63                       -6
 1984                             70                      76                       -6
 1986                             45                      58                      -13
 1988                             64                      74                      -10
 1990                             37                      53                      -16
 1992                             75                      78                       -3
 1996                             64                      76                      -12


SOURCE:
Calculated by Ruy Teixeira using survey data from National Election Studies.




                                             -34-
Table 4: The Change in Voter Turnout, by age, 1972-2000 and by education, 1964-2000


                                        Turnout
 Age Group                      1972                2000            Change
         18-20                  48.3                28.4             -19.9
         21-24                  50.7                24.2             -26.5
         25-34                  59.7                43.7             -16.0
         35-44                  66.3                56.0             -10.3
         45-64                  70.8                64.1             -6.7
         65+                    63.5                67.6              4.1
                                        Turnout
 Education Group                1964                2000            Change
         Less than 9            59.0                26.8             -32.2
         9-11                   65.4                33.6             -21.8
         HSG                    76.1                49.4             -26.7
         C 1-3                  82.3                60.3             -22.0
         C 4 or more            87.5                72.0             -15.5


SOURCE:
US Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract 1989, table 432 and Statistical Abstract 2002,
table 401; and Voting and Registration, historical time series table, available at:
http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/voting/tabA-2.pdf.




                                             -35-
Table 5: Turnout by Demographic Characteristics (1964-88, Current Population Surveys)


 Demographic Group                 1964      1968         1972    1976     1980       1984    1988
 Total                              70.5      70.3        64.9    62.6         62.3   63.1     60.1
 Income
     1 (Low)                        53.7      57.5        50.7    47.4         47.7   47.8     42.7
     2                              63.1      67          55.9    55.1         54.2   57.5     52.2
     3                              72.8      74.2        63.3    62.4         60.5   63.5     58.9
     4                              78.7      79.7        71.6    69.9         68.9   70.3     67.5
     5 (High)                       85.2      85.4        80.7    78.4         76.1   77.6     76.9
     Gini Coefficient              -0.09     -0.08        0.094   0.098        0.1    0.099   0.1112
 Occupation
     Service Worker                 65.9      62.7        58.6    52.8         51.3   52.9     47.2
     Blue-collar                    65.6      62.3        54.2    49.8         48     49.4     44.5
     White-collar                   82.1      79.8        76.4    72.1         70.9   70.8     68.5
 Education
     No high school                 59.4      56.4        48.9    46.8         44.5   45.1     38.4
     Some high school               65.9      63.1        53.7    50.1         48.4    47      43.3
     High school grad               76.5      74.2        66.1     62          61      61      56.6
     Some college                   82.6      80.2         76     70.1         69.5   69.9     66.4
     College grad                    –        84.7        83.6    81.1         80.1   79.3     75.8
     Post-college                   88.2      86.9        87.4    85.2         84.9   84.4     83.9


SOURCE: Leighly and Nagler (1992, Table 1 and Endnote 10).

NOTE:
 Table entries are the reported turnout rates for each demographic category.
*For 1964 college grad and post-college are only available in combined form.




                                                   -36-
Table 6: Size of Income Quintiles: Percentage of Eligible Voters in Each Group


 Income                       1964     1968        1972     1976    1980         1984   1988
 Current Population Surveys
 1 (Low)                       19        27            18   17       20          22     17
 2                             20        24            22   23       15          21     22
 3                             28        19            15   24       25          16     19
 4                             16        20            25   15       14          24     25
 5 (High)                      18        10            19    21      26           17     18

SOURCE: Leighly and Nagler (1992, Table A-1).




                                                -37-
Table 7: Turnout and Changes in Turnout in Validated NES data


 PART A: Turnout by Income Quintile, 1964-1988, Validated Turnout (NES)
 Income Quintile                    1976       1980      1984      1988   Turnout Change
                                                                          1964-1988 in %
 1 (Low)                 53.7 %      47        45.8      45.8      39.7        -14
 2                        56.4       60.6      53.8      61.8      49.4         -7
 3                         62        63.4      57.7      63.2      58.6        3.4
 4                        76.4       66.7      68.4      68.4      68.1        8.3
 5 (High)                 78.5       79.8      67.6       80       73.7        4.8



 PART B: Turnout by Education Level, 1964-1988, Validated Turnout (NES)
                          1964      1976       1980      1984      1988   Turnout Change
                                                                          1964-1988 in %
 Years of Education
 Less than 12 years      57.4 %      52.2       45       49.6       43        -14.4
 12 years                 68.1       63.8      54.8      58.6      52.7       -15.4
 More than 12 years       76.9       73.9      70.1      74.2      72.1        -4.8


SOURCE: Darmofal, David. 1999. “Socioeconomic Bias in Turnout Decline: Do the Voters
Remain the Same?" presented at APSA meetings, Atlanta (September).




                                             -38-
Appendix Table A: Numbers of Persons in Groups Associated with National Turnout Rates
 Year        Vote for      Voting-      Turnout         Non-        Ineligible   Overseas    Turnout
             Highest         Age       Rate VAP       citizens        Felons      VEP       Rate VEP)
              Office       Popula-        (%)          (100s)        (1000s)     (1000s)       (%)
             (1000s)         tion
                           (1000s)
 1948         48833         95573         51.1         2198            348         440         52.2
 1950         41984         98134         42.8         1880            372         391         43.6
 1952         61552         99929         61.6         1899            379         1131        62.3
 1954         43854        102075         43.0         1939            411         987         43.5
 1956         62027        104515         59.3         1986            428         981         60.2
 1958         47203        106447         44.3         2129            464         951         45.0
 1960         68838        109672         62.8         2193            481         912         63.8
 1962         53141        112952         47.0         2259            491         1113        47.7
 1964         70645        114090         61.9         2282            478         1212        62.8
 1966         56188        116638         48.2         2363            448         1621        48.7
 1968         73213        120285         60.9         2766            421         1856        61.5
 1970         58014        124498         46.6         3148            443         1765        47.3
 1972         77719        140777         55.2         3640            443         1581        56.2
 1974         55944        146338         38.2         4148            496         1510        39.1
 1976         81556        152308         53.5         4558            588         1562        54.8
 1978         58918        155609         37.9         5780            629         1753        39.0
 1980         86515        163945         52.8         6827            803         1803        54.7
 1982         67616        166724         40.6         10554           932         1982        43.0
 1984         92653        173995         53.3         13252          1153         2361        57.2
 1986         64991        177922         36.5         12223          1308         2216        39.0
 1988         91595        181956         50.3         13942          1533         2527        54.2
 1990         67859        185888         36.5         16297          1845         2659        39.8
 1992        104405        189687         55.0         17826          2117         2418        60.6
 1994         75106        193163         38.9         13205          2365         2229        41.8
 1996         96263        196928         48.9         13948          2545         2499        52.6
 1998         72537        200929         36.1         15070          2822         2937        39.0
 2000        105326        205813         51.2         16500          2851         3008        55.6

SOURCE:
Taken from table 1 of Michael P. McDonald and Samuel L. Popkin, “The Myth of the Vanishing Voter,” American
Political Science Review, Vol 95:4 (December 2001), p 4. See:
http://elections.gmu.edu/APSR%20McDonald%20and_Popkin_2001.pdf.




                                                     -39-
                                                  References

Álvarez-Rivera, Manuel. 2003. “Elections in Puerto Rico.” Official election statistics available at:
http://eleccionespuertorico.org/home_en.html

Banducci, Susan, and Jeffrey Karp, 2001. “Mobilizing American Voters: A reassessment.” Paper presented to
the 2001 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association. San Francisco (August 30 -
September 2, 2001).

Banducci, Susan, and Jeffrey Karp. 2002. “Going Postal: How All-Mail Elections Influence Turnout.”
Political Behavior 22(3): 223-39.

Berinsky, Adam, Nancy Burns, and Michael Traugott. 2001. “Who Votes by Mail?: A Dynamic Model of the
Individual-Level Consequences of Vote-by-Mail Systems.” Public Opinion Quarterly 65: 178-87.

Burden, Barry. 2000. “Voter Turnout and the National Election Studies” Political Analysis 8(4): 389-98.

Burnham, Walter. 1987. “The Turnout Problem.” In Elections American Style, edited by James A. Reichley.
Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Caltech-MIT Voting Technology Project. 2001. “Voting - What Is, What Could Be.” Report of the Caltech-
MIT Voting Technology Project (July). Available at www.vote.caltech.edu/Reports.

Calvert, Jerry W., and Jack Gilchrist. 1993. “Suppose They Held an Election and Almost Everybody Came?”
Political Science and Politics 26(4) (December): 695-700.

Casper, Lynne, and Loretta Bass. 1998. “Voting and Registration in the Election of November 1996." Current
Population Reports, seres P20, no.504 (July). Washington: U.S. Government Printing House for U.S. Bureau
of the Census.

Crocker, Royce. 1990. “Voter Registration and Turnout in States with Mail and Motor Voter Registration
Systems.” Washington, Library of Congress: Congressional Research Service Report (February 23).

Darmofal, David. 1999. “Socioeconomic Bias in Turnout Decline: Do the Voters Remain the Same?"
presented at APSA meetings, Atlanta (September).

Darmofal, David. 2003 submission. "Socioeconomic Bias, Turnout Decline, and the Puzzle of Participation"
American Journal of Political Science.

Day, Jennifer, and Avalaura Gaither. 2000. “Voting and Registration in the Election of
November 1998.” Current Population Reports, series P20-523RV (August). Washington: U.S. Government
Printing House for U.S. Bureau of the Census.

Devroye, Daniel. 2001. “Does Low Registration Increase Class Bias in Voting? Evidence from the Fifty
States.” Cambridge: Harvard University (April).

Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Government. NY: Harper and Row.

                                                      -40-
Freeman, Richard. 2003, forthcoming. “What Do Unions Do to Voting?” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working
Paper.

Gerber, Alan and Donald Green. 2000. “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and Direct Mail on
Voter Turnout: a field experiment.” American Political Science Review 94: 653-63.

Green, Donald, Alan Gerber, and David Nickerson. 2002. “Getting Out the Youth Vote in Local Elections:
results from six door to door canvassing experiments.” New Haven: Yale University, May 18.

------. 2003 “Getting Out the Vote in Local Elections: results from six door to door canvassing experiments.”
The Journal of Politics 65(4) (November).

Hamilton, Randy. 1988. “American All-Mail Balloting: A Decade’s Experience” Public Administration
Review 48(5) (Sept-Oct): 860-6.

Hill, Kim, and Jan Leighley. 1992. “The Policy Consequences of Class Bias in State Electorates.” American
Journal of Political Science 36(2) (May) 351-65.

Hill, Kim, Jan Leighly, Angela Hinton-Anderson. 1995. “Lower-class Mobilization and Policy Linkage in the
U.S. States” American Journal of Political Science 39(1) (Feb): 75-86.

Highton, Benjamin and Raymond Wolfinger. 1995. “Anticipating the Effects of the National Voter
Registration Act of 1993." Paper presented to the 1995 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science
Association. Chicago (August 31 - September 3).

International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA). 1997. Voter Turnout from 1945 to
1997: A Global Report. Stockholm Sweden.

Jamieson, Amis, Hyon B. Shin, and Jennifer Day. 2002. “Voting and Registration in the Election of
November 2000.” Current Population Reports, series P20, no.542. Washington: U.S. Government Printing
House for U.S. Bureau of the Census.

Knack, Stephen. 1995. “Does Motor Voter Work? Evidence from State-Level Data.” Journal of Politics
57(3) (August): 796-811.

Leighly, Jan, and Jonathan Nagler. 1992. “Socioeconomic Class Bias in Turnout, 1964-1988: The Voters
Remain the Same." The American Political Science Review, Vol. 86, No. 3. (September): 725-736.

Lijphart, Arend.1997 . “Unequal Participation: Democracy’s Unresolved Dilemma.” American Political
Science Review 91(1): 1-14.

Luttberg, Norman. 1984. “Differential Voting Turnout Decline in the American States." Social Science
Quarterly 65: 60-74.

McDonald, Michael P. 2001. “An External Validity Check of the National Election Study’s Turnout Rate.”
Processed June 20.


                                                     -41-
McDonald, Michael. 2003. “On the Over-Report Bias of the National Election Study Turnout Rate.”Political
Analysis 11(2): 180-6.

McDonald, Michael P. and Samuel L. Popkin. 2001. “The Myth of the Vanishing Voter.” American Political
Science Review 95(4) (December): 963-74.

McKee, Seth. 2002. “Was Turnout Significantly Higher in the Battleground States in the 2000 Presidential
Election?” Paper presented to the 2002 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association.
Boston (September 24-28, 2002).

Michelson, Melissa. 2002. “Turning Out Latino Voters.” Paper presented to the 2002 Annual Meeting of the
American Political Science Association. Boston (September 24-28, 2002).

Mullin, Megan, and Thad Kousser. 2002. “Separating Selection and Treatment Effects in the Study of
Absentee Voting.” Paper presented to the 2002 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science
Association. Boston (September 24-28, 2002).

Nagel, Jack Henry, and John McNulty. 1986. “Partisan Effects of Voter Turnout in Senatorial and
Gubernatorial Elections.” American Political Science Review 90(4) (December): 780-93.

Nagler, Jonathan. 1991. “The Effect of Registration Laws and Education on U.S. Voter Turnout.” American
Political Science Review, 85: 1393-405.

Nickerson, David. 2002. “Hunting the Elusive Young Voter”, Paper presented to the 2002 Annual Meeting of
the American Political Science Association. Boston (September 24-28, 2002).

Oliver, J. Eric. 1996. “The Effects of Eligibility Restrictions and Party Activity on Absentee Voting and
Overall Turnout.” American Journal of Political Science 40(2) (May): 498-513.

Pacek, Alexander, and Benjamin Radcliff. 1985. “Turnout and the Vote for Left-of Centre Parties: A Cross-
National Analysis.” British Journal of Political Science 25(1) (January):137-43.

Piven , Francis and Richard A. Cloward 1988 Why Americans Don’t Vote. New York. Pantheon Books

Radcliff, Benjamin, and Patricia Davis. 2000. “Labor Organization and Electoral Participation in Industrial
Democracies.” American Journal of Political Science 44(1) (January): 132-41.

Reiter, Howard. 1979. “Why is Turnout Down?” Public Opinion Quarterly 43: 297-311.

Riker, William. 1962. The Theory of Political Coalitions. (New Haven: Yale University Press).

Ringquist, Evan, Kim Hill, Jan Leighly, Angela Hinton-Anderson. 1997. “Lower Class Mobilization and
Policy Linkage in the U.S. States: A Correction.” American Journal of Political Science 41(1) (January): 339-
44.

Rosenstone, Steven, and John Hansen. 1993. Mobilization, Participation, and Democracy in America. NY:
Macmillan.

                                                     -42-
Shields, Todd, and Robert Goidel. 1997. “Participation Rates, Socioeconomic Class Biases, and
Congressional Elections : a cross validation.” American Journal of Political Science, 41(2) (April 1997): 683-
91.

Silver, Brian, Barbara Anderson, and Paul Abramson. 1986. “Who Overreports Voting?”American Political
Science Review, 80(2) (June): 613-24.

Squire, Peverill, Raymond Wolfinger, David Glass. 1987. “Residential Mobility and Voter Turnout.”
American Political Science Review, 81(1) (March): 45-66.

Teixeira, Ruy A. 1999. “Turnout Patterns and Trends and Parental Power.”Draft pages faxed on 5/24/99.

------. 1992. The Disappearing American Voter. Washington D.C.: Brookings.

Traugott, Michael. 2000. “Why Electoral Reform Has Failed: If You Build It, Will They Come?” Paper
presented to the Conference on Political Participation: Building a Research Agenda. Princeton University
(October 12-14, 2000).

Traugott, Michael J., and Michael J. Hammer. 2001. “Oregon Vote-by Mail Project: Report to the League of
Conservation Voters Education Fund.” Available at:
www.voteenvironment.org/pdf/OR%20Vote-By-Mail%20Research.PDF

U.S. Department of Commerce. U.S. Census Bureau. 1964. “Educational Attainment.” Current Population
Reports, series P20, no. 536 (March). Available at: www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/educ-
attn.html.

------. 2000. “Educational Attainment.” Current Population Reports, series P20, no. 138 (March). Available
at: www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/educ-attn.html.

------. 1989. Statistical Abstract of the United States 1989. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

------. 1999. Statistical Abstract of the United States 1999. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

------. 2002. Statistical Abstract of the United States 2002. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

------. 1998. “Voting and Registration in the Election of November 1996.” Current Population Reports, series
P20, no. 504. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office (July). Available at:
http://www.census.gov/prod/3/98pubs/p20-504.pdf

------. 2000. “Voting and Registration in the Election of November 1998.” Current Population Reports, series
P20, no. 523RV. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office (August). Available at:
http://www.census.gov/prod/2000pubs/p20-523.pdf

------. 2002. “Voting and Registration in the Election of November 2000.” Current Population Reports, series
P20, no.542. Washington: U.S. Government Printing House. Available at:
http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/voting/p20-542.html.


                                                     -43-
U.S. Department of Justice. Civil Rights Division. 2000. “The National Voter Registration Act (NVRA).”
Available at: www.usdoj.gov/crt/voting/nvra/activ_nvra.htm (Last revised February 11, 2000).

Verba, Sidney, Kay Schlozman, and Henry Brady. 1996. Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in American
Politics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wattenberg, Marvin. 2002.Where Have All the Voters Gone? Cambrdige, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wolfinger, Raymond and Steven Rosenstone. 1980. Who Votes? New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Wolfinger, Raymond, Benjamin Highton, and Megan Mullin. 2002. “Between Registering and Voting: How
state laws affect the turnout of young registrants.” Paper presented to the 2002 Annual Meeting of the
American Political Science Association. Boston (September 24-28, 2002).

Wolfinger, Raymond, Benjamin Highton, and Megan Mullin. 2002. “State Laws and the Turnout of the
Registered.” Paper presented to the 2002 Annual Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association.
Chicago (April 2002).

Wolfinger, Raymond and Jonathan Hoffman. 2001. “Registering and Voting with Motor Voter.” Political
Science and Politics, PS Online, 35(1) (March).




                                                   -44-
                                             Endnotes

1.IDEA, 1997, p. 21. The US and Canadian comparison are for 1945 to 1997, as reported in
IDEA.

2. In addition, there are diverse irregular surveys such as exit polls, focus group interviews, and
general surveys such as NORC’s General Social Survey, which provide information on who
votes.

3. Silver, Anderson, and Abramson, 1986

4. Burden, 2000, figure 2

5.M.McDonald “An External Validity Check of the National Election Study’s Turnout Rate”,
processed, June 20, 2001

6. Caltech, MIT Report of the Caltech-MIT Voting Technology Project
Voting - What Is, What Could Be July 2001 www.vote.caltech.edu/Reports

7. IDEA, figure 36

8.Wolfinger and Rosenstone; Leighly and Nagler, 1992

9.Verba, presentation 1999

10. The median voter model is the simplest model of democratic decision-making. According to
this model, politicians who seek election pay close attention to the preferences of the person in
the middle of the distribution of preferences – the median. Array voters by their attitudes toward
government policies on a right to left scale. Candidates from the right and candidates from left
will move to the middle to gain the votes. To win they need 50+% of the votes and thus must
appeal to the median voter (Riker, 1962).

11.Radcliff and Davis

12.IDEA

13.Highton and Wolfinger, 1995

14. Marvin Wattenberg, Where Have All the Voters Gone? (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass, 2002).

15.In addition, there are potential citizen voters living abroad. But their number is dwarfed by
the number of non-citizens and persons incarcerated or deprived of the franchise because of past
incarceration. M&P deal with this group as well.

16.The range of estimates for 1996 across several studies is about 3 percentage points. Burden
notes that taking account of this bias explains only a small proportion of the difference in turnout
in the NES and in official counts.

                                                -45-
17. http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/voting/nvra/activ_nvra.htm

18. Crocker, 1990, Wolfinger and Rosenstone, 1980, Teixeira, 1992, Calvert and Gilchrist, 1993

19.Knack, tables 2 and 3

20.p 4 from Internet download

21.Leighly and Nagler, 1992; Freeman, 2003

22. This calculation multiplies the ratio of the turnout rate in administrative data to the turnout
ratio on the CPS for all voters by the turnout rate on the CPS for Puerto Ricans.

23. In 2000, there were approximately 2,730,000 persons of voting age in Puerto Rico (see “IDB
Summary Demographic Data for Puerto Rico” at: www.census.gov/cgi-bin/ipc/idbsum?cty=RQ)
In 1990 Puerto Rico had approximately 2,330,000 persons of voting age
(welcome.topuertorico.org/censo, Summary Population and Housing Characteristics, Table 1:
welcome.topuertorico.org/censo/age/shtml). In 2000 2,447,000 persons were registered to vote,
giving a registration rate of 89.6%.; Puerto Rico had no elections in 1990, so I average the
numbers registered in 1988 and 2002 to obtain an estimate of 2,190,100 registrants for
comparison with the 1990 population – a rate of 93.9 percent. Averaging the 1990 and 2000
estimates, I come up with a 91.8% registration rate for Puerto Rico.

24. A 10 percentage point drop in voting by a group with a low rate of voting is a larger
percentage drop than a 10 percentage point drop in voting by a group with a high rate of voting.
In a model of voting using individual data that makes the probability of voting depend on
independent variables with a logistic or probit form, changes in a variable will have a bigger
impact on the proportion voting depending on groups with a voting rate around 50% than on
groups with a voting rate much lower or higher than that.

25. Say the population has 10 wealthy people and 100 poor people. Initially all the wealthy vote
(10) and ½ of the poor vote (50). Then 1/6th of the electorate are wealthy people. A 50
percentage point reduction in the turnout of both groups leaves 5 wealthy voters and no poor
voters. The example is extreme but the principle holds

26. Assume that 100% of the upper group voted. Then to get the 20 point increase, the lower
group would have to vote at a rate of 80% – a huge 30 point rise for them.


27. Estimates of the distribution of the population by education are from US Bureau of the
Census, Educational Attainment CPS March 2000 and Educational Attainment: March 1964
(P20-138). http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/educ-attn.html


28. The problem of limited and inaccurate quintile groupings in the NES suggests the value of
estimating incomes from detailed occupation codes for working people in the November CPS
files, and use this to compute inequality measures with thicker income measures. I have not yet
done this.


                                                -46-
29. Their table 3 shows a large drop in misreporting for both high and low occupation and
income groups.

30. I read Shields and Goidel’s “cross validation” of Leighly and Nagler as suffering from
similar problems. Their estimated logit coefficients on education show strongly rising inequality
in voting in both their NES and CPS calculations. Since Shields and Goidel do not record the
proportion of people in their income quintiles, I do not know if that is a problem with their
income calculations

31. There are many other areas in which people participate despite having only a miniscule
chance of making a gain, such as lotteries. And people root for teams, presumably so that they
gain greater pleasure from victory than if they simply watched the sport.

32. Hill, Leighly, and Hinton-Andersson’s extension of this analysis shows similar results See
Ringquist, Hill, Leighly, Hinton-Andersson as well.

33. Others argue that any relation that existed historically has disappeared (Nagel and McNulty).




                                              -47-
