                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DOES EXCHANGE RATE RISK MATTER FOR WELFARE?

                                              Paul R. Bergin
                                             Ivan Tchakarov

                                          Working Paper 9900
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9900


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




We thank Paul Beaudry, Michael Devereux, Robert Kollmann, and Kenneth Rogoff for especially helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Paul R. Bergin and Ivan Tchakarov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Does Exchange Rate Risk Matter for Welfare?
Paul R. Bergin and Ivan Tchakarov
NBER Working Paper No. 9900
August 2003, Revised March 2006
JEL No. F41

                                            ABSTRACT

       Volatility in exchange rates is a prominent feature of open economies, a fact which has
motivated elaborate attempts in many countries at exchange rate management. This paper analyzes
quantitatively the welfare effects of exchange rate risk in a general two-country environment. It finds
that the effects of uncertainty tend to be small for the types of simplified cases considered in past

literature. But it identifies other cases, not considered previously, in which these effects can be

significantly larger. These include habit persistence, where agents are more sensitive to risk, and
also incomplete asset market structures which allow for asymmetries between countries. The latter
case suggests that countries which are hosts to an international reserve currency, such as the U.S.
or members of the euro zone, may accrue significant benefits because of the enhanced ability to

hedge against exchange rate risk.

Paul R. Bergin                                         Ivan Tchakarov
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of California, Davis                        University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616                                        Davis, CA 95616
and NBER                                               iptchakarov@ucdavis,edu
pbergin@ucdavis.edu
1 Introduction
        Exchange rate variability is one of the most prominent features of open economy
macroeconomics, and a desire to moderate this variability has been a motivation behind the
managed exchange rate regimes of many countries as well as European monetary union. This
paper conducts a model-consistent evaluation of optimal monetary polic y rules in the context
of a two-country general equilibrium model with sticky prices. It focuses on two questions.
Firstly, what degree of exchange rate variability or stabilization is optimal for certain classes
of economies? Secondly, for what types of economies does following an optimized
stabilization policy yield the most significant benefits in terms of household utility?
        Several recent papers have employed analy tically solvable models to characterize the
implications of alternative monetary policy rules and exchange rate arrangements in sticky
price open economies. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000) demonstrate that monetary policy
rules that stabilize the exchange rate do not necessarily increase household welfare or even
trade, depending on the nature of preferences, the monetary policy rules, and the shocks.
Devereux and Engel (2003) show that the degree to which optimal policy lets the exchange
rate fluctuate depends on the currency in which prices are sticky. Gali and Monacelli (2005)
study classes of policy rules in the form of inflation targeting and Taylor-type rules. 1
        This paper conducts a quantitative analysis of somewhat richer and more realistic
economic environments, as permitted by calibration and numerical solution. For example,
asset markets and preferences are not limited to cases that imply complete international risk
sharing, which would imply the current account is restricted to zero balance. As a result,
when the paper computes the effects of exchange rate variability, it takes into consideration
the potentially important effects that exchange rates have on a country’s current account.
This numerical analysis is made possible by the second-order solution method developed in
Kim et. al. (2004), which is also applied to an open economy setting in Kollmann (2002) and
(2004). 2 The analysis here differs from Kollmann in that it studies alternative economic
environments, and pays special attention to the size of quantitative implications from policy
choices.



1
  For a sample of other related work, see Benigno (2004), Benigno and Benigno (2003), Carre and Collard
(2003), Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2001), Corsetti and Pesenti (2001, 2004), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002),
Sutherland (2005).
2
  Related solution algorithms have been proposed in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004a), and Collard and
Juillard (2001).


                                                                                                       1
        The paper begins by studying a generalized version of the standard model from the
optimal policy literature, with calibrated parameters and augmented with incomplete asset
markets. Experiments support the findings from simpler analytical models, in that the
particular Taylor -type policy rule that is optimal prescribes aggressively stabilizing inflation.
The optimized rule does not directly respond to exchange rate fluctuations, and it is optimal
to let the exchange rate fluctuate in response to productivity shocks. However, the
experiment highlights that the benefits from following an optimized stabilization policy are
small in terms of representative household utility.
        The paper goes on to study two new types of economic environments, where the
utility benefits might be expected to be larger. The first of these cases is where household
preferences exhibit habits. However, experiments indicate that the conclusions from the
benchmark economy are little altered. Optimized policy continues to focus on inflation
stabilization, and continues to allow substa ntial exchange rate variability. Further, while
households with habits are by definition much more sensitive to certain types of variability,
the utility gains from following an optimized stabilization policy increase only moderately.
        The second alternative economic environment features one country unable to issue
debt denominated in its own currency. Termed “original sin” in recent literature, this asset
asymmetry makes it difficult for the country to respond to a stochastic environment through
precautionary saving, since net foreign assets expose the country all the more to the effects of
exchange rate variability. In this context the optimized cooperative policy rule puts
substantial weight on exchange rate stabilization and virtually eliminates exchange rate
fluctuations. The size of the utility gain for the sin country is about four times that for the
benchmark economy above.
        The next section of the paper presents the benchmark two-country model, calibration,
and solution method. Section 3 presents results for the benchmark model and the two
extensions. Section 4 concludes and makes suggestions for future research.


2 The Model
        Consider a model of two countries, denoted home and foreign. Agents consume two
final goods, where each country specializes in the production of one of these.
Monopolistically competitive firms produce intermediates using capital and labor, and set
prices sluggishly due to adjustment costs.



                                                                                                  2
2.1 Goods market structure
       Final goods (F) are a CES index over sub-indexes of the home (FH ) and foreign (FF)
intermediates. The aggregation technology for final goods is:
                                                                                            µ
                                           1µ µµ−1          1       
                                                                µ −1 µ −1

                                     Ft = a FH ,t + (1 − a ) FF ,µt  , where
                                                             µ                                                                             (1)
                                                                   
                                                                                            λ
                                                                  1            λ −1
                                                                                      λ −1
                                                    FH , t     =  ∫ f H ,t ( i) λ di                                                     (2)
                                                                  0                  
                                                                                            λ
                                                              1             λ −1
                                                                                   λ −1
                                                  FF , t   =  ∫ f F ,t ( j ) λ dj  ,                                                     (3)
                                                              0                   
where a lower case represents output of the individual firms.
       Final goods producers behave competitively, maximizing profit each period:

                                           Πt = max  PF
                                                        t t − PH ,t FH ,t − PF ,t FF ,t 
                                                                                                                                          (4)

where P is the overall price index of the final good, PH is the price index of home goods in
home currency units, and PF of foreign goods in foreign currency units. The price indexes
may be defined:
                                                                                        1
                                           Pt = aPH1−, tµ + (1 − a ) PF1−,t µ 1−µ , where                                              (5)


                             (∫ p                          )                                    (∫ p                        )
                                                               1                                                             1

                                           ( i)                                                            ( j)
                                1             1−λ            1 −λ                                1            1− λ          1− λ
                  PH , t =          H ,t             di                           PF ,t =            F,t               di          .     (6,7)
                                0                                                                0


Given the aggregation functions above, demand will be allocated between home and foreign
goods according to
                                                  −µ                                                              −µ
                                    P                                                           P 
                       FH , t   = a  H ,t  Ft                               FF , t   = (1 − a )  F ,t  Ft ,                          (8,9)
                                     Pt                                                          Pt 
with demands for individual goods:
                                                    −λ                                                                 −λ
                                  p ( i)                                                         p ( j) 
                  f H ,t ( i ) =  H ,t  FH ,t                                   f F , t ( j ) =  F ,t    FF ,t .                  (10,11)
                                  P                                                              P
                                  H ,t                                                           F ,t 
Analogous definitions apply to the foreign country.


2.2 Home household problem



                                                                                                                                             3
        The representative home household derives utility from consumption (C), real money
balances (M/P), and labor (H). Households derive income by selling their labor (H) at the
nominal wage rate (W), renting out capital to firms at the real rental rate (r), receiving real
profits from home firms ( Π ), and from government transfers (T). In addition to money,
households can hold a noncontingent nominal bond denominated in home currency (BH)
which pays an interest rate (i), or a bond denominated in foreign currency (BF) which pays an

interest rate ( i* ), where S is the home currency price of a unit of foreign currency. The
household determines capital accumulation (K), which involves a quadratic adjustment cost
that depends upon the parameter ψ I and a constant rate of depreciation ( δ ).
        Household optimization for the home country may be written:
                                                 ∞
                                                        M           
                                        max E0 ∑ β t U  Ct , t , Ht 
                                               t =0         Pt      
subject to the budget constraint:

                  t t + Pt ( Kt +1 − (1 − δ ) Kt ) + PAC
                 PC                                   t I ,t + M t +BH ,t + St BF ,t + ACB ,t

                 = (1 + it −1 ) BH ,t −1 + St (1 + ti*−1 ) BF ,t −1 + Mt −1 +Wt Ht + PrK
                                                                                     t t t + Tt + Πt


where
                                                                   1−ε
                                        C1− ρ   χ M                        Ht1+ψ
                                    Ut = t + t  t                      −                             (12)
                                        1 − ρ 1 − ε  Pt                    1 +ψ

and

                                                   ψ ( Kt +1 − Kt )
                                                                         2

                                           ACI ,t = I                                                  (13)
                                                    2       Kt

                                                      (
                                                  ψ St ( BF , t − BF )       )
                                                                             2

                                        ACB ,t   = B                             .
                                                   2      PH , tYt

Money demand shocks are represented by shifts in χt . There is a small adjustment cost on
bond holdings, ACB , to ensure stationarity in the net foreign asset position. 3 Later sections of
the paper will consider a more general form of preferences featuring habits. Later sections
also consider an alternative asset market structure, limited to only one type of bond.
        Optimization implies a money demand equation:


3
 Home and foreign bonds are treated separately in this adjustment cost to ensure that there exists a
determinate allocation between home and foreign currency bonds even in a first-order approximation to the
system, as is required by the second-order accurate solution method.


                                                                                                         4
                                                                      ρ ε
                                                    Mt    χ1t ε Ct
                                                       =              ,                                        (14)
                                                    Pt   (1 − dt )1 ε
a trade-off between consumption and leisure:
                                                        Wt
                                                           ρ
                                                             = Htψ ,                                           (15)
                                                       PC
                                                        t t

a consumption Euler equation:
                                                                   ρ
                                                             PC
                                                  dt = β Et     t t
                                                                       ,                                       (16)
                                                            Pt +1Ctρ+1
with the definition of d:
                                                                  1
                                                        dt =           ,                                       (17)
                                                                1 + it
an interest parity condition:

                                              ψ B St ( BF , t − BF )  
                                                                        −1
                          ρ
                                                                                   PC    ρ
                                                                                                       
              Et   PC t t    St +1
                  Pt +1Ct +1 St
                           ρ        (1 + i*
                                          t ) 
                                              
                                                1 +                    
                                                                        
                                                                            = Et 
                                                                                        t t
                                                                                            ρ (
                                                                                               1 + it ) ,     (18)
                                                     PH , tYt                  Pt +1Ct +1         

and finally

               ψ I ( Kt +1 − Kt )          Cρ                   1 Kt2+ 2 − Kt2+1  
              1 +                  = β Et  ρ  rt + (1 − δ ) +  ψ I                .
                                                 t
                                                                                                               (19)
                      Kt                   Ct +1              2       Kt2+1      
equating the benefits and costs of capital accumulation. An analogous problem and first order
conditions apply to the foreign household.




2.3 Home firm problem
        The benchmark model assumes producer currency pricing, so that firms set prices in
their own currency both for sales domestically and sales abroad. They rent capital (K) at the
rental rate r, and hire labor (H) at the nominal rate W. Prices are sticky because there is a
quadratic cost to adjusting them. The home firm maximization problem is:
                                                          ∞
                                              max E0 ∑ ξt , t+ n ΠH , t ( i ) ,                                (20)
                                                         t =0

where

                    ΠH , t ( i ) = ( pH ,t (i ) − MCt ( i ) − ACP , t ( i) ) ( fH , t ( i) + fH*, t ( i) ) ,   (21)

with the adjustment and marginal costs defined respectively as:


                                                                                                                 5
                                                           ψ ( pH , t ( i ) − pH ,t −1 ( i ) )
                                                                                                 2

                                             ACP ,t ( i ) = P                                  ,                  (22)
                                                            2           pH ,t −1 ( i )

                                                                   ( rP
                                                                     t t ) Wt
                                                                             α1−α

                                                        MCt    =                          ,                       (23)
                                                                 θt αα (1 − α )
                                                                                1−α



and subject to the demand function for f H,t(i) from above and the production function
specifying output (y(i)) as:

                                         f H ,t ( i ) + fH* ,t ( i) = yt ( i ) = θt Ktα ( i ) H t1−α (i ) .       (24)

Here θt represents technology common to all production firms in the country, and is subject

to shocks. Lastly, ξt , t+ n is the pricing kernel used to value random date t+n payoffs. Since

firms are owned by the representative household, they are assumed to value future profits
according to the household's intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in consumption, so

                     (
that ξt ,t + n = β n UC' ,t + n Pt + n   ) (U   '
                                                C ,t   Pt ) . An analogous problem applies to the foreign firm.

           The optimization problem implies a trade-off between capital and labor inputs that
depends on the relative cost of each:

                                                                        α
                                                        t t t (i ) =
                                                       PrK                 Wt Ht ( i ) ,                          (25)
                                                                       1−α
and price setting behavior:
                                            λ
                                  pH , t ( i ) =
                                          λ −1
                                                   ( MCt + ACP ,t )
                                   ψ                      p ( i) 
                                 + P pH ,t ( i )  1 − H , t                                             ,       (26)
                                   λ −1                  pH ,t −1 ( i ) 
                                                  
                                   1 ψP                  ξ                p2 H ,t +1 ( i )  FH ,t +1 
                                 +        pH , t (i ) Et  t , t+i +1 1 − 2                           
                                   2 λ −1                                   p H ,t ( i )  FH ,t 
                                                          ξt , t+ i 
           Note that in the special case of no price stickiness (ψ P =0), price-setting is set as a

                                                                         λ
simple markup over marginal costs: pH , t ( i ) =                            MCt . But in the presence of price
                                                                        λ −1
adjustment costs, price-setting will deviate from this simple markup because of several
additional terms. First, the resource cost of setting a price (ACP) should be included along
with the cost of production when computing the overall price of bringing a good to market.
The next term in the expression above reflects the backward looking component of price
setting: firms are reluctant to make large changes in price due to the marginal adjustment cost.


                                                                                                                    6
The final term reflects the forward-looking component of price setting. If a firm expects the
need to change prices further in the next period, it will tend to change the price more today,
to minimize future adjustment costs. Further, there is an additional reason to raise prices
today, because a higher current price means that any future changes will be a smaller
percentage change. Here we see one reason for the monopolist to set a higher price on
average, as a hedge against future price changes. Finally, note that in the symmetric
equilibrium pH , t ( i ) = PH ,t .


2.4 Government
          Model experiments will consider three alternative policy rules. The first specifies a
fixed exogenous money supply:
                                                 M t = M t −1 .                                           (27)
This rule will be used as a benchmark for later comparisons, as it implies no endogenous
response of policy to economic shocks or circumstances. The second rule pegs the exchange
rate:

                                                    St = S .                                              (28)

The third rule is a Taylor-type interest rate setting rule

                                        it = i + Γπ π t + ΓY Yˆt + Γs ∆st                                  (29)

where i is steady state interest rate, π t is inflation rate, Yˆt = (Yt − Y ) Y is the output gap, and

∆st is the percentage change in the nominal exchange rate. 4 It is assumed that central banks
make a commitment to set these parameters at time-invariant values.
          The government's budget constraint is:
                                               Tt = Mt − Mt −1 .                                          (30)


2.5 Market clearing and equilibrium
          Market clearing for the home goods market requires:

                                               FH ,t + FH* ,t = Yt ,                                      (31)

and for the home bond market:



4
 For the foreign country’s rule, the response coefficient to the exchange rate is the negative of that for the
home country.


                                                                                                                 7
                                                                    BH , t + BH* , t = 0 .                                                          (32)

Total home final goods demand must equal final goods supply:

                                                                                                             ∫  AC ( i ) di  .
                                                                                                              1
                                                                       ACB , t
                          Ft = Ct + ( Kt +1 − (1 − δ ) Kt ) + ACI ,t +
                                                                                                                        P, t
                                                                               + Yt                           0
                                                                                                                                                    (33)
                                                                        Pt                                              Pt
The home balance of payments condition may be written:

                      (B  H ,t   − BH ,t −1 ) + St ( BF ,t − BF , t −1 ) = PH , tYt + it −1 BH ,t −1 + St it*−1 BF ,t −1 − PF
                                                                                                                            t t .                   (34)

            Equilibrium is a set of 37 sequences: Ct , Ct* , PH , t , PF , t , Pt , Pt * ,St W  , t * ,Ht ,Ht* ,
                                                                                             ,t W

Yt ,Yt * , Ft ,Ft* , FH , t , FH*, t , FF , t , FF*,t , Kt ,Kt* , rt , rt * , dt ,dt* , MCt , MCt* , BH , t , BH* , t , BF ,t , BF* ,t ,θt ,θt* ,

Mt , M t* ,it ,it* . The 37 equilibrium conditions are comprised of the balance of payments
constraint (34) and the following 18 equations combined with their analogous foreign
counterparts: the definition of total demand (1), demand conditions for home and foreign
goods (8 and 9), the overall price index (5), the price setting rule (26), the money supply rule
(27, 28 or 29), labor supply condition (15), capital-labor trade-off (25), money demand
condition (14), the interest rate parity condition (18), production function (24), definition of
marginal cost (23), definition of total demand (33), definition of d (17), consumption Euler
equation (16), market clearing conditions for goods (31) and bonds (32), and capital
accumulation (19).
            The shocks, to technology and money demand in each country, will be log-normally
distributed:

                                         ( logθ − logθ ) = ρ ( log θ − logθ ) + ε
                                                 t                      1          t −1                      1t


                                         ( logθ − logθ ) = ρ ( log θ − logθ ) + ε
                                                 t
                                                  *             *
                                                                            1
                                                                             *            *
                                                                                           t −1
                                                                                                         *        *
                                                                                                                   1t
                                                                                                                                                    (35)
                                         ( log χt − log χ ) = ρ2 ( log χt−1 − log χ ) + ε2t
                                         ( log χ  t
                                                   *
                                                                    )
                                                       − log χ * = ρ 2 ( log χ *t −1 − log χ* ) + ε *2 t
                                                                             *




                                                         ε1 t , ε1*t , ε2 t , ε2*t  ~ N ( 0, Σ ) .

            To deal with the nonstationary nominal variables in this system, they will be
transformed by dividing by their respective national price level. The nominal exchange rate
will be dealt with in first differences in those cases where it is nonstationary in levels. 5


5
  The exchange rate is stationary under the fixed exchange rate rule (28) and the exogenous money supply
rule with no shocks to money supply (27).


                                                                                                                                                      8
2.6 Solution method and welfare measure
        The model is solved numerically to a second order approximation. See Kim et al.
(2003) or Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004a) for a detailed explanation of the methodology.
This contrasts with the more standard method relying upon log-linear approximations of
model equations, which would only capture the direct effects of exchange rate variability on
utility through the fact that people dislike variance in consumption and leisure. A second
order approximation to the full set of model equations additionally picks up the effects of
variability on the means of consumption and leisure and hence utility. For example , firms
may hedge against exchange rate variability by setting higher prices and lowering mean
output, and households may engage in precautionary saving that affects mean consumption.
        Although it is an imperfect measurement of welfare, we follow the literature in using
a second order Taylor expansion of the utility function of a representative household around
the deterministic steady state, indicated here by overbars.6 Using unconditional expectations:

                                    ( )  1
                                                         ( )             ( )
                                                                          1
        EU ( Ct , Ht ) = U + C1−ρ E Cˆt − ρ C1− ρ var Cˆt − H 1+ψ E Hˆ t − ψ H1+ψ var H
                                         2                                2
                                                                                      ˆ .
                                                                                       t     ( )      (36)

The unconditional loss is measured in terms of the share (u) of additional deterministic steady
state consumption needed to equate the utility level of the unconditional expectation under
uncertainty, defined above , with the deterministic steady state :

                                    U ( (1 + u ) C , H ) = EU (Ct , Ht ) .                            (37)

This effect can be decomposed into the part due to the variance of uncertain consumption and
leisure, and the part due to the effect of uncertainty on the means of these variables:

                      (                )    1
                                            2
                                                              ( )
                   U (1 + uvar ) C , H = U − ρ C1− ρ var Cˆt − ψ H1+ψ var Hˆ t
                                                              1
                                                              2
                                                                                   ( )                (38)


                            (                 )               ( )            ( )
                          U (1 + umean ) C , H = U + C1− ρ E Cˆt − H 1+ψ E Hˆ t .                     (39)

        Tables also report conditional utility measures, which have the advantage of taking
into consideration the transition dynamics following the implementation of a new policy rule.
To compare the implications of adopting the set of alternative policy rules, the utility level is
tracked as it starts out from the unconditional expectation implied by the exogenous money
supply rule defined above , and evolves over time in response to the alternative rule under
consideration. Utility implications are summarized analogously to the unconditional formulas

6
 True welfare analysis is hampered by well-known problems of aggregation. As is standard in this literature,
this paper determines optimal policy in a model-consistent manner by maximizing the utility of a
representative household.


                                                                                                         9
above, except that it is the discounted sum of expected utilities over time rather than the
unconditional expectation that is reported. For example, the overall effect is computed:

                             (                       )
                          U (1 + uconditional ) C , H = (1 − β ) ∑ t =0 β t E0U ( Ct , Ht ) .
                                                                      ∞
                                                                                                    (40)

           To solve for the reaction parameters in the policy rule (29) that are optimal, the sum
of home and foreign unconditional utility levels is maximized. Since the benchmark case is
symmetric, this is a fairly simple matter of choosing three policy parameters, Γπ , ΓY , and ΓS ,
which we accomplish by grid search.7


2.7 Calibration
           Regarding behavioral parameters, the labor supply elasticity is set at unity (ψ = 1 ),

following Christiano at. al. (1997). Following Bergin and Feenstra (2001) , we set ε = ρ = 4 ,
implying an interest elasticity of real money balances of 0.25 and an income elasticity of
unity. Following estimates of the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods
in Harrigan (1993) and Trefler and Lai (1999) , µ is set at 5. A value of λ = 7 implies an

average price mark-up of 16%. The share of home goods in the home final goods aggregator,
a , is set at 0.80, reflecting the 20% share of imports in GDP on average for the G7 countries
in the 1990:1-1998:4 period. β = 0.99 , where a period in the model is one quarter. For the

depreciation rate, δ = 0.025 , and for the capital share in production α = 0.36 .
           Regarding adjustment costs, ψ P = 50 , which implies that 95% of the price has

adjusted 4 periods after a monetary shock. Investment adjustment cost, ψ I = 4 , is calibrated
such that investment is about three times more volatile than output. A small bond adjustment
cost ( ψ B = 4 x10−6 ) is necessary to avoid a unit root associated with the incompleteness of the

asset markets.
           Regarding shocks, the variance and persistence of the technology shock is calibrated

                                         ( )
at standard values: var (ε1 ) = var ε1* = 0.012 and ρ1 = ρ1* = 0.90 , common values in the real

business cycle literature. Money demand shocks are calibrated to replicate the variability and
serial correlation of data on the bilateral exchange rate between the U.S. and remaining G7,




7
    Search grids ranged from 1 to 5 for Γπ , and from 0 to 5 for ΓY and ΓS , with step size 0.25.


                                                                                                     10
HP filtered, for the period 1973:1 - 2000:4. 8 To replicate these moments in the benchmark

                                                                                              ( )
model for the exchange rate in levels form requires the calibration var (ε2 ) = var ε2* = 0.032

and ρ1 = ρ1* = 0.99 . For simplicity the shocks are specified as uncorrelated across countries.


3 Results
3.1 Benchmark model
         Table 1 reports the results for the three types of policy rules. The optimized Taylor
rule stresses inflation targeting, with inflation response Γπ = 5.0, and with no effort to

stabilize output or the exchange rate ( ΓY = 0.0, ΓS = 0.0). 9 This policy neutralizes the
effects of money demand shocks, calling for shifts in money supply that accommodate shifts
in money demand. And it responds procyclically to technology shocks, calling for a lower
interest rate and higher money growth rate in the periods shortly following a productivity
increase. This result corresponds to previous findings in the literature using simpler models
(Devereux and Engel, 2003; Gali and Monacelli, 2005). Sticky prices prevent output and
employment from rising fully in response to a rise in productivity, and a monetary expansion
helps remedy this shortcoming.
         Of special interest here is the implication of the optimal rule for exchange rate
variability. Table 1 shows that while a large portion of exchange rate variance is offset, it is
not optimal to eliminate all exchange rate variability. Impulse responses show that while the
conditional variability following money demand shocks is fully eliminated, the monetary
policy response to productivity shocks induces exchange rate fluctuations. This reflects the
finding in preceding literature using simpler models , where exchange rate movements can
help compensate for price stickiness, by promoting adjustment in international relative prices
to productivity shocks. Figure 1 plots the dynamic response of the exchange rate to a 1% rise
in home country productivity. The story above is reflected in a substantial home currency
depreciation in the initial periods after the shock. But the dynamics also indicate there is a


8
  While the search for an adequate theoretical explanation for exchange rate variability is itself the subject
of ongoing research, the approach taken here follows on the example of the literature discussed in the
introduction; Devereux and Engel (2003) and Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000) each use money demand
or money supply shocks to generate exchange rate variability. Bergin (2003) offers some empirical support
for this approach.
9
  As in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004b) we found that the inflation parameter is at the upper bound of the
range considered in the grid search. Allowing yet higher values of this parameter appears to have negligible
effects on the equilibrium.


                                                                                                           11
long-run currency appreciation implied by this rule following productivity gains. 10 As this
implies a significant nonstationary component to the exchange rate movement, the table
reports the variability for exchange rate depreciations rather than for the exchange rate level.
        The table shows that the optimized policy rule eliminates any extra price markup
ratio present under exogenous money supply and under the fixed exchange rate rules. This
helps explain why the mean levels of output and consumption are higher under the optimized
rule relative to the exogenous money rule (by 0.06% and 0.05% , respectively). This rule also
raises unconditional utility of the representative household, by the equivalent of 0.07% of
steady state consumption. The fixed exchange rate case is also inferior to the optimized rule,
with lower output, consumption and utility. In particular, if this economy fixes the exchange
rate, it lowers utility by 0.04% relative to the optimal policy.
        While the optimal policy does generate positive gains relative to both alternatives
here, it is worth noting that these gains are small in magnitude. As a useful comparison,
Lucas (1987) measured the costs of business cycle fluctuations at 0.04% of annual
consumption, concluding that this was trivial. Lastly, we note that results based on
conditional rather than unconditional measures are similar to those presented above.
        The analysis of the benchmark model above indicates that some of the basic
conclusions drawn in preceding literature in the context of simpler models continue to hold in
the context of a more richly specified and more realistically calibrated model. However, a
second lesson is that the gains in terms of utility remain quite small. The following two
sections will consider further extensions to the basic model.


3.2 Habits
        Past research on household consumption and asset choices has found that habits may
be an essential part of household preferences. 11 Given that this literature has found
households to be quite sensitive to variability in domestic equity markets, one might also
expect them to be sensitive to variability in international asset markets. Yet research
analyzing optimal monetary policy and exchange rate stabilization to date has not been able
to consider this potentially important feature because it precludes the usual analytical solution.

10
   Gali and Monacelli (2005) find a very similar permanent appreciation is implied by the various Taylor
rules they consider.
11
   See for example Constantinides (1990) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999) regarding the equity
premium puzzle, and see Deaton (1987) and Fuhrer (2000) for a discussion in the context of consumption
behavior.


                                                                                                       12
           To include habits in the model, we consider the utility function:

                                       ( Ct − γ Ct −1 )
                                                       1− ρ                     1−ε
                                                                χ M                     Ht1+ψ
                                Ut   =                        + t  t                −         ,             (41)
                                              1− ρ             1 − ε  Pt                1 +ψ

which implies an intertemporal Euler equation:12

                                   P  ( C − γ Ct ) − βγ Et +1 ( Ct +2 − γ Ct +1 )
                                                               −ρ                                   −ρ
                                                                                                         
                        dt = β Et  t  t +1                                                            .   (42)
                                   Pt +1  ( Ct − γ Ct −1 ) − βγ Et ( Ct +1 − γ Ct )
                                                              −ρ                       −ρ
                                                                                                         

As γ goes to unity, households act to smooth changes in consumption rather than the level of

consumption. We calibrate the habit persistence parameter at γ = 0.8, which is approximately

what Deaton (1987) and Constantinides (1990) require in order to explain aggregate
consumption smoothness and the equity premium puzzle.
           While it is common in calibrating habit persistence models to impose a large
investment adjustment cost to keep the standard deviation of consumption from falling to
implausibly low levels, this device does not work in an open economy where international
borrowing breaks the link between domestic investment and saving. Instead we augment the
bond adjustment cost in the household budget constraint to penalize large changes in asset
holding as well as large levels:

                                          (
                                    ψ St ( BF ,t − BF )        )            (
                                                                         St ( BF ,t − BF , t −1 )   )
                                                               2                                     2
                                                                     ψ
                          ACB ,t   = B                              + B2                                      (43)
                                     2      PH , tYt                  2         PH , tYt

Where ψ B 2 is calibrated at 9x10-4.
           Results are reported in Table 2. The optimal policy parameters are the same as in the
benchmark model above. It remains optimal to respond aggressively to stabilize the inflation
rate, wit h no response to the exchange rate. Further the optimal degree of variability of the
exchange rate remains essentially the same as above, both in terms of unconditional variance,
and in terms of the conditional response to shocks, as depicted in Figure 1.
           The welfare gains from optimal stabilization policy are increased slightly relative to
the benchmark model. The optimized rule raises unconditional utility by the consumption
equivalent of 0.13% relative to the exogenous money rule , which is around double the gain in
the context of the benchmark economy. In contrast, the representative household in this
habits economy would be willing to trade a more sizeable 0.66% of steady state consumption
if it were possible to eliminate all shocks from the economy, an amount which is more than

12
     The welfare formula is of course updated with the second order expansion of the new utility function.


                                                                                                               13
four times that in the benchmark economy. So even if habits indicate that households are
more concerned about certain types of variability, it appears that monetary policy has a
limited ability to influence this impact on utility.


3.3 “original sin” in asset markets
        The implications of exchange rate variability can be shaped also by the structure of a
country's asset market. Eichengreen et al. (2005) has noted that perceptions in the
international capital market make it impossible for many countries to issue international debt
denominated in their own national currency. Given that such perceptions of untrustworthiness
may well be beyond the control of the country to change, but simply are a feature of the
international capital market, the authors have termed this condition “original sin.”
        To study this feature, consider a version of the model where there is only one
nominal bond that is traded internationally, denominated in the currency of the home country.
This returns to the benchmark model above, except that B Ft is set to zero in all periods. The
home country in this model certainly is relevant for those countries whose currencies have
the status of reserve currencies, such as the U.S., Japan, and EMU countries. And the foreign
country in the model is relevant to some degree for any of the remaining countries, and most
especially for developing countries.
        Table 3 indicates that the equilibrium in the “original sin” model under the exogenous
money supply policy is quite different from that in the benchmark model. The stochastic
steady state deviations for endogenous variables are often a full order of magnitude larger.
Further, they are asymmetric across countries, with consumption higher in the home country
but lower abroad, and vice versa for production levels. Some intuition for this effect can be
found by noting the large asymmetry in asset holdings, with net bond holdings by the home
country rising 60% relative to the benchmark case, and hence that of the foreign country
falling by 60%. This finding is precisely the inverse of that found by Kollmann (2002) in a
small open economy model with a similar asset structure. That model indicated that the
presence of uncertainty raised the desire for precautionary saving, which raised wealth and
hence consumption. We show that moving from a small open economy to a two country
general equilibrium model reverses this result. The distinction is that a small open economy
model assumes only agents in the small economy respond to the presence of shocks , while
assuming the saving behavior of agents in the rest of the world and the equilibrium world
interest rate are exogenous and remain unaffected.


                                                                                                 14
         In contrast, a two-country environment makes clear that if uncertainty encourages
saving behavior of all households in the world, the world interest rate on bonds must fall to
balance an excess demand for bonds. The presence of this effect in our model is confirmed
by the fall in the interest rate in column 1 of Table 3. In equilibrium the demand and supply
of bonds are held equal by having the home (non sin) country save more while the foreign
(sin) country saves less. This appears to be due to an asymmetry in the saving options facing
the two countries. Recall that the foreign country cannot accumulate a net positive asset
position in its own currency. It may be that accumulating assets is a less attractive hedge
against uncertainty, when the accumulation of foreign currency assets itself may increase
exposure to the uncertainty of exchange rate fluctuations. As a result, the interest rate falls
enough to more than compensate for the desired increase in precautionary saving in the sin
country, and in equilibrium it holds fewer bonds.
         A fixed exchange rate policy substantially offsets the asymmetries above. As column
2 indicates, the asymmetry in asset holdings is reduced by over two-thirds. Further, an
optimized Taylor rule policy comes close to replicating the fixed exchange rate regime.
When policy parameters are chosen to maximize the sum of home and foreign utility, as
shown in column 3, the optimal exchange rate response is at the upper bound of the search
grid and the response to inflation is reduced compared to previous cases ( Γπ = 2.0, ΓS =
5.0). 13 As a result, the unconditional standard deviation of the exchange rate is reduced to
only 0.02%, and the conditional response of the exchange rate to productivity shocks is
nearly completed dampened, as shown in Figure 1. Further, if one chooses policy parameters
to maximize just the utility of the sin country alone, the response to inflation is reduced yet a
bit further ( Γπ = 1.25, ΓS = 5.0), leading to even greater exchange rate stabilization (as
                        14
shown in column 4).          Each country still offsets its own money demand shocks under these
rules, even more so, as policy works to dampen the currency appreciation proceeding from a
rise in money demand. Policy continues to respond procyclically to a productivity shock by
lowering interest rates, but the degree of inflation stabilization is smaller under these policy
rules.


13
   The grid search above is restricted to policy parameters symmetric across countries, implying that both
countries work jointly to stabilize their bilateral exchange rate. Nonetheless, some ancillary experiments
here with unilateral pegs indicated that the welfare of the foreign country can fall if it alone has ΓS >0.
14
   Figure 1 does not plot the response for the policy rule optimized for foreign welfare, as this is nearly
identical to that for joint welfare discussed above.


                                                                                                          15
         The gains from stabilization policy for the sin country are somewhat larger than in the
previous cases studied. The second of the optimize d policies discussed above raises
unconditional foreign utility by 0.29% over the exogenous policy, more than four times the
gain from policy observed under the benchmark model. 15 The gains occur entirely in the
mean component of utility, reflecting the effect of variability on the means of endogenous
variables, rather than in the variance component itself. The gain is even a bit larger under the
fixed exchange rate rule (0.33%), suggesting that the gains from the optimized policy rule
observed here are due to stabilizing the exchange rate and moderating the resulting
asymmetries. We think this experiment is informative, indicating that economies of this type
warrant further investigation in the theoretical literature.


4 Conclusions
         This paper performs a quantitative model-consistent evaluation of optimal policy
rules in a two-country sticky-price model. The experiments focus on the important question
of what degree of exchange rate variability is optimal for various types of open economies.
The utility benefits of pursuing an optimized policy appear to be small for the types of simple
economies typically studied in this literature. Developments in solving second-order
approximations to dynamic stochastic models in principle open up the door to study much
more varied and realistic economic environments.
         The paper finds that extending the environment to consider consumer habits has only
minor effects on the conclusions standard in the literature. It remains optimal to aggressively
stabilize inflation, while allowing the exchange rate to fluctuate in response to productivity
shocks. Further, the utility benefits of pursuing optimized stabilization rules remain quite small.
In contrast, an extension of the environment to consider asset markets exhibiting ”original sin” ,
does alter these conclus ions. Since ”original sin” appears to impose significant constraints on a
country’s precautionary saving, it becomes optimal, both from the perspective of the two-
country world as well as from the sin country in particular, to actively suppress exchange rate
fluctuations. These results would seem to indicate that it is alternative economic environments
such as this one , which most warrant further investigation in the theoretical literature.


15
  Note also that the conditional welfare effect is small despite the large unconditional effect. Adopting a
new policy does not change the fact that the foreign economy is starting off with a low share of wealth.
After the adoption of the new policy, the foreign country begins saving more, but this entails a lower
consumption level during the lengthy transition period where it is building up its capital stock and assets.


                                                                                                           16
5 References
Bacchetta P, van Wincoop E. Does exchange rate stability increase trade and welfare?
       American Economic Review 2000;90; 1093-1109.
Benigno G, Benigno P. Price stability in open economies. Review of Economic Studies
       2003;70; 743-764.
Benigno P. Optimal monetary policy in a currency area. Journal of International Economics
      2004;63; 293-320.
Bergin P, Feenstra R. Pricing-to-market, staggered contracts, and real exchange rate
       persistence. Journal of International Economics 2001;54; 333-359.
Bergin, P. Putting the `new open economy macroeconomics' to a test; Journal of International
        Economics 2003;60; 3-34.
Campbell, JY, Cochrane, JH. By force of habit: a consumption-based explanation of
      aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 1999;107; 205-251.
Carre M, Collard F. Monetary union: a welfare based approach. European Economic Review
       2003;47; 521-552.
Christiano LJ, Eichenbaum M, Evans C. Sticky price and limited participation models of
        money: a comparison. European Economic Review 1997;41; 1021-1049.
Clarida R, Gali J, Gertler M. Optimal monetary policy in open versus closed economies.
        American Economic Review 2001;91; 248-252.
Collard F, Juillard M. Accuracy of stochastic perturbation methods: the case of asset pricing
        models. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 2001;25; 979-999.
Constantinides GM. Habit formation: a resolution of the equity premium puzzle. Journal of
       Political Economy 1990;98; 519-543.
Corsetti G, Pesenti P. Welfare and macroeconomic interdependence. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 2001;116; 421-445.
Corsetti G, Pesenti P. International dimens ions of optimal monetary policy. Journal of
        Monetary Economics 2004;52; 281-305.
Deaton A. Life-cycle models of consumption: is the evidence consistent with the theory? In:
       Bewley T (Ed), Advances in Econometrics Fifth World Congress, vol. 2. Cambridge
       University Press: Cambridge; 1987. p. 121-148.
Devereux MB, Engel C. Monetary policy in the open economy revisited: price setting and
       exchange rate flexibility. Review of Economic Studies 2003;70; 765-783.
Eichengreen B, Hausmann R. Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial
       Instability in Emerging Market Economies. University of Chicago Press: Chicago;
       2005.
Fuhrer JC. Habit formation in consumption and its implications for monetary policy models.
        American Economic Review 2000;90; 367-390.
Gali J, Monacelli T. Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a small open economy.
        Review of Economic Studies 2005;72; 707-734.


                                                                                            17
Harrigan J. OECD imports and trade barriers in 1983. Journal of International Economics
       1993;35; 91-111.
Kim J, Kim S, Schaumburg SE, Sims C. Calculating and using second order accurate
       solutions of discrete time dynamic equilibrium models. Mimeo, Princeton University;
       2003.
Kollmann R. Monetary policy rules in the open economy: effects on welfare and business
      cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 2002;49; 989-1015.
Kollmann R. Welfare effects of a monetary union: The role of trade openness. Journal of the
      European Economic Association 2004;2; 289-301.
Lucas RE. Models of Business Cycles. Basil Blackwell: New York; 1987.
Obstfeld M, Rogoff K. Global implications of self-oriented national monetary rules. The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 2002;117; 503-535.
Schmitt-Grohe S, Uribe M. Solving dynamic general equilibrium models using a second-
       order approximation of the policy function. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
       Control 2004a;28; 645-858.
Schmitt-Grohe S, Uribe M. Optimal simple and implementable monetary and fiscal rules.
       Mimeo, Duke University; 2004b.
Sutherland A. Incomplete pass-through and the welfare effects of exchange rate variability.
        Journal of International Economics 2005;65; 375-399.
Trefler D, Lai H. The gains from trade: standard errors with the CES monopolistic
        competition model. Mimeo, University of Toronto; 1999.




                                                                                              18
                           Table 1: Benchmark Model

                             Exogenous              Fixed           Optimized flexible
                            money supply         exchange rate       exch. rate rule 3
Standard deviations:
consumption                      1.24                 1.21                  1.20
output                           2.41                 2.36                  1.86
investment                       5.09                 5.09                  4.93
inflation                        0.70                 0.48                  0.02
exchange rate depr.              1.44                 0.00                  0.20

Stochastic steady state deviations 1 :
consumption                     -0.036               -0.018                0.016
leisure                          0.012                0.017                0.026
output                          -0.015                0.007                0.046
capital stock                   -0.034                0.023                0.108
interest rate                   -1.481               -1.082               -0.324
 markup ratio                    0.341                0.215                0.001
home net assets                  0.000                0.000                0.000
trade volume                     0.299                0.256                0.277

Unconditional welfare effects (as percentage of steady state consumption)2 :
u-overall                      -0.144               -0.113              -0.070
u-variance                     -0.099               -0.082              -0.067
u-mean                         -0.046               -0.031              -0.003

 Conditional welfare effects (as percentage of steady state consumption)2 :
  u-overall                          -0.144               -0.129            -0.109
  u-variance                         -0.099               -0.087            -0.070
  u-mean                             -0.046               -0.042            -0.039
1
  Percent difference between stochastic steady state and deterministic steady state.
2
  Difference between stochastic steady state and deterministic steady state, shown as a
share of deterministic steady state consumption.
Foreign variables are identical to home in the cases shown here.
3
  The policy rule is it = i + 5.0π t + 0.0Yˆt + 0.0 ∆st .




                                                                                          19
                       Table 2: Habit Persistence Model

                            Exogenous               Fixed        Optimized flexible
                           money supply         exchange rate     exch. rate rule 3
Standard deviations:
consumption                     1.25                1.24                1.25
output                          1.41                1.41                1.39
investment                      7.35                7.32                7.35
inflation rate                  0.73                0.50                0.14
exchange rate depr.             1.20                0.00                0.23

Stochastic steady state deviations 1 :
consumption                      0.018              0.023               0.030
leisure                         -0.003             -0.013              -0.020
output                           0.113              0.123               0.140
capital stock                    0.513              0.571               0.630
interest rate                   -8.235             -7.833              -8.560
 markup ratio                    0.360              0.186               0.020
home net assets                  0.000              0.000               0.000
trade volume                     0.576              0.561               0.570

Unconditional welfare effects (as percentage of steady state consumption)2 :
u-overall                      -0.659              -0.580             -0.530
u-variance                     -0.692              -0.674             -0.680
u-mean                          0.033               0.095              0.150

Conditional welfare effects (as percentage of steady state consumption)2 :
  u-overall                        -0.659                 -0.655        -0.636
  u-variance                       -0.692                 -0.688        -0.683
  u-mean                            0.033                  0.032         0.047
1
  Percent difference between stochastic steady state and deterministic steady state.
2
  Difference between stochastic steady state and deterministic steady state, shown as
a share of deterministic steady state consumption.
Foreign variables are identical to home in the cases shown here.
3
  The policy rule is it = i + 5.0π t + 0.0Yˆt + 0.0 ∆st .




                                                                                        20
                        Table 3: Asymmetric Asset Market Model

                             Exogenous           Fixed        Optimized rule: Optimized rule:
                            money supply     exchange rate     Joint welfare 3 Foreign welfare 4
Standard deviations:
consumption                     1.31                1.28           1.36              1.34
output                          1.67                1.69           1.71              1.71
investment                      5.89                6.56           6.56              6.56
inflation rate                  0.57                0.39           0.08              0.26
exchange rate depr.             1.04                0.00           0.02              0.01

Stochastic steady state deviations 1 :
consumption (home)               0.157              0.079          0.122             0.109
consumption (foreign)           -0.137             -0.031         -0.041            -0.036
leisure (home)                  -0.403             -0.088         -0.176            -0.148
leisure (foreign)                0.595              0.287          0.376             0.345
output (home)                   -0.410             -0.094         -0.152            -0.130
output (foreign)                 0.534              0.261          0.371             0.336
capital stock (home)            -0.389             -0.081         -0.086            -0.081
capital stock (foreign)          0.431              0.227          0.369             0.324
interest rate                   -0.440             -0.218         -0.255            -0.477
 markup ratio                    0.139              0.070          0.003             0.015
home net assets                60.169              17.954         29.902            25.838
trade volume                     1.051              0.861          0.924             0.903

Unconditional welfare effects (as percentage of steady state consumption)2 :
u-overall (home)                0.278           -0.030             0.079             0.046
u-overall (foreign)            -0.751           -0.416            -0.491            -0.462
u-variance                     -0.177           -0.174            -0.173            -0.172
u-mean (home)                   0.454            0.144             0.252             0.218
u-mean (foreign)               -0.575           -0.242            -0.318            -0.290

Conditional welfare effects (as percentage of steady state consumption)2 :
u-overall (home)                   0.278                  0.288    0.298              0.299
u-overall (foreign)               -0.751                 -0.736   -0.733             -0.731
u-variance                        -0.177                 -0.171   -0.168             -0.168
u-mean (home)                      0.454                  0.458    0.466              0.466
u-mean (foreign)                  -0.575                 -0.565   -0.565             -0.564
1
  Percent difference between stochastic steady state and deterministic steady state.
2
  Difference between stochastic steady state and deterministic steady state, shown as a share of
deterministic steady state consumption.
3
  The policy rule is it = i + 2.0π t + 0.0Yˆt + 5.0 ∆st .
4
  The policy rule is i = i + 1.25π + 0.0Yˆ + 5.0 ∆s .
                    t           t        t     t




                                                                                                   21
                                                   Figure 1: Exchange rate impulse responses
                                                       following home productivity shock
                                                      under optimized Taylor policy rules
                                            .20
percent deviation from steady state level




                                            .15

                                            .10

                                            .05
                                                                      asymmetric
                                            .00

                                            -.05
                                                                         habits
                                            -.10
                                                                       benchmark
                                            -.15

                                            -.20
                                                   5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
                                                               periods after shock




                                                                                               22
