                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    PROCURING KNOWLEDGE

                                          Stephen M. Maurer
                                          Suzanne Scotchmer

                                         Working Paper 9903
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9903


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




Forthcoming, Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Economic Growth, Vol. 15, Gary
D. Libecap, editor, JAI Press (Elsevier Science) 2004. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Stephen M. Maurer and Suzanne Scotchmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Procuring Knowledge
Stephen M. Maurer and Suzanne Scotchmer
NBER Working Paper No. 9903
August 2003
JEL No. O31, O38

                                          ABSTRACT

       There is growing public interest in alternatives to intellectual property including, but not
limited to, prizes and government grants. We argue that there is no single best mechanism for
supporting research. Rather, mechanisms can only be compared within specific creative
environments. We collect various historical and contemporary examples of alternative incentives,
and relate them to models of the creative process. We give an explanation for why federally funded
R&D has moved from an intramural activity to largely a grant process. Finally, we observe that
much research is supported by a hybrid system of public and private sponsorship, and explain why
this makes sense in some circumstances.

Stephen M. Maurer                                   Suzanne Scotchmer
GSPP, U.C. Berkeley                                 Department of Economics and GSPP
2607 Hearst Avenue                                  U.C. Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320                             2607 Hearst Avenue
maurer@econ.berkeley.edu                            Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
                                                    and NBER
                                                    scotch@socrates.berkeley.edu
1   Introduction

Patents and other intellectual property rights (IPRs) became stronger during the 1980s
and 1990s than at any point in the preceding century.       Nevertheless, other mech-
anisms for eliciting and investing in new ideas have remained important.       This is
particularly true in the public sector, where federal spending accounts for almost a
third of the nation's total R&D. (The fraction is higher in most other countries.)
Funding mechanisms used by the public sector routinely include in-house develop-
ment, procurement through competitive bidding, and research grants to universities
and promising scientists.
       The public sector also uses hybrids that mix sponsorship with intellectual prop-
erty. The 1980 Bayh-Dole and Stevenson-Wydler Acts authorized the patenting and
licensing of federally funded research outputs, and the Federal Technology Transfer Act
of 1986 authorized the formation of Cooperative Research and Development Agree-
ments (CRADA's) between national laboratories and industry, granting intellectual
property to the industrial partners.
       Despite the prominence of intellectual property incentives, prize-based and
other incentives remain strong, and may even be undergoing a renaissance. Begin-
ning in the Clinton Administration, NASA and Congress have debated a prize-based
approach to new space technology (Space Projects 2002).        The Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has o®ered a $1 million prize designed to elict a
40-fold improvement in robotic o®-road vehicle design (DARPA 2003; Holden 2003).
Even the private sector has begun to experiment with prizes, and in at least one of-
fering, the prize mechanism has become institutionalized. Eli Lilly Corporation has
established a company called Innocentive to elicit new ideas for solving problems in
biology, chemistry, biochemistry, and materials science.     \Seeker companies" post
problems on Innocentive's web site and o®er rewards ranging from $5,000 to $100,000.
Scientists are invited to submit solutions, and the seeker companies pick the best ones
(Innocentive 2003).
       In this paper we catalog some of the many incentive schemes that have been
suggested and used.    We argue that the sensibleness of each scheme { indeed, the

                                          1
attractiveness of intellectual property { cannot be debated without reference to a
speci¯c environment of knowledge creation.          The diversity of models and incentive
schemes discussed here suggest that no single incentive mechanism dominates, but that
di®erent models of knowledge creation call for di®erent incentive schemes. There are
also creative environments where the social value of an innovation is not appropriable
by private ¯rms or intellectual property rights are insu±cient to cover costs.1
       The main objective of the incentive schemes we discuss is to elicit investments
in new knowledge. Another objective is to do this at the lowest possible cost. The
cost of investing in knowledge has two components: resource costs and the diminution
of value that may arise through proprietary pricing and deadweight loss. The latter
particularly a²icts intellectual property. Although raising funds for general revenue
is not costless, the associated ine±ciencies are usually thought to be less onerous than
taxing a single market, as proprietary pricing does.          This observation leads to the
conjecture that, in many creative environments, some form of public procurement
may be preferred.
       We begin in Section 2 with a model of the creative process, and then discuss
the incentive mechanisms that naturally °ow from it. The e±cacy of prize systems,
discussed in Section 3, will depend largely on whether prizes can be made to re°ect
the values of delivered innovations. But even if that is possible, prize incentives, like
patent incentives, are a crude mechanism for discriminating among ideas for R&D
investment.     In Section 4 we discuss contests that are targeted speci¯cally to the
problem of ¯nding the innovators with the best ideas.              In Section 5 we give an
economic rationale for the federal grant process, in which ideas for funding originate
with grantees, there is no enforcement mechanism to ensure that the grantee's proposal
is feasible, and no means to reclaim payment if the objective is not accomplished. In
Section 6 we turn to the virtues of sponsorship for innovations such as nuclear fusion for
energy, where it is ex ante unknown what the best approach is. In Section 7 we address
what is probably the most controversial development in the R&D establishment, the
   1
    One important examples is what Mokyr (2002) calls \propositional knowledge." Even if the
knowledge that \DNA is a double helix" were patentable, it would be hard to collect a royalty on
every use of that knowledge.


                                               2
fact that many innovations are both subsidized by public sponsors, and also receive
intellectual property protection. We show that, provided industry is required to give
matching funds, this system can solve the dual problems of generating enough funding
for \big science", while also tapping into industry's expertise, to avoid ill-conceived
ideas.


2    Ideas and Innovations

To compare incentive schemes from a normative point of view, we must have some
notion of an e±cient investment plan. How much money should be devoted to R&D?
Where should R&D dollars be channeled? Which incentive system is mostly likely to
achieve the desired goals?
         From a business point of view, an \e±cient" investment plan is the one that
maximizes pro¯t { investing in knowledge is only \e±cient" if it leads to pro¯t. How-
ever, the business point of view does not help society as a whole choose among incentive
mechanisms.     Pro¯t is only a partial view of bene¯ts, since it does not account for
bene¯ts that accrue directly to users. These are especially important for innovations
funded by the public sector and put in the public domain.
         To compare the e±ciency of incentive mechanisms, we must ¯rst have a notion
of which R&D investments themselves are e±cient. The notion that underlies this
paper is a standard economics notion, namely that an R&D investment is e±cient if
it provides higher (discounted) consumers' surplus net of costs than any other feasible
investment or investment path, at least in expectation. This is a de¯nition that takes
account of how investments in knowledge are funded. If investments are funded by
intellectual property, then they generate less consumers' surplus (or more deadweight
loss) than if they are funded by public sponsors and put in the public domain.
         Just as importantly, e±ciency of an R&D investment, and therefore e±ciency of
incentive mechanisms, can only be understood within a model of the creative process.
We will use the \ideas" model of O'Donoghue, Scotchmer and Thisse (OST, 1998; see
also Scotchmer (2004)), which makes a clean separation between an exogenous process
that generates ideas for innovations, and the decisions whether to invest in them. An


                                           3
innovation requires both an idea and an investment in it.
        Not all economic models of technological advance are set up to evaluate e±-
ciency in investment, or to compare incentive mechanisms. For example, the evolu-
tionary model of Nelson and Winter (1982) (see also Mokyr 1990, Ch. 11) is a positive
model of technical change, rather than a normative model. Regardless of the incentive
mechanisms in place, ¯rms are assumed to invest in R&D when pro¯t falls below a
certain level. There is no notion of rationality that drives investment decisions.
        Another class of models relies on an exogenous production function for knowl-
edge that is commonly known to everyone (Wright 1983, Scherer 1984, Shavell and
Van Ypserele (2001) and earlier models using the Poisson process, summarized by
Reinganum 1989). These models do not recognize that ideas can be scarce. Indeed,
an important intuition for why intellectual property may be a better mechanism than
any form of government sponsorship is that it can harness the creativity that is widely
dispersed among humans. Intellectual property can encourage investment in an idea
that only a single person thinks of. But as we shall see, other mechanisms also have
merit in such environments.
        We describe an idea by a pair (v; c) (per-period social value and cost).2 The
variable v represents the per-period consumers' surplus with competitive supply.                     If
the social value lasts forever, then, if the invention is in the public domain, the dis-
counted social value is 1r v: If the invention is marketed by a proprietary ¯rm, we will
assume that the per-period pro¯t is ¼v; where ¼ is a fraction less than one. Then the
proprietary pro¯t available under a patent that lasts for discounted length T is ¼vT:3
We assume that the associated deadweight loss is dv per period, so that the associated
deadweight loss is dvT:
        Following the economics literature on contracting, we will make a distinction
between the case that the per-period social value, v; or the cost of achieving it, c; is
   2
      The interpretation of an idea will depend on how ideas are related to each other. In OST, ideas
follows each other in a progression up a quality ladder; a later idea must be preceded by the earlier
ones. That context is not discusssed here.
    3
      For tidier notation, we always useR discounted time instead of \real time." If the real length is
                                          ¿
¿ , then the discounted length is T = 0 e¡rt dt: There is a one-to-one map between real time and
discounted time, and the maximum discounted time is 1r :



                                                  4
observable to a third party, and the case that it is veri¯able by an enforcing party such
as a court. If it is not veri¯able, then it is impossible to enforce a contract in which
payments depend on that variable. This limits the kinds of incentive contracts that
are available.
       We begin with a preliminary comment that relates patents and prizes.            If
the social value of an invention is veri¯able, then prizes clearly dominate intellectual
property as an incentive system provided the e±ciency concern is aggregate dead-
weight loss. Whatever the duration, T , of the proposed protection, a prize equal to
½(v) = ¼vT entails the same incentives to invent as the IP system has, but with less
deadweight loss, provided the prize giver puts the innovation in the public domain.
This observation remains true in other models of knowledge creation, such as where
there is a knowledge production function.
       If the value v is observable, an invention authority can generally do even better,
by o®ering a prize ½(v) that is tailored to the distribution of costs. In fact, it might
seem natural to base rewards directly on the R&D cost c, since that would enable
a sponsor to minimize the amount of money that must be raised for rewards.            In
practice, however, this would not work.         First, a sponsor cannot observe cost by
consulting the researcher's accounting data.      The economic de¯nition of cost is the
minimum cost required to achieve the result. Wasteful or ine±cient e®orts should not
count. If the sponsor simply reimbursed the accounting costs, he might, for example,
give the researcher an incentive to go to the beach under the guise of attending research
conferences.     Second, in most research endeavors, the laboratories and researchers'
time are spread among many research projects. Overhead costs must be apportioned
among the projects. No one except the researcher, and possibly not even him or her,
can know how to apportion the costs.
       Finally, and perhaps most importantly, some research e®orts do not pay o®
with certainty. PhRMA, the trade organization of the pharmaceutical ¯rms, estimates
that fewer than one in ¯ve drug development e®orts results in a successful drug. The
failures obviously cannot be identi¯ed in advance, else the drug companies would avoid
them. If only the successful drugs results in pro¯table IP rights or prizes, the cost


                                            5
being covered by the IP rights or prizes would have to include the cost of failures as
well as successes. If only the successful drugs are rewarded, they must be rewarded
at least ¯ve times more than the average cost per drug discovery e®ort.
        Conditional on v; the sponsor should have some subjective notion of the distri-
bution of costs: An optimally chosen prize should re°ect this conditional distribution.
If costs for ideas with value v are lower on average for some types of innovations, then
presumably the prize ½(v) should also be lower. For other types of innovations, the
expected costs might be higher on average, and the prize should be higher. In making
these judgments, the sponsor recognizes that, since the cost c is unobservable, a prize
                                         v
½(v) smaller than the social value       r
                                             may not cover cost, and a prize larger than the
patent value ¼vT may be larger than cost, and attract too many competitors. The
bene¯t of giving lower prizes must be balanced against the possibility of discouraging
some innovations.
        A prize based on the value created will not be credible if the sponsor has
opportunity to renege, or is thought likely to renege. This is where veri¯ability by
a court may be important. For a prize system to work, something about the merits
of the delivered invention must be observable to an enforcer, even if it is only a noisy
proxy for v.4     It also helps if the prize giver can make himself credible in a repeat
game, as was true to a large extent in 18th century and 19th century France.
        The examples of incentive mechanisms that we give below address two types
of creative environments: those where the creation of knowledge addresses a known
need, and those where the need had not been identi¯ed, or at least articulated by a
sponsor, prior to someone thinking of the idea. In the latter context, it is natural to
call the idea scarce, in the sense that there are no substitute ideas that would address
the same economic need.
        The distinction between ideas that address well-known needs and ideas that
are scarce has implications for what types of mechanisms can be used. If the need
is known in advance, then it makes sense for a sponsor to post a prize to address it,
or otherwise solicit solutions ex ante.         The prizes would typically be contingent on
   4
    Gallini and Scotchmer (2002) point out that the same problem of veri¯ability arises with patents,
but only when they are litigated.


                                                 6
some performance standard dictated by the need. In contrast, an incentive system
to reward scarce ideas could not very easily be established in advance, at least with a
performance standard. The terms of the reward must be established ex post.
       The distinction between well known needs and scarce ideas is, of course, fuzzy.
A need can have varying degrees of speci¯city, from \demonstrate that Maxwell's
equations are correct" to \improve the e±ciency of harnessing water power", both
discussed below.
       We close this section with three examples that illustrate the scarcity of ideas,
and also illustrate the growing realization that, before good R&D investments can be
made, the individuals with good ideas must be identi¯ed.
       The ¯rst example is NASA's Institute for Advanced Concepts, which spends
$4 million per year funding ideas for space propulsion. The funding is in two phases.
Initial grants are up to $75,000, which is entirely for exploring an idea. The agency
then funds Phase II grants of to $500,000 to validate them. The two phases arguably
correspond to the idea and the investment, although the second stage is still rather far
from a usable innovation. Speculation is encouraged: the director urges audiences
\Don't let your preoccupation with reality sti°e your imagination." Not surprisingly,
results have been mixed. Some grants (antimatter rockets, solar sails, space elevators)
re-work ideas that have been widely discussed for decades. Other grants have elicited
risky but physically plausible schemes. In fact, NASA has already picked up one idea
{ creating magnetic \sails" to surf the solar wind { for further development. Critics
charge that another (\hydrino" propulsion) rests on pseudoscience ruled out by the
known laws of physics (Reichardt 2002).
       The second example concerns jet ¯ghters. The U.S. Air Force has always recog-
nized that an essential part of advancing aircraft capabilities is attracting new ideas.
The current F-22 design e®ort began in 1981 with a formal request to industry for
ideas. Suggestions ranged from an ultra-lightweight ¯ghter to a 120,000 lb. \battle
cruiser." The Air Force then took the best ideas from each proposal and prepared
detailed speci¯cations. Even then, the Air Force resisted prototyping because that
would reduce the number of participants and ideas. It was not until 1986 that Lock-


                                           7
heed and Northrup were selected for the remaining competition (Sweetman 1991).
         The third example comes from the private sector. In 2002, Google announced
its ¯rst annual prize for a scalable computer program that \does something interesting"
to the company's internal library of pre-parsed web pages. The winning entry merges
Google's data with census bureau address data to create a database that can limit
searches by geographic area. (Contestants granted Google a worldwide, non-exclusive
license to make, sell, or use any technologies they developed (Google 2002).) Although
the winning contestant was required to submit working code, the main bene¯t to
Google resided more in the idea than in the implementation. Any programmer could
have turned the idea into an innovation; it was the idea itself that had value, and that
is what Google was looking for.


3    Prizes: Linking Payments to Value

An important class of mechanisms are prizes. These come in two types that corre-
spond to the two innovative environments that arise from well-known needs and scarce
ideas.    Targeted prizes, which are posted ex ante and have clear performance stan-
dards, reward solutions to needs that originate with sponsors. The inventor's idea is
a solution to the sponsor's stated need. Blue-sky prizes are given when no need has
been stated in advance, but judges are allowed to \know it when they see it." (In
blue-sky prizes, \the sky is the limit.") If the reward is speci¯ed in advance, it cannot
be tailored to the idea.   For example, Nobel prizes are a ¯xed award, regardless of
the nature of the accomplishment.     More often, as we shall see, blue-sky prizes are
tailored ex post to the value of the innovation, but this is a di±cult problem.
         The problem with blue-sky prizes is how to tailor them to the value v: This
same problem carries over to contests, discussed below. If a prize cannot depend on
the value of the innovation that is delivered, then the sponsor cannot avoid rewards
to useless innovations or rewards to the wrong innovators.
         We illustrate two methods that have been used to ensure that a prize re°ects
the value v; namely, making the prize conditional on a veri¯able performance standard,
and giving the inventor the option to choose intellectual property protection instead.


                                           8
In the latter case, the prize e®ectively becomes a patent buy-out. The inventor will
not agree unless the prize is at least as large as the patent value ¼vT; and in this sense,
the prize is constrained to re°ect the value.
          An example of how the buy-out works occurred when the French inventors
of photography, Daguerre and Nahin, sold their rights in an ex post negotiation in
1839. The inventors received pensions totaling 10,000 francs per annum in exchange
for revealing the secrets of the process at a joint meeting of the French Academies of
Art and Science. Afterwards, the process was put in the public domain (Newhouse
1988). We can only presume that the French inventors received value commensurate
with their invention, since they would not have accepted a prize less than the patent
value.5
          In contrast, John Hyatt chose patent protection over a prize for inventing cel-
luloid in the 19th century (Porter 1994). Hyatt had originally invented celluloid in
order to claim a prize posted by a manufacturer of billiard balls who wanted to re-
place ivory. However, when Hyatt realized that his invention had wider applicability,
he chose patent protection instead, apparently judging the value of the patent to be
greater than the prize.
          Michael Kremer (1998) suggests a direct way to buy out the patent at a price
that re°ects the value.      Since the value of the invention is likely to be observable
by rival ¯rms after the invention has been made, the patent authority can turn the
patent into a prize as follows. The invention authority appropriates the patent, and
auctions it to rival ¯rms. He promises that there is a small probability that he will
actually deliver the patent to the highest bidder in return for the bid price. The
rivals will bid the same as if the patent would be transferred with probability one,
thus revealing their valuations. The winning bid should be (close to) the private value
¼vT . The sponsor can divide the winning bid by ¼T to get an estimate of the value v:
Kremer suggests that the sponsor pay the inventor a prize equal to his estimate of the
social value, vr , from general revenue. With low probability he transfers the patent
to the winning bidder in return for the bid price. With high probability, he puts the
  5
    Contemporary observers contrasted this procedure with what happened in England, where a
better process was sti°ed by patent litigation (Newhouse 1988).


                                             9
innovation in the public domain, thus turning the patent system into a prize system.
This scheme is enforceable, provided the parameters ¼T are speci¯ed in advance, so
that a court could enforce it.
       The greatest virtue of patent buy-outs is that they allow the government to
con¯scate inventions with high public consequences, such as pharmaceuticals, without
hurting the innovator.     If anything, the Kremer scheme increases the incentive to
                                        v
invest, since the innovator's reward    r
                                            is larger than the value of the patent ¼vT .
However, such a high prize also leads to social waste if it incites rival ¯rms to duplicate
each other's costs in a wasteful race. Under these circumstances, it may be better to
choose a prize ½(v) below the social value, as discussed in the previous section.
       An example of linking the prize to veri¯able performance standards occurred
in the Lyonnaise silk-weaving industry.       Members of the Fabrique Lyonnaise could
make improvements to weaving on their own initiative, and then petition a prize
committee for remuneration. It is unclear whether most of these improvements would
alternatively have been patentable, but the terms of the ex post reward evidently did
not rely on that alternative. Instead, the prize committee set the terms of the rewards
based on performance critera, such as the number of weavers who adopted it (Foray
and Perez 2000).     Such terms allowed the committee to ensure that the prize was
given only in return for value.
       Targeted prizes were common in France along with blue-sky prizes. In 1795 a
prize was o®ered for a means to preserve food to feed Napoleon's vast armies and navy.
The prize was awarded in 1810 to Nicolas Appert on condition that he publish the
technique and put it in the public domain (Porter 1994, p. 16). His technique, which
involved heat-sterilization of food packed in bottles, is still in use.   (If the solution
seems obvious, we should remember that the causes of spoilage were not understood.)
Other targeted prizes led to improvements of the steam engine (Porter 1994) and also
water power, which led to the ¯rst water turbine (Strandh 1979).
       One of the most famous targeted prizes was for discovering how to determine
longitude (Sobel 1995). By the time the English prize of $20,000 was posted in 1714,
similar prizes in other countries had gone unclaimed. The failure to determine longi-


                                             10
tude was the principal cause of a large and growing number of naval and commercial
catastrophes. No one disputed the high value of a solution, but mariners despaired
of ¯nding one.      In the course of the English competition, two very di®erent ideas
for solving the problem emerged. John Harrison had the idea to engineer seaworthy
clocks that would allow the mariner to keep London time, and thus compare local
time to London time. Such a comparison would tell him how far East or West he had
sailed. The other idea was to use lunar observations in comparison with the stars to
ascertain longitude. Both were developed in parallel, but the prize eventually went
to Harrison.
        In the modern renaissance of prizes, the X Prize Foundation was established
in 1996 with a $10 million prize for the ¯rst private ¯rm to carry three passengers to
a suborbital height of 100 km twice within a single two week period.6 To date, 23
teams representing seven countries have entered (X Prize Foundation 2003). Observers
report that at least three teams are likely to produce actual hardware. One e®ort has
reported that it plans to spend $5-7 million in the e®ort. Some commentators believe
that several teams have a reasonable chance of claiming the prize before it expires in
2005 (Ho®man 2003).
        Another modern targeted prize was $30m announced in 1992 to develop a new,
"Super E±cient Refrigerator" (Penn 1993, Zuckerman 2003). In order to receive pay-
ment the winner had to sell 250,000 copies of the new refrigerator by 1997. Although
Whirlpool won the contest, they did not meet the performance standard, selling only
200,000 units, and the prize was not paid.
        Finally, we mention two targeted prizes with performance standards that have
been o®ered for inventions that have great value to the sponsor or to society, but no
   6
    Long distance °ight has traditionally been supported by prizes. Famous examples include the
¯rst °ight across the English channel in 1909 ($5,000), the ¯rst °ight across the North Atlantic in
1919 ($10,000), and the ¯rst non-stop °ight from New York to Paris in 1927 ($50,000). The 1927
contest, which resulted in Lindbergh's °ight is particularly interesting. The prize was originally
o®ered in 1919 for the ¯rst °ier to accomplish the feat before 1924. This incentive may have been
insu±cient given the technologies of the time; in any case, there were no takers. The prize was then
renewed for an additional ¯ve year period drawing a total of nine teams into the race, although at
least one of these e®orts failed to obtain adequate ¯nancing. The remaining teams spent a total of
$400,000 in the e®ort. Eight of these aircraft either crashed on take o® or disappeared. Lindbergh's
successful e®ort cost $25,000 (X Prize Foundation 2003, Jablonski 1972).


                                                11
commercial value. The ¯rst was a German prize for demonstrating that Maxwell's
equations of electromagnetism were correct.       The prize was o®ered by the Berlin
Academy in 1879, and the feat was accomplished by Henrich Hertz, albeit long after
the prize expired (Bryant 1988).
       A modern prize with similar character is the RSA Factoring Challenge, which
o®ers a $250,000 prize for the ¯rst team to factor a speci¯ed 2048-bit integer. Rewards
for smaller speci¯ed numbers start at $10,000 (RSA Factoring Challenge 2003). RSA
sells a commercial implementation of public key encryption whose security rests on the
computational di±culty of factoring large numbers. If the prize goes unclaimed, RSA
has more con¯dence in the security of its system. This is a case where the sponsor
is better o® if it does not get what it is looking for. The successful claimant cannot
pro¯t from the discovery in any way other than the prize.
       These examples show that prizes can be linked to value by (i) administering
prizes in a legal environment where intellectual property protection is also available
and (ii) making the prize contingent on a performance standard. These techniques
can apply to either targeted prizes or blue-sky prizes, although patent protection is
probably a more important backup for blue-sky prizes, as a way to avoid ex post
hold-up.
       So far these arguments have been entirely about the feasibility of linking prizes
to the value of the innovation. They do not inform us about the optimal size of the
prize. If costs are \expected" to be much lower than value, then it is sensible to set a
prize much lower than the social value, even if the social value can be observed. The
appropriate size of a prize should also be tailored to the number of participants that
the sponsor wishes to attract.
       In the simple ideas model given above, it is desirable to avoid duplication of
costs. When ideas are scarce, this is not a problem { scarcity means that only one
inventor can ¯ll the market niche de¯ned by his idea. In that case, the size of the prize
should simply balance the possibility of giving up the innovation (when the prize turns
out to be less than cost) against the social cost of over-rewarding the innovator. Such
a balancing must be done by reference to a subjective distribution of costs, conditional


                                           12
on value.
          For targeted prizes, ideas are typically not scarce. There are typically several
ideas that could ¯ll the targeted need. In such an environment, simple prizes share
a defect of intellectual property, even if the prize can depend on the value. There is
no way to ensure that only the agent with the best idea invests, or even that a single
agent invests. Those problems can be partly addressed by the contests we discuss in
the next section.


4    Research Contests

A di±cult problem for a public sponsor is when the prize cannot be made to re°ect
the value of the delivered invention. The sponsor is then in jeopardy of giving a prize
for no value. Just as bad, potential inventors may refuse to take the bait, fearing that
the sponsor will renege on promises. In this environment, intellectual property starts
to look attractive, since the value of an intellectual property right is automatically
linked to the social value of the invention.
          However, we should not give up on prizes too soon. For one thing, there are
many inventions for which intellectual property will be ine®ectual because the social
value cannot be appropriated. Examples that spring to mind are military wares and
pure scienti¯c knowledge. Fortunately, the sponsor still has options.
          We discuss how the sponsor can elicit investments in innovations of high value
even if the value is not veri¯able ex post to an enforcement body. He will do this
by setting up contests that involve enforceable contracts. In two of the contests we
discuss, the contract terms will not involve the enforcement of any payment conditional
on the observation of value.      These two contests have the downside that the best
contest may nevertheless lead to duplicated e®orts of the contestants. The inability
to make enforceable contracts in which payments depend on the delivered quality is
costly.
          A Simple Commitment to Pay The ¯rst commitment device is extremely
simple, and also very common. The sponsor sets a prize, and commits only to give it
away. He does not make the payment conditional on any speci¯ed performance, but


                                             13
rather announces his objectives, and lets the contestants choose their strategies. Ex
post he will choose the contestant who comes closest to meeting his objective. There
is no reason for an enforcement body to be involved, except to make sure that the
prize money is actually paid to someone. The sponsor cannot renege on paying the
prize, and has no reason to pay it to any contestant other than the one who comes
closest to his objective.
         Much of the development of airplanes was motivated by such contests, espe-
cially before World War II. The Gordon Bennett, Schneider, Thompson, and Bendix
prizes supported air races, typically o®ering purses between $5000 to $10,000.7 This
promoted ¯erce competition from 1911 until 1939.                While it is impossible to mea-
sure technological impact of these competitions with any certainty, prize winners rou-
tinely outperformed contemporary military aircraft in speed and endurance until the
late 1930s.    More speci¯cally, the participation of two companies in pre-war racing
{ Rolls-Royce and Supermarine { pioneered technologies for advanced aircraft and
engines that were eventually incorporated in World War II designs like the British
Spit¯re. Although much of this e®ort was subsidized by government loans of pilots
and specially-built aircraft, other racing machines were built by private investors in
search of prize money.         The most famous example was the lethal (but very fast)
\GeeBee" design that dominated racing in the early 1930s (Vorderman 1991, Porter
1994).
         The next two contest-like mechanisms that we discuss are more complicated
than a simple commitment to give away the money, but they have additional e±ciency
properties.    As we have already mentioned, the simple commitment to pay a ¯xed
prize has a defect that it shares with patent incentives, namely, that it provides no
control over which contestants enter, or even how many.                 Suppose that a prize or
patent is worth $100. Suppose there are two potential contestants, one of which can
enter for a cost of $70, and the other of whom can enter for a cost of $60. Only one
will enter, since entry by both means that the expected winning of $50 will not cover
   7
    These amounts tend to understate the incentive, since a single aircraft could compete in multiple
races and win multiple purses. In a few cases, aircraft were also able to compete in successive years.
[Vordman (1991)]


                                                 14
the cost of either.     But if the higher-cost ¯rm enters, then the lower-cost ¯rm will
not. There is no guarantee that it is the lower-cost ¯rm that enters in equilibrium.
Similarly, if the two ¯rms have di®erent prospects for success, there is no guarantee
that it is the better ¯rm that enters. A further problem is that, depending on costs
as compared to the prize, both ¯rms may enter even if investment by a single ¯rm
would su±ce. The incentive system then leads to a wasteful duplication of costs. A
good incentive mechanism should avoid these forms of waste.
        We now discuss two more re¯ned contests that to some extent address these
problems. Suppose that two ¯rms have substitute ideas (vi ; ci ), i = 1; 2; for how to
serve the sponsor's need. We assume that, if the sponsor could observe these values,
then he would choose the idea that provides the greatest social surplus, that is, the
sponsor would choose ¯rm 1's idea if 1r v1 ¡ c1 ¸ 1r v2 ¡ c2 , and would otherwise choose
¯rm 2's idea. This is the ¯rm with the lower cost if v1 = v2: The problem is that the
sponsor cannot observe (v1 ; c1); (v2 ; c2 ). The ¯rms may have an incentive to lie about
them if they think that lying will garner a pro¯table government contract.
        A Vickrey Auction The Vickrey auction goes some distance toward eliciting
e±cient investment, but only works if the value can be veri¯ed ex post.8 So far as we
know, this has not been used in practice. In the second-price (Vickery) auction, the
sponsor asks each prospective innovator i to report the social surplus si = 1r vi ¡ ci that
it could provide. The ¯rms report some values s1; s2: Of course the sponsor cannot
verify that either ¯rm is reporting si honestly: In addition, he does not know whether
a high value of the reported surplus si means that vi is high or ci is low. However
this will not matter, as the promised payments will give the ¯rms an incentive to be
honest.
        The sponsor chooses the ¯rm that reports the highest net surplus. Suppose
that this is ¯rm 1. He promises a payment to the winning ¯rm, ¯rm 1, that is equal
   8
    It is named after economist William S. Vickrey, who ¯rst exposited its remarkable properties in
his (1961) paper. The simplest example is where an auctioneer wants to transfer an object to the
agent with the highest valuation, but cannot observe the valuations. He asks each one to state his
valuation, then gives the object to the highest bidder, but only charges a price equal to the second
highest bid. In that situation, there is only one unobservable for each bidder, and nothing needs
to be observed ex post. In the version given here, each agent has two unknown variables, cost and
value. The value must be observed ex post, but not the cost.


                                                15
to 1r v1 ¡ s2 . Notice that the payment depends on the other ¯rm's bid, s2 ; not on the
winning bidder's bid s1 : The sponsor then asks ¯rm 1 to invest. After paying its own
                                             h                  i
                                                 1
costs c1 ; ¯rm 1 ends up with the payment          v
                                                 r 1
                                                       ¡ s2 ¡ c1 = s1 ¡ s2 .
       The second-price auction has the following properties: Assuming that the ¯rms
report their respective surpluses honestly, then (1) the payment to the winning ¯rm,
say ¯rm 1, will be close to (but no smaller than) the cost c1 if s1 is close to s2; and
(2) the winning ¯rm makes nonnegative pro¯t by delivering the innovation in return
for the speci¯ed payments.
       We can now ask whether the premise is valid: Does either ¯rm have anything
to gain by misrepresenting its net surplus to the sponsor?          In the case that s1 < s2 ;
does ¯rm 1 want to overstate s1 ? Unless its lie causes ¯rm 1 to win the bid instead
of losing it, the lie has no e®ect, since ¯rm 1's payment does not depend on its own
bid s1. If the lie is large enough to change the outcome, then ¯rm 1's pro¯t is s1 ¡ s2 ;
which would be negative. Firm 1 is better o® losing the bid and making zero pro¯t.
       In the case that s1 > s2 ; does ¯rm 1 want to understate the surplus s1 ? Unless
its lie causes ¯rm 1 to lose the bid instead of winnig it, the lie again has no e®ect. If
the lie is large enough to change the outcome, then ¯rm 1 makes zero pro¯t by losing
the bid instead of earning s1 ¡ s2 ; which is positive. Thus, ¯rm 1 has no incentive to
lie about s1 : The same argument applies to ¯rm 2.
       Thus, the most important feature of the second-price auction is that each ¯rm
has an incentive to report faithfully on the net surplus it can deliver, and the sponsor
can safely pick the ¯rm that claims the highest surplus.
       The second-price auction is particularly attractive if the surplus available from
the two rivals is expected to be similar.    In that case, the payment to the winning
bidder will be close to the winning bidder's cost, and equal if s1 = s2.          In general,
however, a sponsor would care about the size of the transfer that he must pay to the
winning bidder. The social cost of raising funds for general revenue is smaller than
the social cost of taxing a single market, but is still not zero. The second-price auction
yields an e±cient outcome in the sense that the high-surplus ¯rm is asked to invest,
and there is no duplication of cost.


                                            16
        The second-price (Vickrey) auction assumes that the ex post payment can de-
pend on the delivered value. But that is the di±culty we would like to avoid. The
contest we now discuss, following Che and Gale (2003), is a hybrid between the com-
mitment prize and the Vickrey auction.
        A Prototype Contest The ex ante problem of the sponsor is to elicit invest-
ment in the best idea, given that he cannot condition his payments on the value of the
delivered innovation. But in order to elicit investment, he needs a mechanism that
commits him to pay o® ex post, instead of trying to negotiate a low price once the pro-
totypes are delivered. If the sponsor cannot commit to pay a price above production
cost, the innovators will not invest.
        The prototype contest solves this problem by allowing the ¯rms and the sponsor
to make contingent contracts before any investments are made. The contracts specify
what price the sponsor will pay to each innovator, contingent only on buying that ¯rm's
innovation. The sponsor's observation of quality is re°ected only in the decision to
buy. The only enforcement problem is to make sure that if the inventor is chosen, the
price will be as speci¯ed in the contract written before the innovator invested. Each
¯rm would like to get a high price if its innovation is chosen, but a high price increases
the chance of not being chosen ex post. This constrains the prices demanded by the
¯rms in negotiating the contracts ex ante. On the other hand, since the contingent
contracts are negotiated before costs are sunk, the ¯rms will not o®er prices so low
that they do not cover costs.
        To see this mechanism more explicitly, suppose the two potential innovators
have ideas (v1 ; c1 ); (v2 ; c2 ):9 Suppose, for concreteness, that v1 > v2 : If v1 is very
close to v2 , then in an ex post auction, the winning bid would be close to zero, and
neither bidder would be likely to cover its cost in expectation. This is remedied in the
contest we now describe by letting the ¯rms bid ex ante, before they sink their costs.
For simplicity, assume that the qualities v1; v2 are known to all parties, even if they
   9
    The model presented here is simpler than that of Che and Gale. In their model, the ¯rms can
choose what qualities to develop, using a more standard model in which there is a known function
that yields quality in return for investment e®ort. The ¯rms announce their qualities in advance,
coupled with a random distribution on prices as below.



                                               17
cannot be veri¯ed in court. Thus, all the parties know what qualities of innovations
will be delivered ex post. The ¯rms will announce ex ante the prices (½1 ; ½2 ) at which
they are willing to sell their innovations ex post. The ¯rm will receive this price, but
only if chosen by the sponsor ex post.
       Our objective is now to characterize the ¯rms' equilibrium bids.        These are
bids such that neither ¯rm has an incentive to revise its bid, assuming that the other
¯rm's bid is ¯xed.
       We ¯rst argue that the contingent bid prices cannot be deterministic. To see
this, suppose that v1 = v2 and c1 = c2 = c; and consider what prices the ¯rms will
demand. A natural guess is (½1 ; ½2 ) = (2c; 2c). These are the minimum prices the
¯rms could demand and still cover their costs in expectation, assuming that the tie-
breaking rule is to randomize evenly between the ¯rms. Since each ¯rm would win
the bid with probability 1/2, the revenues would be (1=2)½1 = (1=2)½2 = c:
       However, these prices are not an equilibrium.        If ¯rm 2 demands price 2c
in the event that the sponsor chooses that ¯rm, then ¯rm 1 can improve pro¯t by
reducing its own demand to ½1 = 2c ¡ "; where " is a small number.           With prices
(½1; ½2 ) = (2c ¡ "; 2c); the sponsor will choose ¯rm 1, and ¯rm 1 will make pro¯t
½1 ¡ c = c ¡ " instead of 0. This shows that the zero-pro¯t prices (½1 ; ½2) = (2c; 2c)
are not an equilibrium. Of course there are no lower prices that are an equilibrium
either, since at least one ¯rm would then not cover cost in expectation.
       The solution to this problem is mixed strategies. Instead of choosing a deter-
ministic price, each ¯rm chooses a probability distribution over prices, and the price
actually o®ered to the sponsor is a random draw from this distribution.
       An equilibrium will have the property that the ¯rms randomize on whether
they develop the innovation, as well as on the price. With some probability each ¯rm
will drop out, which means that it does not innovate and demands a zero price. If
both ¯rms drop out, the sponsor will fail in his objective of procuring the innovation
by setting up a contest.    We will denote the cumulative distributions on price by
F1 ; F2 : [0; vr ] ! [0; 1]: For each ½ 2 [0; vr ]; the probability that the ¯rm chooses a
price no larger than ½ is Fi (½), for i = 1; 2: The ¯rm will never choose a price larger


                                           18
than (v=r) because the sponsor would never pay a price greater than the value of the
innovation. The price ½ = 0 will imply that the ¯rm does not innovate, and a positive
price will imply that the ¯rm does innovate.     Thus F1 (0); F2 (0) are the probabilities
that the two ¯rms do not innovate.
         The ¯rms' decisions whether to innovate and what price to demand will be
made independently of each other, not observing each other's choices. Their choices
are commitments in the sense that they cannot change the contract ex post if, for
example, the other ¯rm's price turns out to be lower.
         For the example with symmetric ideas (v1; c1 ) = (v2 ; c2) = (v; c), there is an
                                                                                   c
equilibrium in which the ¯rms drop out with probabilities F1 (0) = F2 (0) =      (v=r)
                                                                                       ;   and
the distributions on prices are F1 = F2 = F; de¯ned as follows:
                       c
                     (v=r)
                                    if 0 · ½ < c
         F (½) =
                     1 ¡ ½ + (v=r) if c · ½ · vr
                           c    c

       This implies that probability c=(v=r) the ¯rms drops out and asks for price
½ = 0; that the ¯rm never chooses any other price between 0 and c, and that the
probability distribution has density function c=½2 for prices between c and v=r: That
is, conditional on innovating, the ¯rm puts most of its probability weight on a price
near the cost c, with the probability weight declining to the maximum (v=r):
         This is an equilibrium because each price in the support of the distribution
yields the same expected pro¯t as any other price, namely zero, and no other price
would yield greater pro¯t. If ¯rm 1 drops out (chooses price ½ = 0), it makes zero
pro¯t.    If ¯rm 1 develops the innovation and demands any price ½ in the interval
                                                                  h i
[c; vr ]; ¯rm 1's expected pro¯t is ½[F20 + 1 ¡ F2 (½)] ¡ c = ½    c
                                                                   ½
                                                                        ¡ c = 0: The term
[F20 + 1 ¡ F2(½)] represents the probability that ¯rm 1 wins the bid ex post.         With
probability F20 ¯rm 2 drops out, and with probability 1 ¡ F2 (½) ¯rm 2 innovates but
demands a higher price than ¯rm 1's price.
         These strategies hold the ¯rms to the lowest possible expected pro¯t that will
induce them to invest, given that two of them are asked to innovate. However it is
important to notice that, aside from the oddity of random prices, the investment deci-
sions are ine±cient. With some probability, the sponsor does not get the innovation,
and even if he gets it, there is a large probability that the costs will be duplicated.


                                            19
Allowing duplication is how the sponsor induces rivalry to keep the procurement price
down.
          The reader can work out how this mechanism must be modi¯ed if the ¯rms'
ideas (v1 ; c1); (v2; c2 ) are di®erent.   In that case, the random prices, conditional on
both ¯rms innovating, may have the consequence that the sponsor does not always
choose the highest-value innovation.         Instead, the innovator chooses the innovation
that generates the highest surplus, which will be the lower-value innovation if the
innovator also demands a very low price.
          The main example of prototype competition has occurred in military procure-
ment.      Prior to the 1970's, the U.S. Air Force usually acquired prototypes from a
single vendor after a contest to choose the best written proposal, and then decided
whether to accept it.       That procedure led to widely criticized cost overruns in the
1960's.     In the 1970's the Air Force moved to a system where two rival companies
received contracts to build prototypes followed by a °ight competition to demonstrate
quality. This process led to the F-16 and F-18 ¯ghter jets (Sweetman 1991, Sweetman
et al, 1987).
          While these contracts do not mirror the exact mechanism discussed above, they
show that the sponsor can use prototype competition to keep quality high and costs
low, at least relatively.    Rogerson (1994) points out that the payo® to winning the
prototype competition is a lucrative production contract.         According to Rogerson,
such procurement can be viewed as a three stage process consisting of (a) a design
phase in which multiple ¯rms pursue competing designs, (b) a selection phase in which
a limited number of ¯rms compete to produce prototypes and/or a ¯nal design, and
(c) a production phase, typically involving sole source production by a single ¯rm.
He argues that the production phases allows the DoD to \award larger prizes to more
important innovations, at least in a rough sense" as well as providing ongoing incen-
tives to improve the produce after initial adoption.      Firms that reach the production
phase typically enjoy economic pro¯ts (above the normal return to capital) amounting
to 4.4%. The super-normal rate of return can be viewed as a prize.




                                               20
5   Government Grants

In this section we turn from the grand challenge prizes, such as those for longitude and
food preservation, and focus on the more modest stu® of academic and industrial life,
the small innovations that move knowledge forward in increments. Our premise here
is that ideas are scarce, and that the agent with the idea should make an informed
choice whether to invest in it. Under intellectual property incentives, or a prize system
such as that in Lyon, the informed choice will follow the pro¯t motive. But for most
ordinary science, neither prizes nor patents have been the main mechanism for funding
research. Instead, sponsors have employed scientists directly, or given them up-front
grants in return for some unenforceable promise to implement a self-generated idea.
How could that possibly work?
          The grant process is a relative modern invention. For most of history, pub-
licly sponsored research was in-house. This dates back at least to ancient Egypt,
where the engineer Imhotep was hired to build bigger and better pyramids (DeCamp
(1980).     European monarchs routinely promoted knowledge creation by attaching
gifted individuals to their courts, for example, Archimedes, Kepler, Brahe, Euler, and
Lagrange. Later examples of government employees who became famous innovators
include Charles Darwin, science o±cer on the Beagle, and Herman Hollerith, the cen-
sus bureau inventor of punch card technology (Porter 1994). In modern versions of
intramural research, the emphasis has been on teams. During WWII, the U.S. govern-
ment hired large groups of academics to produce weapon prototypes, e.g., radar at the
MIT Radiation Laboratory, nuclear weapons at Los Alamos, torpedos at the Harvard
Underwater Sound Laboratory, and rockets at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Addi-
tional advances were generated within the government's own laboratories, notably the
invention of an advanced \laminar °ow" wing that was used in the \Mustang" ¯ghter
plane of WWII (Sweetman 1984). This arrangement is continued by NASA and the
national laboratories funded by the Department of Energy.
          The paid researchers who are most familiar to readers of this article are uni-
versity faculty members. This arrangement also has a long history. The preeminent
example in the ancient world was Egypt's Library of Alexandria, which supported

                                            21
domestic and foreign scholars who were free to work on their own ideas.            Resident
scholars included Archimedes, Hipparchos, Eratosthenes, Euclid, and Hero of Alexan-
dria. These researchers made fundamental advances in astronomy and mathematics,
as well as a variety of clever mechanical and clockwork devices. The mechanic Ketsi-
bios, also employed there, was widely acclaimed as \The Edison of the Ancient World"
(De Camp 1980; Casson 2001). Later, the famous inventors Galileo, Newton, Dalton,
Volta, Ampere and Maxwell (Porter 1994) all worked as employees of universities,
rather than in response to project-speci¯c incentives.
       The industrial laboratories that came into existence in the 20th century mimic
the university model, especially with the establishment of campus-like settings for
research in electronics and biotechnology.        Probably the most famous of these is
Xerox Parc in Palo Alto, which originated many of the computer technologies that
can probably be found on the reader's desktop.
       Before WWII, R&D funding by the U.S. federal government was a small per-
centage of total R&D, and what existed was mostly intramural. The nature of public
funding for R&D changed precipitously after the war.10              The federal government
became a primary source of R&D funds, of which 70% is currently given out as ex-
tramural funding.      The percentage of total R&D that is paid for by the federal
government has fallen steadily between 1953 and the present, from about 2/3 to 1/3,
but it is still much larger than the percentage in the 1930's, which was between 12%
and 20% (Mowery and Rosenberg 1998, p. 27).
       To explain the virtues of the grant process, we shall retain our model of in-
novation in which agents have ideas for innovations, and must be given incentives
to invest in those ideas.    Even though the grant giver cannot monitor the grantee
or withdraw payment in case of failure, and has limited ability to monitor the past
record, the system can do a very good job of selecting the best researchers and making
sure that they perform. The grantor's main instrument of coercion is that he can cut
o® funding for future projects if a grantee fails to deliver on a past grant.
       As we show, the system works by self selection. The funding agency evaluates
  10
    For a concise account, see Mowery and Rosenberg (1998, Ch 2).   For the basic data on R&D
funding, see NSF, Science Indicators 2002.


                                             22
ideas (proposals), but will only fund them, even if good, if the researcher has not failed
to deliver in the past. In order to stay in the system, the researcher will have to be
honest about his ideas for grants { else he won't succeed { and must actually bear
the cost of implementing his idea.     It is only the researchers with relatively fertile
minds who will have an incentive to do this, and this supports the funding agency's
objective. However, the granting agency cannot actually observe the fertility of the
researcher's mind or keep track of how many innovations the researcher has made.
We show that, nevertheless, the grant system works well to motivate e®ort and select
the best researchers. (If even the best and most honest researchers can fail by mistake
rather than malfeasance, the argument we give must be modi¯ed so that the grantor
can also use information on the history of successes.)
       Since the fertility of a researcher's mind can be captured either in the rate at
which he has ideas or in the value of the ideas, we will assume for simplicity that
all ideas have the same value and cost, (v; c), but that researchers receive ideas at
di®erent rates ¸ ¸ 0 per year, where ¸ represents the fertility of the researcher's mind.
The objective of the grant agency is to reward the high-¸ researchers.
       When the researcher receives an idea, he can ¯le a grant proposal with the
sponsor, and the sponsor will decide whether or not to fund him. The researcher does
not need to worry about getting paid, because he gets the money up front. However,
whether or not the sponsor can observe the merits of the idea (v; c), he has to worry
that the researcher either cannot execute the idea or prefers to pocket the award and
go to the beach.
       In a given time period, a researcher with parameter ¸ has an average of ¸ ideas.
(The parameter can be less than one, in which case the researcher will not, on average,
have an idea in every period.) We can think of the parameter ¸ as measuring how
creative he is.    For a researcher with creativity ¸; the expected present discounted
value of investing in all the ideas he has in a given period at date t is the following,
when r is the discount rate and the size of the grant per idea is ½ :
         ¸
               (½ ¡ c)
      (1 ¡ r)t
Suppose now that the researcher has received a grant of size ½: He must decide whether

                                           23
to perform the research or go to the beach. His net gain if he fails to perform is the
saved cost c. His net loss from lost future grants is
     1
     X                                 X1
             ¸                                1        ¸
                  t (½ ¡ c) = ¸(½ ¡ c)             t =   (½ ¡ c)
      t=0 (1 ¡ r)                      t=0 (1 ¡ r)     r
Thus, he will perform instead of pocketing the money if
                  ¸
              c ·   (½ ¡ c)                                                          (1)
                  r
                    ¸
     or       c ·       ½
                  ¸+r
We can see that, for ¯xed awards ½, only researchers who expect to have lots of ideas
(high ¸) will perform in return for future options on grants. If the inequality (1) holds
for any ¸, it also holds for any researcher with a higher value of ¸: We can also see
that, for a ¯xed rate of idea formation ¸, researchers will only perform if the rewards
½ are high enough. And, of course, they will never perform if the award ½ is smaller
than the cost c:
       Let H be the distribution of ¸ in the population of researchers, so that 1¡H(¸)
is the fraction of researchers with parameter greater than ¸: For a ¯xed award size ½,
    ^
let ¸(½)  be the minimum ¸ for which (1) holds, that is, the value for which (1) holds
                            ^ is decreasing in ½ : For higher prospective awards, even
with equality. The function ¸
less creative researchers are willing to perform in return for future options on grants.
                                                  ³      ´
Then the number of funded researchers 1 ¡ H ¸       ^ (½) increases with the size of the
award, ½: The total budget of the sponsor per unit time is
               Z   1
     B (½) =           ¸½ dH (¸)
                ^
                ¸(½)

In this system, if the sponsor wants to ensure that only the more creative researchers
are funded, he must give awards without rationing. The only researchers who continue
                                                                     ^ (½) ; and all of
to apply for grants are those with creativity parameters larger than ¸
them are funded.         The only way to increase the amount of research (number of
researchers) is to increase ½ for all researchers, which means that the budget increases
by more than the payments added for new researchers.
       It is worth understanding what is lost by the grant giver if he cannot condition
his awards on past success. Conditioning the size of awards on past success will reduce

                                             24
the grant giver's total budget, conditional on a ¯xed amount of innovation. Because
the sponsor cannot observe ¸, or condition grants on ¸; sponsorship is more costly
than it would be otherwise.
       If the sponsor could observe the fertility ¸ of the researcher's mind, he could
make di®erent payments for di®erent researchers; the grant per idea, ½; would be a
function of ¸: For each ¸; he would choose a prize ½(¸) for which (1) holds as an
equality. The function ½ would then be a decreasing function of ¸; more productive
researchers would receive less money per funded idea. However, one can also see from
(1) that, since c (¸ + r) = ½(¸)¸; the more creative researchers (those with higher ¸)
would receive more grant funding per unit time, ¸½ (¸).
       The fertility of each researcher's mind will depend, among other things, on
whether he is operating in an environment of \open science" (David 2003). If open
science means that each discovery is published, hence shared, each researcher will be
stimulated to have ideas at a higher rate. We can thus interpret open science to imply
that each researcher's ¸ is higher than otherwise. With higher ¸'s, a given total grant
budget will support a higher rate of progress.


6    Public Sponsors and the Direction of Research

For some research objectives, there may be several paths to the result, each one risky
in its own idiosyncratic way. That is, one of the things that is unknown is whether
a particular approach will succeed. In this environment, an idea is a triple (v; c; p);
where v is the value of the speci¯ed objective, c is the expected cost of a particular
research approach, and p is the probability that the approach will fail.
       It is natural to assume that the successes and failures of di®erent approaches
are independent. Thus, if there are several ideas f(vi ; ci ; pi )gi2S for how to achieve the
objective, and the sponsor elicits investment in all of them, the probability of success
is 1 ¡ ¦i2S pi : (This model follows Wright (1983), except that in Wright's model all
competitors have the same idea. Only the sponsor is uninformed.)
       In this environment, the main e±ciency question is how many approaches will
be taken, and which ones. One of the di±culties of patent incentives is that they can


                                             25
yield either too much or too little entry (too many or too few approaches). To see
this, consider the case that vi = v for each i (the potential knowledge is the same for
each ¯rm), ci = c for each i (the approaches are equally costly) and pi = p for each ¯rm
(they have the same likelihood of failure), but the approaches are nevertheless di®erent,
re°ected in the fact that the probabilities of failure are independent. Suppose that
the value of the property right will be ¼vT; as above. If n approaches are taken, the
probability of success is 1 ¡ ¦i pi = 1 ¡ pn : Then the total expected revenue of the
¯rms collectively is given by a function f de¯ned as

       f (n) = (1 ¡ pn ) ¼vT

        The social value of the innovation can be written kf(n) for some number k > 1:
                                              h              ³           ´ i
                                                                 1
This is because the social value is (m + ¼)vT +                  r
                                                                     ¡ T ) v (1 ¡ pn ) > (1 ¡ pn ) ¼vT;
where mv is the per-period consumers' surplus that is available with proprietary pric-
ing.
        The number of approaches that maximizes social welfare, namely, the n¤ that
maximizes kf(n) ¡ cn; will not be the same as the number of approaches n
                                                                       ^ that are
taken by competitive ¯rms in a patent race. Firms will enter will di®erent approaches
                                f(^
                                  n)
up to the point where            n
                                 ^
                                         = c; that is, they dissipate the rent.       To see that the
optimal number n¤ can be either larger or smaller than the equilibrium of the race, n
                                                                                    ^;
notice ¯rst that, since f is a concave function originating at 0, it holds for all n that
            f (n)                                                                      kf (n¤ )
f 0 (n) <     n
                  :   The optimal n¤ satis¯es kf 0 (n¤) = c; which implies that          n¤
                                                                                                  > c: If k
                                 f (n)
is close to 1; then, since         n
                                                        ^ > n¤ : But as k becomes large, n¤ must
                                         is decreasing, n
also become large, with the consequence that it may hold that n¤ > n
                                                                   ^:
        It is di±cult to remedy the incorrect patent incentives. If too few ¯rms would
enter, it is hard to entice more, since the additional entrants would make negative
pro¯t in expectation.           If too many ¯rms would enter, it would be hard to exclude
them, especially if the ideas were common knowledge. If some competitor dropped
out, another competitor would enter with the unused approach.
        Thus, if the approaches to solving the problem are common knowledge, the
public sector can do a better job of coordinating the di®erent approaches, by adjusting
their relative funding or funding the appropriate selection from them.

                                                     26
        The advantages of public sponsorship become even more pronounced if we
augment the model to account for learning. We will not give a formal treatment, but
will summarize the idea. An R&D e®ort typically takes place over time. As portions
of the cost c are invested, more is learned about the probability that each approach
will be successful. If one approach seems particularly promising, then it is rational
to shift resources away from the less promising toward the more promising. At some
point the promising venture may play itself out, and then the resources should again
be reorganized.
        This rational shifting of research priorities can best take place if the intermedi-
ate knowledge learned is aggregated in a systematic way. A problem with private IP
incentives is that ¯rms have no incentive to share knowledge in a way that is socially
e±cient. Their incentives to share knowledge are polluted by a desire to win the race,
and hence to get rivals to drop out, even if that is ine±cient. The rivals know that
each of them has such an incentive, and therefore the ¯rms' signalling about their
private states of knowledge will be suspect.11
        An example of di®erent ideas embodying di®erent (uncertain) approaches can
be found in the attempt to develop nuclear fusion as an energy source. Since 1945,
governments have understood that current fossil-fuel and nuclear-energy technologies
cannot meet society's demand for electricity inde¯nitely.            By contrast, a successful
fusion technology would generate essentially limitless energy from an isotope, deu-
terium, found in sea water. Researchers in the US, Europe, Russia, and Japan have
all been interested in this problem, using di®erent approaches, at considerable expense.
Over the past 25 years, the U.S. expenditure on fusion-related R&D has consistently
ranged (in constant dollars) from $100 million to $500 million per year (G Kulcinski
& J. Santarisu 1998). The current budget stands at $257 million (Seife 2003).
        There are at least twenty approaches to the problem of generating energy
through nuclear fusion, depending on how one counts.12 Almost all of these approaches
  11
     See Scotchmer and Green (1990) for a model that is similar in that ¯rms may induce shakeouts
by revealing their intermediate progress in pursuit of a goal.
  12
     Approaches are conventionally divided between "magnetic con¯nement schemes" that use pow-
erful magnets and/or electic ¯elds to contain ultra-hot gas and "inertial con¯nement" schemes that
extract energy from fuel pellets before they explode. Technologically distinct methods for magnetic


                                                27
were understood at the very beginning, in 1951-52 (Herman, 1990, Lindl 1998). De-
spite years of public funding and experimentation, none of the approaches has been
proved to achieve goals { and none has been de¯nitively ruled out by experiment.
The technical approach favored by the Russians { so-called tokamaks { leaped ahead
in trials for a brief period in the 1960's, and worldwide funding shifted toward that
approach. By 1972, at least seventeen new tokamaks were completed or under con-
struction outside the USSR (Herman 1990). Despite the disappointing record, parti-
sans in the global partnership remain con¯dent, and in 1986 they hatched a plan to
spend $10 billion commercial-scale fusion reactor.           The plan has been controversial
due to the unproven nature of the technology. The commitment of funds was cut in
half after the U.S. brie°y dropped out in 1998 when detractors were advocating other
approaches and more basic science (Seife 2003).
        It is unclear whether private ventures would ever invest in an innovation as
costly as nuclear fusion, regardless of the potential payo®, and that may be the single
most compelling reason that it should be funded publicly, if at all.               But the other
important lesson embedded in the example is that researchers can and do learn from
each other. The tokamak may or may not end up the survivor, but it is sign¯cant
that researchers responded to experimental evidence in its favor. Private competitors
might have suppressed such evidence in order to maintain a competitive advantage.


7    Mixed Private/Public Incentives

In contrast to many of the examples given above, and also in contrast to how the
public/private question is usually posed by academic economists, incentives are gen-
erally not provided entirely through intellectual property or entirely through public
sponsorship. The modern economy has evolved such that public and private funds
con¯nement include pinch e®ect machines, stellarators, tokamaks, spherical tokamaks, spherical torus
machines, spheromaks, electric tokamaks, colliding beam machines, magnetic mirrors, °oating mul-
tipole machines, reversed ¯eld pinch machines, magnetic targets, inertial electrostatic con¯nement
machines, and Z pinch machines. Inertial con¯nement schemes include direct drive by lasers, direct
drive by ion beams, and indirect drive by lasers. The foregoing categories are not exclusive. Dark
horse candidates have included cold fusion, sonoluminescence, and dense plasma focus machines. For
a detailed survey, see National Fusion Energy Science Web Site (1998).



                                                28
are often mixed.
         There are at least three pieces of legislation that underlie that phenomenon.
The most important are probably the Bayh-Dole and Stevenson-Wydler Acts of 1980,
which authorize the patenting of innovations developed with federal funds. They a®ect
the national laboratories operated by the Department of Energy, such as Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory, Livermore Laboratory, Los Alamos, and many others, which
collectively account for about 3% of total R&D spending in the U.S. They also a®ect
most research done in universities, which collectively account for about 11% of total
R&D spending in the U.S, but receive about 60% of their research funds from the
federal government.13 Subsequent to the Bayh-Dole Act, most research universities
have instituted O±ces of Technology Licensing.            Most such o±ces prefer exclusive
licensing (Jensen and Thursby 2001), suggesting that they intend to exercise their
rights as pro¯t maximizers, just as a private entity would.
         The other legal foundation is the Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986.
This is a tool that lets national laboratories (and other federal enterprises) create
partnerships with private entities, called CRADAs, and thus spin o® their innovations
into the private sector. By the mid-1990's, about 1000 CRADA's were being formed
each year, almost half in partnership with the Department of Energy.14
         Finally, there are occasional examples of public/private incentives, resulting in
intellectual property rights for the private sector, that fall outside these two broad
categories. DARPA has o®ered a $1 million Grand Challenge prize for wining a race
among robotic ground vehicles (DARPA 2003). Entrants not only compete for this
rather substantial prize, but will own any intellectual property that results.
         Many commentators question the rationale for funding R&D directly with pub-
lic funds, but at the same time o®ering intellectual property rights. The fear is that
inventors get funded twice - once with grants and once with IP - thus compounding
the burden to users and taxpayers. In addition, such lucrative funding can lead to
wasteful duplication of e®orts.
         Many of these public/private ventures involve \big science", where one might
 13
      NSF, Science Indicators 2002.
 14
      See Maurer (2002) for a more complete discussion.


                                                 29
argue that neither the private sector nor public sector alone can \a®ord" to fund
it.   That argument is not very convincing, since large bene¯ts should attract large
investments, even if the funds have to be borrowed. In any case, no organization has
better ability to raise money than the federal government.
         Nevertheless, the public/private partnership resulting in intellectual property
rights may have merit.      Our argument is not focussed on the di±culty of raising
money, but rather on how the system of dual funding can overcome other problems
that would otherwise a²ict both sponsors. For big science, industry has the problem
that, although an innovation may have some commercial value, the commercial value
under existing intellectual property laws may not be su±cient to cover costs. This
is especially true for investments that have unappropriable social bene¯ts, or where
intellectual property rights are so narrow that the bene¯ts will be eroded by competi-
tors. The public sector could simply fund such projects, but then it faces the problem
of choosing the ones that are likely to be fruitful, or making sure the funds are used
as intended, especially when the expertise resides mostly in the private sector.
         We have already shown how a grantor can overcome these problems for small,
frequent innovations, simply by threatening to cut the innovator out of the grant
process if he or she does not deliver enough innovations, or innovations of high enough
value.    But \big science" will not produce frequent deliveries of small innovations,
regardless of how meritorious it is.    In fact, for many big science projects such as
energy through nuclear fusion, the real quality indicator is the likelihood of success, and
even the best project may fail. The public sponsor therefore needs some mechanism
to screen for the right investments, and to make sure that the researchers invest as
directed.
         We suggest that a system of matching funds, where it is industry matching the
government subsidy rather than vice versa, together with partial payment to industry
through intellectual property rights, can solve the dual problems of ensuring that
industry covers its cost, and avoiding wrong investments by the public sector.
         Each point in Figure 1 represents an idea (v; c): We will suppose that industry
is the repository of the best information about investments, so that the value and cost


                                            30
                                                                              vπT
     s+m

           s
          m
                                                                                 v
                               v

    Figure 1: Hybrid Incentives: Public Subsidies with Private Matching Funds

(v; c) is known to the researcher, but not to a government sponsor. The objective of
the government sponsor is to invest in those ideas for which 1r v ¡ c > 0: The value
of the intellectual property available to a private ¯rm if it invests on its own is ¼vT;
and without a government subsidy, it will invest if ¼vT ¡ c > 0: In Figure 1, the area
under the lower diagonal line, labeled ¼vT; represents the ideas for which the private
incentives in intellectual property would be su±cient.
       Suppose, however, that there are high-value ideas that are more costly than
the value of the intellectual property right (above the line ¼vT ), but still worth doing
( 1r v > c > ¼vT ): The government might like to sponsor these.
       Suppose that the government simply o®ers a subsidy s: Then all the ideas
(v; c) under the higher diagonal line ¼vT + s will be undertaken. The subsidy will
increase research, but indiscriminately. In particular, there are likely to many low-v
ideas, toward the origin in Figure 1, for which the subsidy of s is a waste of money.
It is easy to imagine an endless series of subsidy claims for worthless innovations.
       The government can solve this problem by insisting that the claimant make a
matching commitment of funds in some amount, say m: Then in order to claim the


                                           31
subsidy, the sponsor and the claimant will contribute s and m respectively to the re-
search budget, and invest in ideas suggested by the claimant. If the claimant suggests
an idea (v; c) such that c > s + m; then he must provide the required supplement. In
that case, the industry partner pays c ¡ s rather than m: If the claimant suggests an
idea (v; c) such that c < s + m; then the surplus goes to supporting graduate students
or other research enterprises. For simplicity, we assume in Figure 1 that the claimant
receives intellectual property in amount ¼T v on the subsidized innovations, although
in practice, the sponsor may require a reduction in intellectual property rights for
some broader social purpose. For example, the NIH imposes guidelines under which
research tools must be made freely available to other academic researchers, with an
intent to protect other grantees of the NIH.
       We can now see what happens under this incentive mechanism.
       First, ideas (v; c) that satisfy c < m will not be subsidized.   The industry
partner gets the intellectual property rights whether or not he is subsidized, and it
is more pro¯table to get these property rights for the lower cost c rather than m:
Thus, the dark shaded area that is below both the diagonal line ¼vT and below the
horizontal line m represents ideas that industry will invest in without claiming any
subsidy.
       It is only in ideas (v; c) that satisfy ¼vT > m that the industry partner would
claim a subsidy. These ideas are all to the right of v in ¯gure 1. This is what solves
the \moral hazard" problem. Partners will not try to collect subsidies on worthless
innovations because that would obligate them to commit funds in amount m.
       We can further re¯ne the ideas for which the industry partner would be willing
to accept a subsidy, namely, the higher shaded area in Figure 1. These are the ideas
to the right of v; above the horizontal line m; and below the line ¼vT + s: Ideas such
that c > ¼vT + s will not be attractive to an industry partner because the partner
must pay the surfeit c ¡ s:
       We thus see that the partnership with mandatory matching funds will allow
the public sector to subsidize ideas that would otherwise not elicit investment (those
between the lines ¼vT + s and ¼vT; to the right of v); without causing the sponsor to


                                         32
hemorrhage money in subsidies to worthless innovations.
       In recent years, industry matching requirements have become increasingly im-
portant in government aircraft procurement. During the 1980's, industry contributed
roughly one-half the cost of developing prototypes for the F-22 and F-23 ¯ghters
(Sweetman 1991). During the 1990's, NASA agreed to spend $912 million on the X-33
spacecraft, provided that Lockheed contributed $212 million. Lockheed, which had
agreed to pay for any cost overruns, eventually spent $357 million before the project
was cancelled in 2001 (NASA 2001a,b).
       The rationale contained in the Bayh-Dole Act is not the one given here. The
rationale is not about ex ante incentives to create innovations, but focusses instead
on the ex post incentive of universities and national laboratories to disseminate them.
The basic assertion is that licenses on university patent rights, especially exclusive
licenses, give industry licensees enough protection to make the collateral investments
required to commercialize those innovations.
       But there is an equally compelling argument that publicly sponsored research
should be put in the public domain.        This would arguably maximize the number
of users, and therefore maximize the number of follow-on innovations.          Whether
the ex post rationale for the Bayh-Dole Act is convincing depends on whether one
believes that intellectual property rights are constructed sensibly to begin with.    If
the intellectual property for follow-on innovations is su±cient, then exclusive licenses
on the underlying publicly sponsored inventions are not necessary. And if insu±cient,
then the Bayh-Dole Act remedies a defect of intellectual property law. Wouldn't it
be better to ¯x the thing that's broken?

8   Conclusion

Public procurement provides the option to pay for knowledge out of general revenue,
which is generally thought to impose less deadweight loss than taxing a single market,
and then to put the knowledge in the public domain.          Thus, public sponsorship
of knowledge that is destined for the public domain has a natural advantage over
intellectual property: it avoids the ine±cient exclusion of users whose willingness to


                                           33
pay is smaller than the proprietary price, but larger than the marginal cost of supply.
For such exclusion, we use the term \deadweight loss".
        However, intellectual property also has a natural advantage over public spon-
sorship: it ensures that only the users pay the costs of inventions, and since these
payments are voluntary, no citizen can be made worse o® by an invention. The lat-
ter advantage is particularly persuasive for knowledge that is narrowly targeted to a
special audience, but it is not determinative even there. Users of knowledge in two
disjoint targeted audiences could all be better o® by making reciprocal subsidies, each
contributing their tax dollars toward the knowledge that is useful to the other targeted
audience, under the condition that no one is excluded from use.
        On grounds that citizens can provide reciprocal subsidies, we have implicitly
taken the view in this paper that it is best to avoid deadweight loss (proprietary
pricing). This pre-judges the choice between public and private sponsorship, and in
doing so, allows us to focus on other important aspects of the creative environment,
in particular, which schemes are best at harnessing the creative genius that is widely
dispersed among humans.
        It is worth noting that sometimes there is no alternative to public sponsorship
funded through taxation, since it may be impossible to exclude bene¯ciaries from using
new knowledge, and therefore impossible to charge each user a price.
        Conversely, invention can sometimes create its own reward without any formal
incentive mechanism. In the early days of airplane development, manufacturers often
subsidized the aircraft that were used in competitions for long-distance °ights, since
winning could be expected to create commercial advantages.15 Bene¯ts presumably
included publicity and gains to reputation, the opportunity to develop trade secrets
and tacit knowledge, and the ¯rm's normal share of externalities to aviation as a whole.
In the case of air racing, prizes were also supported by gate receipts (Vorderman 1992).
The X-Prize competitors have similar business plans. Contestants hope to tap a small
but lucrative market for passenger °ights into space (Ho®man 2003).
  15
    In one striking example, Bellanca told the Spirit of St. Louis team that it was willing to cut the
price of its aircraft from $25,000 to $15,000 { but only if they let the company name its own pilot.
Lindbergh declined. [Jablonski (1972).]


                                                 34
       But in addition, many racing aircraft received massive subsidies from govern-
ments and, in the 1930's, also from charitable or patriotic individuals (Vorderman
1992, Sweetman 1984).      The pattern again continues in the X-Prize competition,
where at least two competitors are reportedly bankrolled by dot.com millionaires.
Most of the X-Prize itself was raised from such donors (Ho®man 2003). Motivations
include civic pride, patriotism, and an ideological commitment to space°ight as an
end in itself (X-Prize Foundation 2003).)




                                            35
References

 [1] Bryant, J. H., 1988. Henrich Hertz: The Beginning of Microwaves. Institute of
     Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Piscataway, NJ.

 [2] Casson, Lionel, Libraries in the Ancient World. Yale University Press, New
     Haven, CT.

 [3] Conant, J., 2003. Tuxedo Park: A Wall Street Tycoon and the Secret Palace of
     Science That Changed The Course of World War II. Simon & Schuster, New
     York.

 [4] David, P., 2003. The Economic Logic of \Open Science" and the Balance be-
     tween Private Property Rights and the Public Domain in Scienti¯c Data and
     Information: A Primer. In National Research Council, The Role of the Public
     Domain in Scienti¯c and Technical Data and Information, National Academies
     Press, Washington, D.C.

 [5] Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, DARPA Grand Challenge,
     http://www.darpa.mil/grandchallenge/.

 [6] Foray, D. and Hilaire-Perez, L., 2000. The Economics of Open Technology: Col-
     lective Organization and Individual Claims in the \Fabrique Lyonnaise" during
     the Old Regime. mimeograph.

 [7] Gallini, N. and Scotchmer, S., 2001. Intellectual Property: When is it the Best
     Incentive Mechanism? , Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 2. MIT Press,
     Cambridge, MA, pp. 51-78.

 [8] Google, Google Programming Contest. http://www.google.com/programming-
     contest/.

 [9] Herman, R., 1990. Fusion: The Search for Endless Energy. Cambridge University
     Press, New York.

[10] Ho®man, C., 2003. The Right Stu®. Wired, July 2003, 134-145.

[11] Holden, C., 2003. DARPA's Desert Dash. Science 300, 733.


                                        36
[12] Innocentive, 2003. About Innocentive. http://www.innocentive.com/about/.

[13] Jensen, R. and Thursby, M., 2001. Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing
     of University Inventions, American Economic Review 91, 240-259.

[14] Jablonski, E., 1972. Atlantic Fever. Macmillan, New York.

[15] Kulcinski, G. and Santarisu, J., 1998. Reducing the Barriers to Fusion Electric
     Power. Journal of Fusion Energy 17, 17- 23.

[16] Kremer, M., 1998. Patent Buyouts: A mechanism for encouraging innovation,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics CXIII, 1137-1168.

[17] Lindl, J. D., 1998. Inertial Con¯nement Fusion. American Institute of Physics
     Press, New York.

[18] MacArthur    Foundation,      The      MacArthur       Fellows         Program,
     http://www.macfound.org/programs/fel/fel overview.htm.

[19] Maurer,      S.     M.,      2002.       Promoting     and      Disseminat-
     ing Knowledge: The Public/Private Interface. National Academies of Sciences,
     http://www7.nationalacademies.org /biso /Maurer background paper.html.

[20] Mokyr, J., (1990), The Lever of Riches, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

[21] Mokyr, J., 2002. The Gifts of Athena. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

[22] Mowery, D. and Rosenberg, N., 1998. Paths of Innovation. Cambridge University
     Press, New York.

[23] National Fusion Science Energy Web Site, 1998. Fusion Innovations: A Report
     from ICC98. http://www.fusionscience.org/ICC98/ICC98 Sum.pdf.

[24] National   Science    Foundation,     2002.         Science   Indicators   2000.
     www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind02/pdf v2.htm.

[25] Newhouse, E. L. ed., 1988. Inventors and Discoverers: Changing Our World.
     National Geographic Society, Washington, D.C.

[26] NASA, March 1 2001.              Press   release.       ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub
     /pao/pressrel/2001/01-031.txt.

                                         37
[27] NASA, 2001.     Ames X-33 Public Web Site.            http://asm.arc.nasa.gov
     /x33/x33home.shtml.

[28] Nelson, R. R. and Winter, S.D., 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic
     Change. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

[29] O'Donoghue, T., Scotchmer, S. and Thisse, J.-F., 1998. Patent Breadth, Patent
     Life and the Pace of Technological Progress. Journal of Economics and Manage-
     ment Strategy 7, 1-32.

[30] Penn, C., 1993. Super E±cient Refrigerator Finalists. Home Energy Magazine.
     http://hem.dis.anl.gov/eehem/93/930305.html.

[31] Perez, L.H. and Foray, D., (2001). Inventing in a World of Guilds: The
     Case of Lyon in the XVIIIth Century. mimeograph, Universit¶e Paris-Dauphine.
     http://emlab.berkeley.edu/users/bhhall/ipconf/forayperez01.pdf.

[32] Porter, R., 1994. The Biographical Dictionary of Scientists. Oxford University
     Press, New York.

[33] Reichhardt, T., 2002. Out of This World. Nature 420, 10-11.

[34] Reinganum, J., 1989. The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development and
     Di®usion, in: Schmalensee, R. and Willig, R.D. (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial
     Organization. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 849-908.

[35] Rogerson, W., 1994. Economic Incentives and the Defense Procurement Process.
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, 65-90.

[36] RSA Security, 2003. Cryptographic Challenges. http://www.rsasecurity.com/
     rsalabs /challenges/index.html.

[37] Scherer, F. M., 1984. Innovation and Growth. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[38] Scotchmer, S., 2004. Innovation and Incentives. forthcoming.MIT Press. Cam-
     bridge, MA.

[39] Scotchmer, S., 1999. On the Optimality of the Patent System. The RAND Journal
     of Economics 30, 181-196.


                                        38
[40] Scotchmer, S. and Green, J., 1990. Novelty and Disclosure in Patent Law. The
     RAND Journal of Economics 21, 131-146.

[41] Seife, C., 2003. United States Rejoins International Fusion-Research Project. Sci-
     ence 299, 801.

[42] SpaceProjects.com, 2003. Competitive Prices Regarding Space as a Waste-
     Reducing Means of NASA Procurement. http://www.spaceprojects.com/prizes/.

[43] Shavell, S. and van Ypserele, T., (2001). Rewards versus Intellectual Property
     Rights. 44 Journal of Law and Economics 525

[44] Strandh, O., 1979. A History of the Machine. A&W Publishers, New York.

[45] Sweetman, W., 1984. High Speed Flight. Janes, London, UK.

[46] Sweetman, W., 1991. YF-22 and YF-23 Advanced Tactical Fighters: Stealth,
     Speed and Agility for Air Superiority. Motorbooks, Osceola WI.

[47] Sweetman, W., Gething, M., Richardson, D., Spick, M. and Gunston, W., 1987.
     The Great Book of Modern Warplanes. Salamander, New York..

[48] Vickrey, W., 1961. Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive Sealed Ten-
     ders. Journal of Finance 16, 8-37.

[49] Wright, B., 1983. The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes and
    Research Contracts. American Economic Review 73, 691-707.

[50] Vorderman, D., 1993. The Great Air Races. Bantam Books, New York.

[51] X Prize Foundation Web Site, 2003. http://www.xprize.org/.

[52] Zuckerman, S., 2003. The New Wave of Energy E±cient Refrigerators.
     http://www.ecomall.com/greenshopping/icebox2.htm.




                                          39
