                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE PRICING OF JOB CHARACTERISTICS
                              WHEN MARKETS DO NOT CLEAR:
                            THEORY AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

                                              Kevin Lang
                                            Sumon Majumdar

                                          Working Paper 9911
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9911


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




We are grateful to participants in seminars at ITAM, the NBER, Queen's University, University of Rochester,
Syracuse University, Virginia Tech and the 1999 European Econometric Society meeting and to Eli Berman,
Denise Doiron, Hsueh-Ling Huynh, Shulamit Kahn, Peter Kuhn, Michael Manove, Dilip Mookherjee and
Bob Rosenthal for helpful comments and discussions. The usual caveat applies. Financial support from
National Science Foundation grant SBR-9515052 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Kevin Lang and Sumon Majumdar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Pricing of Job Characteristics When Markets Do Not Clear: Theory and Policy Implications
Kevin Lang and Sumon Majumdar
NBER Working Paper No. 9911
August 2003
JEL No. J3, J2, J6, J7

                                            ABSTRACT


This paper examines nonsequential search when jobs vary with respect to nonpecuniary
characteristics. In the presence of frictions in the labor market, the equilibrium job distribution need
not show evidence of compensating wage differentials. The model also generates several pervasive

features of labor markets: unemployment and vacancies, apparent discrimination, and market
segmentation. When workers are homogeneous, restrictions on the range of job offers decrease

welfare and cannot reduce unemployment. However, when workers have heterogeneous preferences,
such restrictions may lower unemployment and can even lead to a Pareto-improvement in welfare.
We consider the impact of policies banning discrimination, regulating working-conditions and
imposing a minimum wage.

Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 0221
and NBER
lang@bu.edu

Sumon Majumdar
Department of Economics
Queen's University
Kingston, Ontario
Canada K7L 3N6
sumon@qed.econ.queensu.ca
1    Introduction

Since the publication of his seminal work, Rosen’s (1974) model has provided the basis for labor

economists’ understanding of how worker and job characteristics are priced by the labor market.

Rosen established that with many firms and workers, an implicit market arises for each character-

istic, with prices adjusting until all markets clear (see also, Lucas, 1975; Sattinger, 1979; Rosen,

1986). All workers get matched to their desired jobs, the market is eﬃcient, and workers are com-

pensated for taking up more onerous jobs. However, there is limited empirical support for either

perfect matching or compensating wage diﬀerentials. Both casual empiricism and research show

that matching is imperfect. Typically, 35-40% of workers report dissatisfaction with their current

hours, suggesting imperfect matching (see Lang and Kahn, 2001). Altonji and Paxson (1988)

find that workers who are dissatisfied with their working hours tend to move to jobs more in line

with their stated preferences, and to receive a smaller wage increase when they move. Moreover,

empirical work has often failed to find compensating diﬀerentials for bad job characteristics (e.g.

Brown, 1980).

    Much recent theoretical work recognizes frictions and imperfect information in labor markets

so that firms must search for workers and workers must search for jobs. In this paper, we develop a

model that incorporates frictions into a labor market in which jobs have a non-pecuniary element

(e.g. hours of work, flexibility, safety or physical eﬀort). We extend the Butters (1977) framework

of nonsequential search to model market imperfections when compensation is multidimensional

and workers search for employment taking into account both the wage and the non-wage di-

mension(s) of jobs. We begin with a model in which all workers share the same taste for the

job-characteristic. Once markets are not perfect, in equilibrium there is a dispersion of jobs even

among identical workers, and we show that wage diﬀerentials between disparate jobs need not

be “compensating.” In fact, in equilibrium, salary compensation may be positively or negatively

related to the goodness of the job characteristic oﬀered, and under reasonable restrictions this

                                                 1
relation will be positively sloped. Thus, for example, although firms make tied salary/hours of-

fers, salary may be increasing or decreasing in hours but will generally be decreasing. The model

therefore provides an explanation for our diﬃculty in finding empirical evidence of compensating

diﬀerentials. Hwang, Mortensen and Reed (1998) also show that in a dynamic sequential search

model with heterogeneous firms (and homogeneous workers), salary need not increase as the level

of disamenity rises. We use a static model of job-search to derive this result more directly and

thus obtain a set of suﬃcient conditions, and even for the case where both workers and firms are

homogeneous.1

       In section 3, we allow for workers with heterogeneous tastes and therefore imperfect matching.

We consider the case of a dichotomous job characteristic (which we term “clean” and “dirty,”

e.g. jobs with and without flexible hours, or jobs involving physical exertion or not), and two

groups of observably diﬀerent but equally productive workers (say, men and women) with diﬀerent

degrees of aversion to dirty work. In equilibrium, for each type of job, the range of accepted oﬀers

diﬀers across the two groups of workers. Under fairly general conditions, there will appear to be

discrimination against the group that is more averse to dirty work. If women are more averse

to “dirty” work than men, then women will, on average, earn less than men in both clean and

dirty jobs even though men and women are equally productive. Like the neoclassical model, our

model ascribes the over-representation of women in certain jobs and their lower average wage

to their preferences. However, in contrast with the neoclassical model, conditioning on working

conditions does not eliminate the wage diﬀerential between men and women. We thus obtain a

novel explanation for apparent discrimination as would be measured by comparing average wages

across diﬀerent groups of workers even in the same occupation.

       Since our model generates several pervasive features of labor markets such as unemployment,

   1
    Because Hwang et. al.’s model constrains firms to make a single wage oﬀer for the duration of the employment
relation, the diﬀerence between their dynamic model and our static formulation is relatively minor. The major
advantage of the one-shot formulation is its simplicity which, in turn, allows us to obtain this result analytically.



                                                         2
vacancies and imperfect matching, it is also possible to discuss the eﬀect of policy interventions

involving regulation of job-characteristics, such as caps on the length of the working week or

workplace-safety regulations. In Rosen’s model, the market is eﬃcient, making such interventions

ineﬃcient. In nonsequential search models such as ours, the market is not fully eﬃcient (Lang

and Rosenthal, 1991). Nevertheless, we show that in the homogeneous worker environment, it will

generally not be socially desirable to restrict the range of oﬀers firms can make. Simple policies

such as maximum hours or minimum wages will reduce workers’ expected utility.

    However, the results are quite diﬀerent when workers have heterogeneous tastes. In section 4,

we derive a number of interesting possibility results. In particular, requiring that firms make oﬀers

without knowing a worker’s type (i.e. outlawing discrimination) can make both types of worker

better oﬀ. Each type may exert a positive externality on the other and thereby generate a more

attractive oﬀer distribution for both. Further, the labor market may show segmentation in the

sense that there is a discrete diﬀerence in the level of utility (for both types of workers) between

the worst job in the (endogenously obtained) “good” segment and the best one in the “bad”

segment. This discontinuity in the distribution of utilities oﬀered occurs despite the fact that the

technology is continuous and workers of all types are found in both sectors. With heterogeneity in

the workforce, other policies such as minimum wage laws and laws to regulate working conditions

can also reduce unemployment, help one type of worker at the expense of the other type or even

increase expected utility for all types of workers.

    We begin with the simplest case i.e. where workers are homogeneous.



2    Homogeneous Workers

We consider a labor market variant of the Butters equilibrium search model incorporating non-

wage dimensions of jobs. Each firm decides simultaneously whether or not to make a job-oﬀer to

a worker and, if so, what oﬀer to make. Making an oﬀer entails paying a fixed cost. This may

                                                  3
be construed either as the administrative cost of making an oﬀer or the cost of setting up the

job characteristic or renting a machine prior to searching for a worker. Potential workers collect

all the job oﬀers they receive, and then choose the firm making him or her the best oﬀer. Each

firm recognizes that making a more desirable oﬀer raises the probability of hiring a worker, but

lowers profits conditional on getting the worker. Because some workers randomly fail to receive

any oﬀers, there is unemployment. Similarly, some firms’ oﬀers are turned down, resulting in

unfilled vacancies.2

       We assume that the number of firms with vacancies is given by Z, which is a random variable

with a Poisson distribution with mean z ≡ E(Z). This is a natural assumption in that a Poisson

distribution would result if firms from a large population made independent and equally probable

decisions to enter the job market. Although having a fixed number of firms does not change the

qualitative features of the model, use of this random variable simplifies exposition.3 While firms

know z, they do not know the realization of Z when deciding on oﬀers.

       A firm’s job-oﬀer consists of salary S, and a non-wage dimension h. For concreteness, we will

typically treat this characteristic as hours of work. However, the model can apply to many other

job-characteristics such as job safety, flexibility, etc. We assume that output is a nondecreasing

function V (h), of hours worked. This implies that production is constant returns to scale since

the productivity of a worker does not depend on the number of workers in the firm. We can

   2
     For those not familiar with the Butters model, it may be helpful to explain the intuition in the standard
formulation (Hosios, 1986; Lang, 1991). Suppose there is one worker, who produces output valued at 10. It costs 1
to make an oﬀer. If firms knew that their oﬀers would be accepted, they would each be willing to pay up to 9 and
the wage would be bid up to this level. However, if all firms oﬀer 9, only one of them will get the worker; due to
the fixed cost of making a job oﬀer, this implies all firms would be making an expected loss. If there were a mass
of oﬀers at any other wage, say 5, a firm could oﬀer just a little more than the other firms, hire the worker for sure
and make a profit. Thus the equilibrium will involve a continuous distribution of oﬀers. Note that the lowest oﬀer
any firm makes must have a positive probability of acceptance or it will make a loss. If there are no mass points,
the only way the lowest oﬀer can have a positive probability of acceptance is if there is some probability that the
worker receives no other oﬀers. Thus, there must be a positive probability of unemployment.
   3
     As will become evident, a fixed number of firms in the job market would yield a random number of job oﬀers
to individual workers, but these would have a binomial rather than a Poisson distribution. However, the Poisson
distribution closely approximates the binomial distribution for large economies. Setting up the model so that the
Poisson distribution is exact rather than approximate greatly simplifies the proofs.




                                                          4
therefore treat separately the problem for each worker. Allowing for increasing or decreasing

returns to scale greatly complicates the problem (for an example in a diﬀerent context, see Lang

and Rosenthal, 1991).

    Consider the market for a single potential worker. All firms simultaneously decide whether or

not to make the worker an oﬀer. If a firm does not make an oﬀer, it incurs no costs and makes

zero profit. Otherwise it makes a tied salary-hours oﬀer and incurs a fixed-cost c of making the

oﬀer. This cost c is normalized to equal 1 in this section. Firms seek to maximize their expected

profit.

    The worker’s utility function on salary S and hours of work h is given by u(S, h), where u

is assumed to be continuous and diﬀerentiable both in S and h, with us > 0 and uh < 0. We

further assume that u(0, h∗ ) < ur where h∗ is the worker’s endowment of leisure and ur is his

reservation utility. The worker collects all the oﬀers he receives and chooses the firm oﬀering

the highest utility level if this exceeds his reservation utility. In the event of a tie, he chooses

randomly among the best oﬀers. If he receives no oﬀer exceeding his reservation utility, he remains

unemployed. If the worker accepts employment, he works the specified number of hours h and

receives the specified salary payment S.

    Since workers evaluate oﬀers in terms of the resulting utility level, the probability of attract-

ing the worker by a particular salary/hours oﬀer (S, h) depends on how this oﬀer ranks in the

distribution of utilities from the oﬀers that the worker has received. Hence, in calculating its

expected profits, a firm only needs to consider the distribution of utility levels resulting from the

salary/hour oﬀer distributions of all the other firms.

    Here, a firm’s pure strategy is either a salary/hours pair or the decision not to make any oﬀer,

while a mixed strategy is a probability distribution over all possible salary/hours pairs including




                                                  5
the possibility of no oﬀer. The firm’s expected profit from making an oﬀer (S, h) is



(1)                                E(π) = P (u(S, h))(V (h) − S) − 1



where P (.) is the probability of getting the worker. This probability depends on the utility level

u(S, h) from the firm’s oﬀer of (S, h), and on what other firms exist and the oﬀers (if any) that

they make.

      Thus the firm’s problem can be separated into the decision of what level of utility to oﬀer (if

at all), and how best to oﬀer it. The solution to the second problem is simple: for a given level

of utility u, the firm will choose S and h to maximize its (gross) profit V (h) − S. We make the

following assumption to ensure that the profit function of the firm subject to a utility constraint

is strictly concave. We will maintain this assumption throughout this section.

      Assumption 2.1: uS V 00 (h) + uhh + 2uSh V 0 (h) + uSS (V 0 (h))2 < 0

      Although this assumption has no direct interpretation, it is satisfied for example, if the utility

function u(S, h) and the production function V (h) are both concave.

      Under assumption (2.1), any oﬀer that the firm makes will satisfy the following condition,

which is obtained from maximizing V (h) − S subject to the constraint u(S, h) = u∗ :


                                                            uh
(2)                                           V 0 (h) = −
                                                            uS


      Note that this equation is simply the standard result that oﬀers are eﬃcient in the sense

that they set the value of marginal product equal to the marginal value of leisure. It is also an

implicit function linking S and h. Given assumption (2.1), the second order conditions for the

profit-maximization problem are satisfied; thus, given any utility level u∗ , there exists a unique

profit-maximization pair (S ∗ , h∗ ) associated with u∗ . Therefore, in equilibrium, the distribution



                                                    6
on salary/hour pairs can be obtained from that on the utility levels.

          e(a) = max{S,h : u(S,h)=a} V (h) − S, and the utility level umax by π
   Define π                                                                   e(umax ) = 1. Clearly,

e(u) is decreasing in u, and umax is the maximum level of utility that the worker can hope to
π

achieve.

   The following two lemmas are similar to results in other nonsequential search models (see, for

example, Lang 1991) and are stated without proof.


Lemma 1 In any equilibrium, the oﬀer distribution must be continuous, have support [ur , umax ],

and have no mass points.


Lemma 2 If e−z π
               e(ur ) < 1, all oﬀers in the support of any equilibrium distribution must make

zero expected profit. All oﬀers that are outside the support must make nonpositive expected profit.


   Lemma 1 follows from the fact that if there were gaps in the distribution, a firm oﬀering a

package at the top of the gap could lower its utility oﬀer slightly without aﬀecting its probability

of acceptance (thereby increasing its expected profit). Similarly, if the distribution contained

mass points, a firm could increase its probability of acceptance discretely and thus its expected

profit, by an infinitesimal increase in the utility oﬀer. To understand lemma 2, note that ur is

the lowest utility oﬀer in any equilibrium distribution. Given that the oﬀer distribution must be

continuous, the oﬀer ur will only be accepted either if there are no other firms or other potential

firms choose not to make an oﬀer. Recall that z is the expected number of firms with the potential

to make oﬀers; therefore, from a particular firm’s point of view, e−z is the probability that there

are no other such firms. If e−z π
                                e(ur ) < 1, then the only way that an oﬀer of ur can make positive

expected profit is if there is a positive probability that firms choose not to make an oﬀer. But for

firms to be indiﬀerent between making an oﬀer or not it must be that the expected profit from

making an oﬀer must be zero. For the rest of the paper, we shall assume that z is large enough

so that the condition e−z π
                          e(ur ) < 1 is satisfied.

                                                     7
                           Salary S                            ¹(S,h) = 1

                                                                         ¹ = ¹*
                                        u(S,h)
                                                                               ¹ = ¹max



                                                     ur
                                                              contract curve

                                                                       Hours h




                         Figure 1: The equilibrium salary/hours distribution

    It follows that the equilibrium will involve mixed strategies. We consider the case where all

firms pursue the same mixed strategies.


Proposition 1 Assume that ∃ some (S 0 , h0 ) such that V (h0 ) − S 0 > 1 and u(S 0 , h0 ) > ur ; then

there is a unique symmetric equilibrium.


    Proof. From (2) we know that there is a unique pair (S, h) for each u. If P (u) is the

probability of getting the worker by oﬀering an utility level u, then from Lemmas 1 and 2, in any

symmetric equilibrium we must have:                          π (u) − 1 = 0 for ur ≤ u ≤ umax .
                                                 E(π) = P (u)e
                           1
    Therefore P (u) =    e (u) .
                         π               e(u) is decreasing in u, P (u) is a valid distribution function and
                                   Since π

is uniquely defined over the range u ∈ [ur , umax ]. Outside of this range all oﬀers make negative

profit and therefore are not made.

    Figure 1 shows the equilibrium graphically (for a concave production function). The points

of tangency between the worker’s indiﬀerence curves and the firm’s isoprofit curves map out the

set of eﬃcient oﬀers, the contract curve. The set of oﬀers is limited to those to the right of the

π = 1 isoprofit curve and to the left of the worker’s reservation indiﬀerence curve.4

   4
     Although we focus on symmetric equilibria all throughout the paper, there can be asymmetric equilibria as
well. For example, by having some subset z 0 of the firms make no oﬀers (even when they have vacancies) and
the rest follow the symmetric equilibrium of the game with mean number of firms equal to z − z 0 , an asymmetric
equilibrium is trivially generated.


                                                          8
      In the above proposition, P (u) is the probability that the worker accepts an oﬀer of utility

level less than or equal to u. Since the equilibrium is symmetric, P (u) is also the distribution of

the highest order statistic resulting from the oﬀer distributions of all the firms (although from

a particular firm’s point of view, P (u) is the probability that the best oﬀer made by the other

firms is less than or equal to u, the assumption that the number of firms in the market is Poisson

rather than fixed ensures that P (u) is also the distribution of the highest wage oﬀer made by

all firms rather than that for all firms minus one); thus, P (u) is the equilibrium distribution of

utility levels for the worker. Using the zero-profit condition P (u)e
                                                                    π (u) − 1 = 0, the actual oﬀer

distribution followed by any firm is as follows:

(i) with probability 1 − p, make no oﬀer, where p is given by the condition: e−zp π
                                                                                  e(ur ) − 1 = 0,

(ii) with probability p, make an oﬀer with utility u ∈ [ur , umax ] according to the distribution G(u)

given by5 : e−zp(1−G(u)) π
                         e(u) − 1 = 0.

      We have assumed that firms are free to randomize over both wages and the job-characteristic.

Perhaps more realistically, firms would first choose their technology (and thus a job-characteristic)

and then choose what wage to oﬀer. So long as firms do not learn other firms’ technology choices

before making their own wage decisions, the sequential decision is isomorphic to the simultaneous

decision modeled here. Moreover, even if each firm were constrained to choose the same technology

for all of its workers, given that production is constant returns to scale, there is no way for any

firm to take advantage of the resulting correlation in the oﬀers.

      Assumption 2.1 places few restrictions on the production and utility functions, and therefore

on the equilibrium salary/hours locus. Salary may be increasing or decreasing in hours; indeed

there can be more than one salary associated with a given hours oﬀer. However, there is a sense,

made precise in the following proposition, in which a negative salary/hours relation is the most

plausible one.

  5                                                       P∞     e−z z n
      P (u) = P rob.(best oﬀer by any other firm ≤ u) =    n=0     n!
                                                                         [1   − p + pG(u)]n = e−zp(1−G(u))


                                                          9
Proposition 2 If V 00 ≤ 0, and leisure and consumption are normal goods, then equilibrium salary

is declining in hours worked.

      Proof. See Appendix.


      The intuition for this result can be understood by considering the dual of the profit-maximization

problem in the case of a linear production function V (h) = vh:



                                         max u(S, h) s.t. vh − S = π ∗
                                          S,h



This is just the standard consumer demand problem with v playing the role of the wage (or price

of h) and −π ∗ being the nonlabor income. Therefore if both consumption and leisure are normal,
dS               dh                                                dS
dπ∗   < 0 and   dπ ∗   > 0, so that along the contract curve       dh   < 0.

      Note that from the perspective of the market-clearing model, a downward-sloping salary/hours

locus is anomalous. To “explain” it, one would need to argue that labor supply is, in fact,

negatively sloped and that the lower wages among long hour workers arose not because of diﬀerent

choices by equally productive workers but because less productive workers were choosing longer

hours. In our model, even identical workers get jobs with diﬀering utility levels. Assuming that

leisure and consumption are normal implies that higher utility jobs have higher salaries and lower

hours; hence, in equilibrium, there is a negative relation between the two.

      If the conditions of the above proposition do not hold, it is possible to construct examples

in which the salary/hours locus is positively sloped. For example, with a convex V (h) = vha ,

a > 1, and for the utility function u(S, h) = ln S + b(T − h), the eﬃcient-oﬀer condition (2) gives

avha−1 = bS, which is an upward-sloping salary/hours profile.6

      In the case of a = 1, all jobs oﬀer the same salary and vary only with respect to the hours

   6
     In this case, assumption 2.1 is satisfied in the range where vha > S i.e. in the range where profits are positive.
In this example, we have assumed a utility function in which consumption-choice is independent of income and the
marginal productivity of work is increasing in hours. Even if consumption were a normal good, but its derivative
with respect to income small enough, we would still get an upward-sloping salary/hours profile.


                                                          10
required. Clearly jobs oﬀering lower hours are preferred to those with higher hours. It is straight-

forward to show that in this case all workers would prefer to work fewer hours at their usual

hourly wage S/h. More generally, one can show that whether a worker would prefer to work more

or less at her (implicitly specified) hourly wage than that specified in the oﬀer, depends on the

comparison between the wage and her marginal product of work; the worker would prefer to work

fewer (more) hours if her hourly-wage S/h is less (greater) than V 0 (h). Hence, in the case of a

linear production function, all workers would report a preference for shorter work-hours.

      It is also possible to mimic a perfectly inelastic labor supply curve by considering a utility

function that is linear in S. For example, with u(S, h) = S + b ln(T − h), V (h) = vh, the eﬃcient-
                                        b
oﬀer condition (2) gives v =          T −h .   All jobs now specify the same number of hours, but diﬀer in

their salaries. In this case, the contract curve is vertical because leisure is not a normal good. We

can again obtain an upward sloping salary/hours profile if the income elasticity of the demand

for leisure is small but positive and V 00 > 0.

      The result that once frictions are incorporated into the labor market, salaries need not be

compensating does not seem to rely on the Butters mechanism and is likely to generalize to other

search models which generate endogenously a dispersion of jobs diﬀering in utility levels. Even in

models where the compensation is determined after a match is formed, either due to the realization

of some match-specific productivity and/or a stochastic bargaining parameter, lucky workers will

bargain to receive part of their higher compensation in the form of higher wages and part in the

form of more pleasant working conditions, yielding results analogous to our model.7

      Since the equilibrium produces a range of utilities, it is natural to ask whether it is possible

to increase worker welfare by restricting the set of oﬀers that firms can make. The following

proposition shows that restricting the nature of oﬀers must be welfare reducing if the constrained

equilibrium is also symmetric and has a continuous utility distribution with no mass points.


  7
      We are grateful to a referee for suggesting this to us.


                                                           11
Proposition 3 Consider a symmetric equilibrium when firms are restricted on the (S, h) pairs

that they can oﬀer. If the equilibrium utility distribution under the restriction does not contain

any mass points, then it cannot have higher welfare or lower unemployment than the symmetric

equilibrium in the unrestricted case.


   Proof. Let π R (u∗ ) be the profit at utility level u∗ under the set of restrictions. Then if this

utility level is oﬀered both in the presence and absence of restrictions, the probability that the

oﬀer is accepted is
                                              1       1
                                P (u∗ ) =          ≤ R ∗ = P R (u∗ )
                                            e(u∗ )
                                            π       π (u )

                                          e(u) is the highest level of profit that can be attained
The inequality follows from the fact that π

when the worker receives utility level u. Since the utility distribution (both with and without

restrictions) contains no mass points and the equilibrium is symmetric, this implies that the prob-

ability that the worker receives an oﬀer of utility exceeding u∗ is no higher under the restriction.

Further, in the unrestricted equilibrium, all utilities between ur and umax are in the support;

therefore, there cannot be a utility level that is oﬀered in the restricted equilibrium but not in

the unrestricted equilibrium. Thus, the utility distribution in the unrestricted case first-order

stochastically dominates that under restrictions.

   Finally, suppose a utility level u0 is oﬀered in the unrestricted equilibrium but not in the

restricted equilibrium. Let u00 be the lowest utility level above u0 oﬀered in both equilibria. Since

we know that the probability of u00 or better being oﬀered is no higher in the restricted equilibrium,

the probability of u0 or better being oﬀered must be strictly lower. Applying these arguments to

u∗ = ur establishes the result for unemployment.

   Proposition 3 falls short of establishing that the unrestricted equilibrium is eﬃcient for two

reasons. First, the restricted equilibrium need not be free of mass points. Restrictions that create




                                                  12
mass points may be welfare improving even if compensation is unidimensional.8 In our model,

for mass points to exist in equilibrium, firms must be unable to increase utility infinitesimally in

order to obtain a discrete increase in the probability of their oﬀer being accepted. This requires,

in turn, that policy must either constrain the utilities associated with oﬀers directly or simulta-

neously constrain hours and salary by establishing minimum hours and maximum salary. Such

policies are not particularly relevant to the policy debate. Most policy proposals involve setting

a minimum wage but leaving hours unconstrained, or setting maximum hours but leaving salary

unconstrained.

       Second, as discussed in a related model by Lang and Rosenthal (1991), if the government is

able to reduce the number of firms participating in the labor market, it can increase welfare. In the

context of our model, this can be seen as follows: suppose the number of firms in the labor market

is N (thus it is a departure from our assumption of a stochastic number of firms); then the equilib-
                                                                                                   N
                                                                                   1 N −1
rium cumulative distribution function for utility levels is given by: P (u) = [ πe (u) ]  . Now, as N

decreases, the utility distribution becomes better in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance.

Thus regulations that force some firms to be inactive could lead to welfare improvements.

       Thus proposition 3 is quite restrictive. It rules out policies that create mass points in the oﬀer

distribution and policies that restrict the number of competitors. Nevertheless, the proposition

creates a presumption in favor of laissez-faire. Many policies designed to change firms’ oﬀers will

be welfare-reducing. As we will see, even this restricted result does not hold when workers have

heterogeneous tastes.

   8
    Suppose that v = 10, the cost of making an oﬀer is 1 and that there are exactly two firms making only wage-
oﬀers. Here the number of firms is nonstochastic, but it maintains the spirit of the model. Setting the reservation
wage equal to 0 gives the result that in the unrestricted equilibrium, each firm’s oﬀer distribution is given by
            1
P (w) = 10−w   , w ∈ [0, 9]. The expected wage is 8.1. Suppose that firms were now restricted to make oﬀers of no
              2
more than 8 11   . It is readily confirmed that each firm making an oﬀer of the highest wage with probability 0.9 is
                                                                                               2
an equilibrium in the restricted game. The probability that a worker gets a wage oﬀer of 8 11    is 0.99, which would
also give an expected wage of 8.1. However, the utility distribution under restriction second-order stochastically
dominates that under no restriction; therefore, for utility functions concave in the wage, workers are better oﬀ under
the restriction.




                                                         13
3    Discrimination

We now consider the implications of our model when workers can diﬀer in their taste for the job

characteristic. For simplicity we assume that jobs can be of two types i ∈ {0, 1}. Following Rosen

(1986), we term them “dirty” (i = 1) and “clean” (i = 0). Instead of a literal reference to the

job-environment, “dirty” and “clean” may also refer to long- and short-hour jobs respectively, or

to jobs with or without physical exertion, for example.

    There are two types of workers, m and f, with preferences given by Φ(S) − iΨj , j = m, f ;

Φ0 > 0, Φ00 < 0. With a slight abuse of notation, we take Ψj = j, with f > m. Although not

completely general, this utility function captures two essential features of the model: one group

dislikes dirty jobs more than the other, but for a suﬃcient compensating diﬀerential each would

be willing to take a dirty job. All workers are equally productive, with productivity v at clean

jobs and v + δ at dirty jobs. The fraction of f - and m-types in the population are assumed to be

known to all firms. In this section, we study the case when firms can identify the type of a worker

and make type-contingent oﬀers.

    As a benchmark, consider first the equilibrium in Rosen’s implicit market model. There will be

separate wages for clean and dirty jobs with a single equilibrium wage in each market. Depending

on the parameters v, v + δ (which are the possible equilibrium wages in the two markets) and

Ψf , Ψm , either each group will be in a diﬀerent type of job or all workers from both groups will

have the same job characteristic. In the interesting case where type f workers are employed in

clean jobs and type m workers are employed in dirty jobs, the wage diﬀerential between dirty and

clean jobs will be δ. If two demographic groups have diﬀerent proportions of type m’s and type

f ’s, the one with a higher proportion of m’s will have a higher wage. However, conditional on

the type of job in which they are employed, there is no wage diﬀerence between the two groups.

Additionally, the equilibrium is eﬃcient.




                                                14
3.1      Search Equilibrium

When firms can identify the type of the worker and make diﬀerent oﬀers to the two types, the

equilibrium for each worker group is a simple extension of the case in section 2, now allowing for

a discrete job characteristic. As before, the equilibrium consists of a continuous distribution of

utilities, ranging from the reservation utility level up to a maximum. We state without proof the

nature of equilibrium in this case.


Claim 1 Let urj denote the reservation utility level for a type j worker. If dirty jobs are more

profitable when the lowest possible wages are paid i.e.



(3)                               v + δ − Φ−1 (urj + Ψj ) > v − Φ−1 (urj )



then the lowest utility oﬀer for group j specifies a dirty job.

      If workers prefer clean jobs when the highest possible wages are paid i.e.



(4)                                   Φ(v − c) > Φ(v + δ − c) − Ψj ,



then the highest utility oﬀer for group j specifies a clean job.

      If both (3) and (4) hold, then all oﬀers above some cut-oﬀ utility level u∗j specify that i = 0

and all oﬀers below u∗j specify that i = 1.

      u∗j is given by the equation: v + δ − Φ−1 (u∗j + Ψj ) = v − Φ−1 (u∗j ).

      u∗j is nondecreasing with respect to δ, and u∗m > u∗f .



      If workers are too averse to dirty work, there will be no dirty jobs oﬀered in equilibrium while

if they are insuﬃciently averse, there will be no clean jobs. Conditions (3) and (4) together ensure

that both types of jobs exist in equilibrium. Given our assumption that Φ is concave, the best



                                                     15
              uf              i = 0, um= uf
                                                        uf          i = 0, um= uf



                                         i = 1,                                 i = 1,
                                     um= uf + f - m                         um= uf + f - m

                                                        uf*

                                                        ufr
                             umr   um*        um                                      um

                             (a)                                     (b)


                   Figure 2: Equilibrium distribution for (a) m types, (b) f types.


(i.e. highest utility) oﬀers will involve a clean job and pay a relatively high salary. Marginally less

attractive jobs will pay a lower salary but still be clean. As we go down the utility distribution,

at some point u∗j , it becomes eﬃcient to switch to oﬀering a dirty job. Since utility is continuous,

this jump to the discretely worse job characteristic must be accompanied by an upward jump in

the salary oﬀer (this diﬀerence depends on the value of δ and j). As the utility oﬀered by the

firm falls beyond u∗j , it continues to oﬀer a dirty job and lowers the salary level. Depending on

the value of δ and j, dirty jobs may pay, on average, more or less than clean jobs. Thus there

need not be a compensating diﬀerential for clean jobs, but in contrast with the continuous case,

a compensating diﬀerential is not ruled out.

   Figure 2(a) depicts the equilibrium for the m-type workers. Note that a job-oﬀer with salary

S and characteristic i will give an m-type worker utility um = Φ(S) − im and an f -type worker

utility uf = Φ(S) − if = um − i(f − m). Hence, we can equivalently characterize an oﬀer in terms

of the utility it oﬀers to the two types. Since both groups suﬀer no disutility in clean jobs, the

line um = uf in figure 2 represents the clean jobs, with higher levels of utility corresponding to


                                                   16
higher salary jobs. In dirty jobs, the f -type workers suﬀer a greater disutility than the m-types.

This diﬀerence is given by f − m; hence, the dirty jobs are characterized in the figure by the line

uf = um − (f − m). As claim 1 shows, in equilibrium, for utility below u∗j only dirty jobs will be

oﬀered, while those with utility above u∗j will be clean.


3.2   Apparent Discrimination

Under conditions (3) and (4), both groups of workers are found in both types of jobs. The

following proposition compares the conditional wage distribution for the two groups.


Proposition 4 Suppose (3) and (4) hold. Then the expected salary for a type f worker in an

i = 0 job is lower than that for a type m worker. If both types have the same reservation salary

in i = 1 jobs, then the expected salary for a type f worker in a i = 1 job is also lower than that

for a type m worker.


   Proof. See Appendix.

   It is not surprising that type f workers, who will be found disproportionately in the clean

jobs, have lower average wages overall. After all, they are more averse to dirty work and pay a

penalty for being less likely to accept such jobs. Faced with knowledge of this wage diﬀerential, the

empirical researcher could control for working conditions. The proposition states that even with

controls for working conditions, type f workers have lower salaries on average. This result follows

from the fact that for f types, the cut-oﬀ utility below which oﬀers specify that the job is dirty,

will be lower (i.e. u∗f < u∗m ). Therefore, as can be seen from figure 2, the wage distribution for

clean jobs contains a lower tail for group f that is not present for group m. Since the probability

of acceptance must be the same for any oﬀer that is made to both groups, it implies that the

average salary for a type f worker in a clean job is lower than that for a type m in the same kind

of job. Intuitively, on the margin, there is a set of clean jobs with the lowest salaries in which only

type f workers are employed; for the corresponding utility levels, it is more profitable to employ

                                                  17
a type m in a dirty job rather than in a clean one, as their relative aversion to the dirty job is

lower. Hence, even in the absence of any taste for discrimination on the part of employers, the

average wage of type f workers in clean jobs is lower.

        Similarly the wage distribution for dirty jobs contains an upper tail that is not present for

group f, resulting in a higher average salary for a type m worker. However, in the comparison for

the dirty jobs, the assumption that both types have identical reservation salary is important; if

instead, they had the same reservation utilities, then the distribution for the m-types would also

contain a lower tail that would not be present for group f.

        This result on apparent discrimination derives chiefly from the diﬀerence in the cut-oﬀ utility

levels for the two types of workers. It seems likely to hold also in other search models with an

endogenous distribution of jobs, provided workers cannot ex-ante distinguish between firms with

“clean” and “dirty” jobs and accordingly direct their search. For example, in models with match-

specific productivity, a match between a m-type worker and a clean job with a low match-specific

productivity is more likely to be terminated in favor of a dirty job, than a similar match between

a f -type and a clean job; the reasoning here is analogous to our model, thus again leading to a

diﬀerence in average wages between the two types of workers in the same job.



4        Policy Considerations

4.1       Anti-Discrimination Policy

Faced with the evidence of apparent discrimination as seen in the previous section, government

might be tempted to pass legislation prohibiting conditioning oﬀers on the basis of group mem-

bership.9 Given the eﬃciency result for the case of homogeneous workers and the absence of

discriminatory tastes, it may be tempting to conclude that such an anti-discrimination policy

    9
    For example, it may be made illegal for firms to force workers to reveal their type (e.g. sex, marital status) on
their job-applications.


                                                         18
must lower welfare. In fact, we show that the policy can even be Pareto-improving.

       Of course, in some cases such a policy will be Pareto-deteriorating. If, for example, type f ’s

are so averse to dirty jobs that they will never accept one and type m’s are so averse to clean jobs

that they will never accept one, forcing firms to oﬀer dirty jobs to f ’s and clean jobs to m’s is not

only pointless but costly since firms must bear the cost of oﬀers they know will not be accepted.

It is also not surprising that there are cases where banning discrimination helps one type and

hurts the other. What is more interesting is that there are cases where eliminating discrimination

can make both types better oﬀ.

       In general, the precise nature of the equilibrium when firms do not know the type of the worker,

is much dependent on parametric specifications.10 In the Appendix (section 6.2), we establish

a set of suﬃcient conditions under which eliminating discrimination lowers the unemployment

rate for both types of workers. Here we limit ourselves to an example. The calculations for this

example are also discussed in the Appendix (section 6.2).


Example 1 Consider the model in section 3 with v = 10, δ = 6, c = 1. Suppose that utility for

m-types is given by um = ln S (so they have no disutility from dirty jobs), while that for f -types is

given by uf = ln S − i ln 4, where i = 1 for dirty jobs and i = 0 for clean jobs. Both type of workers

are in equal proportion, and we assume that both have the same reservation utility ur = −25.

       If firms could condition their oﬀers on the type of the worker, the m-types would be oﬀered

only dirty jobs with salaries ranging from a little above 0 to 15, the unemployment rate among

them would be 6.25%, and they would enjoy an expected utility of 0.803. The f -types would be

oﬀered i = 1 jobs with u ≤ u∗f = ln(2) and i = 0 jobs above it; salaries in the clean jobs would

range from 2 to 9, and in dirty jobs would range from a little above 0 to 8; their unemployment

  10
     The problem now is that the same distribution of job oﬀers is ranked diﬀerently by the two groups; thus, in
calculating the expected profit from making any oﬀer, a firm will have to take into account the relevant probabilities
for attracting each group. Arguments which guarantee continuity in the one-type case do not hold here since a gap
in the utility distribution of one type does not necessarily imply a similar gap in the utility distribution of the other.
Lowering the utility oﬀer to one type may reduce the probability of attracting the other. Thus the equilibrium
distribution may not even be continuous.


                                                           19
rate would be 6.25% and their expected utility would be 0.1897. We note that both unconditionally

as well as conditional on being in a dirty job, f -types would have lower wages than m-types.

   When oﬀers cannot be conditioned on type, the equilibrium is that firms oﬀer some clean

jobs with salaries ranging from 3.6028 to 8.3436 and some dirty jobs with salaries ranging from

8.3436 to 14.4112. The probability that a worker receives an oﬀer of a clean job is 0.74, while the

probability of an oﬀer of a dirty job is 0.79. The lowest utility that an employed m-type gets is

1.28; similarly, the lowest utility enjoyed by an employed f -type is 0.735, while the unemployed of

both types get an utility of −25. The unemployment rate is 5.37%, which is lower than that under

discrimination. Further, expected utility is now 0.97 for m-types and 0.32 for f -types – both

types are better oﬀ than under discrimination.


   Why does eliminating type-contingent oﬀers lower unemployment and make workers better

oﬀ? Intuitively, the equilibrium now has two sets of “good” jobs – the jobs of type 1 are primarily

for the m-types, while those of type 0 have a higher probability of attracting the f -types. Now

the two types of workers exert an externality on each other – the presence of m-types makes

it possible for unlucky f -types to get jobs aimed at m-types but which are nevertheless more

attractive than the jobs designed to capture only very unlucky f -types. The presence of the

f -types has a similar beneficial eﬀect for the m-types.

   Thus, in contrast with the homogeneous worker case, the distribution of utilities (for both

types of workers) after restricting firms to type-independent strategies is not strictly first-order

stochastically dominated by that under no restriction. Outlawing discrimination makes the least

desirable outcomes (unemployment) less likely but it also eliminates the most desirable outcomes

for each group. In the above example, the highest wage in clean jobs drops from 9 to 8.34 and

the highest wage in dirty jobs drops from 15 to 14.4.

   It is not possible to establish a general set of conditions suﬃcient to ensure that outlawing

discrimination raises the expected utility of both types. The reason is that while the equilibrium

                                                 20
is invariant to any monotonic transformations of the utility functions (provided of course that the

reservation utilities are also adjusted appropriately), the expected utility change depends on the

cardinality of the utility function. Thus if we use a social welfare function that depends on the

expected utility of the participants, the welfare analysis of the policy change cannot be resolved

only by examining the income distribution and unemployment rate. We must actually know each

individual’s utility function. This result will also arise in our other policy discussions. We believe

that it casts light on the Fuchs et. al. (1998) finding that policy diﬀerences among economists

reflect diﬀerences in values rather than diﬀerences in scientific judgment, a point to which we

return in the conclusion.

Labor Market Segmentation

Another interesting feature of the example above is that in both clean and dirty jobs, all job-oﬀers

involved a strictly higher utility than the reservation utility level. This suggests that there could

be a second segment of the market (a secondary labor market) with utility substantially below that

received by workers in the first segment (primary labor market). In the above example, there is no

secondary labor market (and all employed workers are discretely better oﬀ than the unemployed

workers) because the externality imposed by the presence of each type on the other makes the

resulting unemployment rate suﬃciently low so as to make all lower utility oﬀers unprofitable.

However with a slight modification, a secondary labor market may arise.

   Suppose all parameters are identical to example 1 except that δ = 2. Equilibrium salaries in

the primary sector now range from 2.5757 to 8.6761 for clean jobs, and from 8.6761 to 10.303 in

dirty jobs. There is however also a secondary sector of dirty jobs with low salaries ranging from

a little above 0 to 1.0181. Both types of workers work in both types of jobs.




                                                 21
4.2   Regulating working conditions

The prototypical argument between an economist and an advocate for regulating working condi-

tions goes perhaps as follows. The advocate argues that no worker should be subject to such bad

working conditions. The economist argues that workers in bad working conditions have “chosen

these jobs”. The noneconomist counters that the workers “had no choice”. The economist re-

sponds that eliminating “bad jobs” will not increase the workers’ choice. At best, the regulation

will reduce the number of jobs; at worst it will eliminate any choice for some types of workers.

   The example below should give both parties cause for hesitation. When firms cannot diﬀer-

entiate between worker types, a total ban on one type of job can also have the eﬀect of lowering

the overall unemployment rate.


Example 2 We consider the same parameters as in example 1, but now the reservation utility

for the f -types is taken to be urf = ln(7), which is greater than u∗f = ln(2). If firms are not able to

diﬀerentiate between the two types of workers, the equilibrium will now consist of some clean jobs

with utility levels ranging from urf to ln(8.4), and some dirty jobs with um ∈ [ln(8.4), ln(14)] and

um ∈ [urm , ln(1.6)]. The dirty jobs will attract only the m-types, while the clean jobs attract both

types (but have a higher probability of attracting a type f , rather than a type m worker). In this

case, the unemployment rate among f -types will be 0.5275, while that among m-types is 0.125.

   Now if dirty jobs are completely banned, then only clean jobs will be oﬀered. Those clean

jobs which are above the reservation utility level of the f -types now have the same probability

of attracting both the types; hence the unemployment rate for the f -types falls to 0.33. For the

m-types however, the lowest utility jobs are now of the clean type. Therefore, their unemployment

rate rises to 0.2. Overall, the unemployment rate drops from 0.3265 to 0.265.


   As the economist argued, eliminating dirty jobs hurts workers who would have accepted one.

However, by increasing the likelihood that a low-wage clean job will be accepted, the ban on dirty


                                                  22
jobs increases the availability of clean jobs as the advocate for regulation argued, making the

type f workers better oﬀ. The outcome can be a reduction in overall unemployment. In terms of

utility, the two situations are not Pareto-rankable. The expected utility for the f -types increases

due to the regulation, while that for the m-types falls.

   Whether or not the intuition in the above two examples generalizes to other matching models

in which wages are determined through bargaining and/or match-specific productivity, we leave

for future work. Speculatively, within a Mortensen-Pissarides multi-sector model, restrictions on

bargaining might reduce the surplus in one sector and encourage increased opening of vacancies

and job search in another, thus aiding one type of worker and harming the other type.


4.3   Minimum Wages

The previous section demonstrated that restricting job conditions can have important distribu-

tional consequences. Requiring that all jobs be clean helps workers with a strong preference for

“cleanliness” and hurts those less adverse to “dirt.” In a sense, this is not a surprising result, but

it does not arise naturally in the implicit market model.

   In this section, we use an example with a continuous job characteristic to demonstrate a more

surprising possibility – regulating working conditions can raise the expected utility of all workers.

In our example, establishing a minimum wage makes all workers better oﬀ ex-ante even though

it slightly increases unemployment.

   We consider the following baseline model: there are two types of workers, A and B, with utility

functions over salary S and hours h given by UA (S, h) = ln S −0.025h and UB (S, h) = ln S −0.05h.

The production function is taken to be V (h) = 5h, and the cost of making an oﬀer is 1. We take

urA = 4, urB = 3, and assume that there are equal proportions of A and B types. We find the

equilibrium numerically (details available from the authors).

   Our results reveal several interesting features of the equilibrium distribution. First, the support



                                                 23
                                     5




                                    4.8




                               w
                                    4.6




                                    4.4
                                          20             30               40
                                                              h




                               Figure 3: Wages & Hours - Baseline Model


of the utility distribution ranges from 4.07 to 4.29 for the type As and from 3.19 to 3.58 for the

type Bs. Although there is unemployment in equilibrium, it is not profitable to make any oﬀer at

the reservation utility of either type. In other words, all employed workers are discretely better oﬀ

than the unemployed workers (who earn the reservation utility level). This, in turn, implies that if

we lowered the workers’ reservation utilities suﬃciently, the example would generate a dual labor

market. Second, the oﬀer density is peaked at the highest utility oﬀer for each type. Intermediate

oﬀers are relatively rare. Third, although with homogeneous workers the salary/hours locus is flat,

with heterogeneous workers it is upward-sloping – longer hours are now associated with higher

salaries. Salary ranges from 99.93 to 199.47 and the hours range from 20.6 to 42.2.11 Finally, as

shown in Figure 3 the wage/hours locus is U-shaped with an additional downward segment at the

high end of the hours distribution.

       We can replicate the principal results that we obtained with the dichotomous job characteristic:

there is apparent discrimination when oﬀers can be conditioned on the worker’s type; forcing oﬀers

to be type-independent can lower unemployment and increase expected utility of both types; there

can be a dual labor market, and restrictions on hours can make one type better oﬀ at the expense

of the other. These results are available from the authors on request.

  11
    Since the equilibrium must lie between the contract curves for the two types, salary must lie between 100 and
200. Although we did not impose this restriction, it is closely matched by the algorithm.


                                                       24
   We now consider the eﬀect of imposing a minimum hourly wage of 4.65. We chose this value

because it impacts a small but nontrivial fraction of jobs. In the equilibrium of figure 3, 9.3% of

type As and 15.7% of type Bs or about 12.5% overall, earn less than 4.65/hour. Since workers

with wages below 4.65 have intermediate hour jobs (they work between 25.3 and 35.4 hours), we

anticipate that imposing this constraint will move job oﬀers away from more intermediate hours

and towards the extremes. This is, in fact, what happens.

   With a minimum wage, there is an increase in the likelihood of workers getting jobs oﬀering

them very high utility (close to the hours they desire) or oﬀering them low utility (close to the

hours desired by the other type) or to be left unemployed; they are now less likely to get jobs

oﬀering an intermediate level of utility.

   As a consequence, a minimum wage law can raise or lower expected utility for each type of

worker. As discussed in section 4.1, since neither distribution first-order stochastically dominates

the other, there will be monotonic transformations of each utility function giving rise to either

conclusion.

   We also note that despite the fact that in the unconstrained model, a large fraction of workers

earn less than the minimum wage, the impact of the policy experiment on unemployment is

small. There are two reasons for this limited impact. First, as in a standard market-clearing

model, firms shift to oﬀering jobs with diﬀerent hours so that not all workers who would have

earned less than the minimum are displaced. Secondly, in the unconstrained equilibrium, many

workers who actually earn less than the minimum also receive oﬀers which pay more than the

minimum but involve an undesirable number of hours of work. In fact, among workers earning

less than 4.65/hour, about 80% of type As and 88% of type Bs receive such oﬀers. It is therefore

not very surprising that the impact of the constraint on unemployment is small.




                                                25
5    Conclusion

The model presented in this paper is a relatively modest departure from existing models in the

literature, notably Butters’ original nonsequential search model but also the closely related work

by Burdett and Mortensen (1998). We have simply modified the Butters model to allow for

multidimensional compensation and heterogeneity in worker tastes. Yet these seemingly minor

innovations generate some surprising results. First, even among homogeneous workers, wage

diﬀerentials between disparate jobs need not be “compensating”. Indeed, as we have shown in

section 2, a positive relation between job quality and earnings is the more natural outcome.

Secondly, when workers diﬀer in terms of their taste for the job-characteristic, there will appear

to be discrimination against the group that is more averse to “dirty” work. Even controlling for

the type of job, this group (who are equally productive) will earn lower wages on average. Now if

firms are unable to condition their oﬀer on the worker’s type, there can be a discontinuity in the

support of the utility distribution; the labor market may exhibit segmentation in the sense that

all workers prefer the jobs in one segment to those in the other. This segmentation is not merely

a separating equilibrium – both types of workers are found in each segment. Further, in some

cases, this segmentation may be extreme enough so that all employed workers are strictly better

oﬀ than the unemployed.

    From a policy perspective, the model shows a limited role for policy interventions in the case

of homogeneous workers. However, with a heterogeneous workforce, there may be a positive role

for policy. Policies designed to limit the set of possible oﬀers either by preventing firms from

diﬀerentiating between diﬀerent types of workers or by limiting the range of compensation and

working conditions may be welfare improving. In some cases the welfare judgment depends on

the relative weighting of diﬀerent types of workers. In others, restrictions may lead to a Pareto

improvement. The model therefore generates a potential justification for such diverse policies as

occupational safety legislation, minimum wage laws and maximum hours laws.

                                                26
    We wish to emphasize that the justification is only potential. Although we have developed

examples in which such laws improve welfare, we have not established that they would be so with

realistic parameter values. Indeed, a more realistic model would require considerably more dimen-

sions of job quality and more worker heterogeneity with respect to both tastes and productivity.

    Perhaps more significantly, the model suggests that the relative merits of policies often cannot

be resolved on the basis of observable eﬀects. In our minimum wage example, it is possible for

everyone to agree on the eﬀect of the policy on unemployment and the wage distribution. However,

whether or not the policy is desirable depends on how we assess the trade-oﬀ between having more

“good” jobs but also more unemployment. In principle, if our objective is to maximize expected

utility, we could resolve this with knowledge of individuals’ utility functions. In practice, our

judgment of the policy will be driven by our values. Thus the model is consistent with the Fuchs

et. al. (1998) report that policy diﬀerences among economists are primarily driven by values, not

scientific disagreements.

    Still, the model emphasizes an important element of policy – many policy decisions influence

the distribution of jobs oﬀered. By increasing the availability of jobs with certain characteristics,

policies favor workers who are most drawn to such jobs. In some cases, whether or not a policy

will be desirable will therefore depend on the social welfare function of the individual evaluating

the policy. In others, the shift in job characteristics may be more clearly beneficial.



6     Appendix

6.1    Proofs of propositions

Proof. of Proposition 2: The equilibrium salary/hours pairs are obtained from equation (2):

uS (S, h)V 0 (h) + uh (S, h) = 0.
                                                 dS       −(uhh +uSh V 0 )−uS V 00
    Diﬀerentiating it completely, we obtain:     dh   =       uSh +uSS V 0         .



                                                 27
   Since leisure is assumed a normal good, then for any wage w, we have: uSh + wuSS < 0.

Similarly, since consumption is assumed to be a normal good, we must have: uhh + wuSh < 0.
                                                                                                                             dS
   Now, using these two inequalities and the assumption that V 00 < 0 proves that                                            dh    < 0 i.e.

that the equilibrium salary is declining in hours worked.

   Proof. of Proposition 4: Denote by π i (u), the profit from a contract involving a job of

type i with utility u for a m-type worker.

   First consider jobs of type 0. For a m-type (f -type) worker, the probability of the best oﬀer
                                                                c                  c
being a job of type 0 is given by 1 −                      π 0 (u∗m )   (1 −   π 0 (u∗f )   respectively). Since u∗m > u∗f , a f -type

worker has a higher chance of her best oﬀer being of type 0. For a f -type worker, the distribution

of salaries S, conditional on her best oﬀer being of a type 0 job, is given by:
                                                     c
                                                         − c
                                                  π 0 (u) π 0 (u∗ )
                 Pf (S ≤       Φ−1 (u))       =            c
                                                     1− π (u ∗
                                                                f
                                                                        for u∗f ≤ u ≤ Φ(v − c)
                                                          0 f)

and Pf (S ≤ Φ−1 (u)) = 0 for u < u∗f and Pf (S ≤ Φ−1 (u)) = 1 for u > Φ(v − c). For a m-type

worker, the corresponding distribution is given by:
                                                     c         c
                                                         −
                                                  π 0 (u) π 0 (u∗
                 Pm (S ≤ Φ−1 (u)) =                        c
                                                     1− π (u∗ )
                                                                 m)
                                                                         for u∗m ≤ u ≤ Φ(v − c)
                                                          0 m

and Pm (S ≤ Φ−1 (u)) = 0 for u < u∗m and Pm (S ≤ Φ−1 (u)) = 1 for u > Φ(v − c).
                 c              c
   Since    π 0 (u∗m )   >   π0 (u∗f ) ,   the salary distribution for m-types in a clean job (i.e. i = 0) first-order

stochastically dominates that for f -types in clean jobs; therefore, the average expected salary for

m-types in type 0 jobs is higher than that of f -types.

   Now, consider jobs of type 1. The probability of the best oﬀer being of a type 1 job for a m-type
                 c           c                                                                                           c            c
worker is   π 1 (u∗m )   − v+δ−S , which is higher than that for a f -type worker viz.                          π 1 (u∗f +f −m)   − v+δ−S ,

as u∗f + f − m < u∗m . Further, for m-type workers, the salaries in dirty jobs will range from S to

Φ−1 (u∗m ), while for f -type workers, they range from S to Φ−1 (u∗m + f − m). For a j-type worker

(j = m, f ), the probability of getting a salary less than or equal to S, conditional on the best
                                                              c
oﬀer being of a type 1 job, is given by                     v+δ−S /(Prob.            that the best oﬀer for a j-type is of a type

1 job). Therefore, the salary-distribution for the m-types in a dirty job first-order stochastically


                                                                         28
dominates that for the f -types, and their average salary in type 1 jobs is higher.


6.2      Equilibrium with indistinguishable types

In the case of a dichotomous job-characteristic i ∈ {0, 1}, it is diﬃcult to derive analytically the

equilibrium when firms cannot distinguish between the two types of workers. We consider the

case when m and f type workers have preferences given by ln(S) − im and ln(S) − if respectively,

the marginal product of a clean job is v while that of a dirty job is v + δ. The proportion of

m and f -types in the population is given by θm and θf respectively. The following proposition

characterizes a particular class of equilibria (and its existence) along with a set of conditions

under which banning discrimination lowers the unemployment rate of both types. For brevity, we

denote F = ef and M = em . The proof is available from the authors on request.


Proposition 5 Suppose

      (i) δ/(M − 1) > v > δ/(F − 1) + c
                    v+δ−c                          M
      (ii) c/[v −     F ]   < θf + θm c/[v + δ −   F (v   + δ − c)]
                                                          M
      (iii) c/[v + δ − M (v − c)] < θm + θf c/[v −        F (v   − c)]
                         δ                                                 v+δ−c
      (iv) c(v + δ − M F −1 ) < [θm c + θf (v + δ − M (v − c)][θm (v −       F ) + θ f c]

      Then, for suﬃciently low reservation utility levels for both the types, the following strategic

profile followed by all firms constitutes a symmetric equilibrium:

      (a) with probability 1 − p − q − t, make no oﬀer.

      (b) with probability p, make an oﬀer of a type 0 job, with utility (for m-types) u ∈ [u2 , u1 ]

according to the distribution G given by:

(5)                         π 0 (u)[θm e−zp(1−G(u))−zq + θf e−zp(1−G(u)) ] = c

      (c) with probability q, make an oﬀer of a type 1 job, with utility (for m-types) u ∈ [u1 , u2 +f −m]

according to the distribution H given by:

(6)                         π 1 (u)[θm e−zq(1−H(u)) + θf e−zq(1−H(u))−zp ] = c

                                                          29
      (d) with probability t, make an oﬀer of a type 1 job, with utility (for m-types) u ∈ [urm , uJ ]

according to the distribution J given by:            e−zp−zq−zt(1−J(u)) π 1 (u) = c.

      u1 , u2 are obtained from the following pair of equations:

(7)                       π 0 (u1 )[θf + θm π1 (uπ21+f −m)
                                                    (u1 )  ]=c

(8)                       π 1 (u2 + f − m)[θm + θf ππ00 (u1)
                                                        (u2 ) ] = c

(9)        p and q are given by : e−zp = π 0 (u1 )/π 0 (u2 )     and   e−zq = π 1 (u2 + f − m)/π 1 (u1 ).

      If e−zp−zq (v + δ − S) ≤ c, then t = 0.

      If not, then t and uJ are given by:       e−zp−zq−zt (v + δ − S) = c      and    e−zp−zq π 1 (uJ ) = c.

      If condition (iv) is replaced by the stronger condition:

                                                                  v+δ−c
      (iv)0 c(v + δ) < [θm c + θf (v + δ − M (v − c)][θm (v −       F ) + θ f c],

      then for low enough reservation utility levels, t = 0. In this equilibrium, the unemployment

rate for both types of workers is lower than that under discrimination.


      Verifying the equilibrium in example 1: Since for m-types, u = ln S, given the parameters

of example 1, we have π 0 (u) = 10−eu and π 1 (u) = 16−eu . Inserting these expressions and ln 4 for

f −m in equations (7) and (8) gives eu1 = 8.3437 and eu2 = 3.6028. Using (9) gives e−zp = 0.2589,

e−zq = 0.2075, and the unemployment rate e−zp−zq = 0.0537. The equilibrium distribution for

the clean and dirty jobs can be obtained from (5) and (6) respectively.

      To verify that this is an equilibrium, we show that no deviation yields positive expected profits.

Any dirty job with utility lower than u2 for both types attracts only the unemployed m and f

types; the expected profit from such an oﬀer is e−zp−zq (16 − eu ) − 1, which is negative even for

eu = 0. Similarly we can rule out clean jobs that attract only the unemployed. Oﬀers below 16 in

dirty jobs or oﬀers below 10 in clean jobs do not attract all workers, so that there is no profitable

oﬀer that attracts all workers. The construction of the equilibrium rules out oﬀers with utility

below u2 in clean jobs or below u1 in dirty jobs. So the only possible remaining deviations are

oﬀers above u1 in clean jobs and oﬀers above u2 in dirty jobs.

                                                       30
   Consider oﬀering a clean job with utility u slightly higher than u1 (the best equilibrium clean

job). This oﬀer attracts all f -types but among m-types faces competition from equilibrium dirty

jobs which oﬀer utility between u and u2 + f − m; thus the probability of attracting an m-type

is e−zq(1−H(u)) , which from (6) is c/π 1 (u)[θm + θf e−zp ] giving expected profit:

   π 0 (u)[θf + θm π1 (u)(θmc+θf e−zp ) ] − c = (10 − eu )(0.5 +          1
                                                                   (16−eu )(1.2589) ) − 1

which is negative for all values of eu between 8.3436 and 16. Similarly we can rule out other

deviations that attract all of one type but only a fraction of the other type.




                                                     31
                                        References

   Altonji, Joseph G. and Christina H. Paxson. “Labor Supply Preferences, Hours Constraints,

and Hours-Wage Trade-Oﬀs.” Journal of Labor Economics 6(2) (1988), 254-76.

   Brown, Charles. “Equalizing Diﬀerences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-

nomics 94 (1980), 113-34.

   Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen. “Wage Diﬀerentials, Employer Size, and Unem-

ployment,” International Economic Review, 39 (1998), 257-73.

   Butters, Gerard R. “Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices.” Review of

Economic Studies 44 (1977), 465-91.

   Fuchs, Victor R., Alan B. Krueger and James M. Poterba. “Economists’ Views about Parame-

ters, Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics,” Journal of Economic

Literature, 36 (1998), 1387-1425.

   Hosios, Arthur J. “Layoﬀs, Recruitment and Interfirm Mobility.” Journal of Labor Economics

4 (1986), 473-502.

   Hwang, Hae-shin, Dale T. Mortensen and W. Robert Reed. “Hedonic Wages and Labor

Market Search.” Journal of Labor Economics 16 (1998), 815-47.

   Lang, Kevin. “Persistent Wage Dispersion and Involuntary Unemployment.” Quarterly Jour-

nal of Economics 106 (1991), 181-202.

   Lang, Kevin and Shulamit Kahn. “Hours Constraints,” in G. Picot and G. Wong, eds.,

Working Time in Comparative Perspective, Volume I (Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute, 2001).

   Lang, Kevin and Robert W. Rosenthal. “The Contractor’s Game.” RAND Journal of Eco-

nomics 22(3) (1991), 329-38.

   Lucas, Robert E.B. “Hedonic Price Functions.” Economic Inquiry 31 (1975), 157-78.

   Mortensen, Dale T. “Equilibrium Unemployment with Wage Posting: Burdett-Mortensen meet

Pissarides,” in H. Bunzel, B.J. Christiansen, P. Jensen, N.M. Kiefer and D.T. Mortensen, eds.,

                                             32
Panel Data and Structural Labor Market Models (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2000).

   Rosen, Sherwin. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Diﬀerentiation in Pure

Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 82 (1974), 34-55.

   Rosen, Sherwin. “The Theory of Equalizing Diﬀerences,” in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard,

eds., Handbook of Labor Economics (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986).

   Sattinger, Michael. “Diﬀerential Rents and the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic

Papers 31 (1979), 60-71.




                                             33
