NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADVERSE SELECTION AND THE CHALLENGES TO
STAND-ALONE PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE
Mark V. Pauly
Yuhui Zeng
Working Paper 9919
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9919
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Mark V. Pauly and Yuhui Zeng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Adverse Selection and the Challenges to Stand-Alone Prescription Drug Insurance
Mark V. Pauly and Yuhui Zeng
NBER Working Paper No. 9919
August 2003
JEL No.G22, I18
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates a possible predictor of adverse selection problems in unsubsidized "standalone" prescription drug insurance: the persistence of an individual's high spending over multiple
years. Using MEDSTAT claims data and data from the Medicare Survey of Current Beneficiaries,
we find that persistence is much higher for outpatient drug expenses than for other categories of
medical expenses. We then use these estimates to develop a simple and intuitive model of adverse
selection in competitive insurance markets and show that this high relative persistence makes it
unlikely that unsubsidized drug insurance can be offered for sale, even with premiums partially risk
adjusted, without a probable adverse selection death spiral. We show that this outcome can be
avoided if drug coverage is bundled with other coverage, and briefly discuss the need either for
comprehensive coverage or generous subsidies if adverse selection is to be avoided in private and
Medicare insurance markets.
Mark V. Pauly
Department of Health Care Systems
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu
Yuhui Zeng
Department of Health Care Systems
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
yuhui72@wharton.upenn.edu

1
Introduction
Providing insurance coverage against expenditures for prescription drugs through
unsubsidized but sometimes regulated private insurance markets has proved to be difficult.
Medigap policies for elderly provide only limited coverage, and are not taken by many of those
over 65. Of those not covered by employer-paid plans, only a small fraction of seniors take a
Medigap policy that pays anything for drugs. For people under age 65, drug-only coverage is
virtually unavailable, and some managed care insurers are putting upper limits on the bundled
coverage they do offer. In this paper, we use novel methods applied to claims data to show that
adverse selection is an important cause of the absence of or limits to stand-alone drug coverage
for both populations.
We further argue that private markets without substantial subsidies will not be able to
offer stand-alone drug coverage. This means, we will show, that such coverage is neither to be
expected nor desired for the under-65 population; the more integrated coverage that characterizes
managed care may therefore be more feasible than a return to the old “Blue” system in which
each type of provider fielded a separate type of insurance. We also show that Medicare policy
makers should likewise be cognizant of the chance of adverse selection for stand alone coverage.
If stand alone coverage is infeasible for the under-65 population, as we show, that analysis also
provides evidence that it is also likely (perhaps even more likely) to be infeasible for the over-65
population. Moreover, examination of adverse selection in the under-65 market is of interest in
its own right, both as a test of the general hypothesis that unsubsidized unbundled coverage is
infeasible, and as a warning that such coverage is neither to be encouraged nor expected.
We then go further to develop a method to show what type of bundling and/or what types
and levels of subsidies would be needed to make voluntary drug coverage (public or private)

2
viable. We illustrate these methods with data for both the under-65 and the Medicare
populations.

Adverse Selection in Concept and Application to Prescription Drugs

A potential threat to the efficiency and even the feasibility of unsubsidized private market
insurance coverage for any expense is adverse selection. Adverse selection occurs when
potential insurance buyers are better able to predict their expected benefits from insurance than
are insurers, or when insurers are forbidden to charge higher premiums to those they expect to
claim higher benefits. Such special buyer knowledge, should it occur, can have many causes, but
adverse selection by new health insurance purchasers is surely more likely if there are health
conditions known to the buyer for which above-average expenditures will persist over time
(Crippen 2002).
If the insurer is not as well informed as is the buyer about the existence of these
conditions, or is not permitted to charge higher premiums to those expected to have higher
expenses, a buyer with high and persistent expenditures in one period will be eager to obtain
generous insurance coverage of that type of expenditure for the next period at premiums that do
not fully reflect the higher expected benefits. Similarly, those with low expected expenses will
be less willing to pay insurance premiums that substantially exceed their expected claims.
While insurers may ask applicants about prior period spending, it will be difficult for
them to enforce truthful revelation for prospective purchasers they have not previously insured
and for whom they have no prior claims data. Community rating rules may prevent them from
gathering or using that information. Since group insurance typically does not vary the premiums

3
with risk across options, and since Medicare itself is likely to use a uniform premium for any
drug coverage option, in what follows we usually assume pure community rating. We do,
however, inquire whether using adjusted community rating (adjusting premiums for age and sex)
would make a difference, and find that it would not. In summary, adverse selection in the sale of
new coverage is likely to be a more serious problem, other things equal, for conditions and
medical product expenditures that persist over time than for conditions and product expenses
which are a “bolt from the blue” and generally resolve fairly quickly (by patient recovery or
death).
Another vehicle used by buyers to engage in adverse selection when consumers can
choose among different health plans (in individual or group markets) is an ability to select the
details of coverage for various types of expenses. Most generally, it is easier for buyers to
engage in adverse selection if they can pick and choose amounts and types of coverage, rather
than take or leave a predetermined broad-based policy. If a person knows that he or she had high
previous period medical expenses on certain medical goods or services, adverse selection is
enhanced by the ability to choose coverage that only (or primarily) covers these costs.
We therefore investigated the persistence over time of high levels of spending for a type
of medical care that is often a candidate for selective coverage: outpatient prescription drug
expense. The problem of adverse selection is thought to be especially acute in individually
chosen, unsubsidized, but regulated and partially community-rated Medigap drug coverage. The
failure of basic Medicare to cover outpatient drugs has meant that seniors with incomes above
the Medicaid limits seeking such coverage must do so largely in the currently-unsubsidized
private market, either in the form of supplementary Medigap coverage or a managed care plan
with such coverage. For the under-65 population, there is at present much less stand-alone drug

4
coverage than in Medicare (probably for the reasons we identify), but the extent of coverage can
vary across the options available to employees in larger firms or to purchasers in the individual
market.
While there are a number of sources of data for prescription drug benefits for both under65 and Medicare populations, because we wanted to investigate the effect of combining or
“bundling” drug coverage with other coverage, this study required information on a population’s
use of benefits for all covered medical services as well as for drugs. Because we wanted to
examine persistence over a reasonably long period of time, we wanted data that covered multiple
years. We therefore examined two sets of data: (1) a large sample of claims data for drugs and
other kinds of medical spending for a working age population and (2) data on Medicare
beneficiaries from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS). We also used a subanalysis of workers in the five years before Medicare eligibility at age 65, to show that the
problem of persistence in spending is worse for them than for younger adults because the extent
of and prevalence of persistent expenditures increases with age.
The key issue in predicting the extent of adverse selection is the distribution of expected
expenses in a population charged a uniform insurance premium. We propose a simple method to
estimate this distribution, and to use this estimate along with an assumption about the strength of
risk aversion to see how likely it is that adverse selection will emerge.
Our research differs from that presently available in several ways. There have been some
studies of the persistence of drug spending from one year to the following year only (Ettner
1997; Long 1994; van Vliet 1992; Wouters, 1991, Coulson and Stuart, 1992), but we follow
spending over periods of three to five years. There have been some studies that looked at long
term persistence for total medical care spending (Eichner et al., 1998), but none that explored the

5
category of drug spending. There have also been some studies that looked at adverse selection
(and moral hazard) in the Medigap market as a whole (Wolfe and Goddeeris, 1991). They used
sophisticated (but rather fragile) econometric methods, to determine adverse selection and
separate it from moral hazard. They also did not look at drug spending and drug coverage
specifically. In contrast, we use a different method based on direct estimation of the distribution
of risks to judge the likelihood of adverse selection, and do apply that method to drug coverage
as well as comprehensive coverage. The recent study by Atherly (2002) is closest to ours in
looking at adverse selection into Medigap drug coverage, but it does not consider more
comprehensive drug coverage or stand-alone drug coverage.

Methods

We first explore the relative importance of persistence in prescription drug expenditures
compared to other expenditures. To show the impact of persistence and selective coverage on
adverse selection, we then take the analysis two steps further. In the first step, we simulate the
equilibrium premiums in insurance markets for drug coverage alone, and for comprehensive (all
medical services) coverage. We show that adverse selection under community rating or with
some risk rating is much worse in the former case than in the latter, in two senses. First, the ratio
of the market equilibrium premium to the premium that would have prevailed if all (risk averse)
people bought coverage is higher for unsubsidized stand-alone drug insurance than for
comprehensive coverage: because of the widely skewed distribution of expected expenses, low
risk people would need to pay proportionately much more than their average expenses. Even
fairly risk averse people at the median risk level would be unlikely to be willing to pay the

6
premiums insurers must charge to cover their costs. Second, the risk premium is smaller for
stand-alone drug coverage than for comprehensive coverage, precisely because drug expenses
are so predictable. Indeed, for many plausible values of consumer risk premia and some
plausible assumptions about insurer premium rating, we show that it is impossible to offer standalone drug insurance at premiums that will cover its costs; there is a death spiral for unsubsidized
insurance.
In the second step, we illustrate the level of subsidies that would be needed to make
stand-alone coverage viable. We then offer some observations on the policy tradeoffs, for both
Medicare and the private sector, between subsidies and “bundling” of coverage.
Our initial analysis is based on claims data provided by the MEDSTAT Group for a large
sample of workers and adult dependents with comprehensive insurance that covered prescription
drugs over a five-year-period from 1994 to 1998 inclusive. We use this data set to develop
estimates of adverse selection in unsubsidized insurance for the under-65 population; the large
size of this data base allows us to examine the impact of several variants of the basic model. We
then use the validated basic model to analyze adverse selection in the smaller MCBS data set.
The high consistency of results across both data sets reinforces our confidence in the results.

Data and Descriptive Statistics: MEDSTAT under-65 data

We followed the MEDSTAT claims and benefits expenditure experience of those persons
who retained coverage over the entire period. (We also looked at those who were in the database
for shorter periods of time, but their experience is not described here.) We do not know the
details of each person’s coverage but the plans are known to be similar in terms of coverage.

7
Our results could be biased if people who remained with these plans over a five-year period were
those with unusually high drug expenses. However, since the coverage for this population is
employment-based coverage chosen by and for a group of workers, not an individual worker, and
since, as noted, stand-alone drug coverage is not generally available in groups, we think the bias
should be small. We did not include data on people who died. But the data still provides valid
measures from the viewpoint of the surviving population which might purchase insurance.
Following Eichner, et al. (1998), we first describe persistence by asking what happened
over time to the (relative) expenditure levels for various categories of expenditures of those who
had unusually high expenses in the first period (1994). We characterize high spenders in 1994 in
two ways—as being in the top quintile of 1994 expenses, and as spending more than $5000.
(Those with zero expenditures are included in the population.)
There were 140,981 persons between the ages of 22 and 64 in 1998 who had continuous
medical and pharmacy coverage for the period 1994-1998.2 As shown in Table 1, of those in the
top quintile of total spending in 1994, only 46 percent remained in that quintile by 1998. The
largest decline occurred in the first year, with a more gradual erosion later.
Table 1 also shows the percentages remaining in the top quintile for drug expenditures
only and for total expenditures minus drug expenditures. By this measure, persistence is
definitely higher for drug expenditures; 60% remained in the top drug spending quintile in 1998,
while only 40 percent remained in the top quintile for expenditures other than drugs.
Table 2 shows the percent of those with expenses above $5000 who also had expenses
above that level in the next year (a measure used by Eichner, et al. (1998)). Persistence tends to
rise with age, and our figures are very close to those in the Eichner study.

8
We next calculated, for each of the expenditure categories, the ratio of the average
expenditure in each year of those who were in the top quintile in 1994 to the average expenditure
for the entire population in that year. The higher this number, the more likely is adverse
selection. As shown in Table 3, the ratio between the average or expected expenses of high
spenders and the community (average) rate is virtually identical in the initial year (1994) for the
two categories of spending but, in all subsequent years, is considerably higher for drug spending
only than for total spending. This indicates that, in any single time period, drug expenditures
display about the same amount of skewedness as other medical expenditures. The major
difference is that, in subsequent periods, those with unusually high drug expenses are much more
likely to repeat that high spending than those initially with high spending in other categories.
The level of drug expected expenses is much more predictable for an individual than is the level
of other expenses.

Potential Adverse Selection in the MEDSTAT Data

To determine the potential seriousness of adverse selection for different types or
combinations of types, we and whether it might be serious enough to cause a “death spiral,” we
used a simulation model. Under the assumption that the person must either buy the indicated
coverage or none at all, we assume various levels of risk aversion and estimate what proportion
of consumers will continue to buy coverage, and what the average expense of those willing to
buy will be. For the present, we also ignore moral hazard, and assume the level of expense that
insurance will cover is the same as the expense the person who declines coverage would pay outof-pocket.

9
We approach this problem in two ways, which we label “statistical” and “economic.” In
both cases we focus on predicting 1998 expenses. The methods differ in the technique used to
estimate the expected expense for each person. In the statistical (or actuarial) approach, people
are classified into cells based on age, gender, and prior spending. The cell mean expense in 1997
is used as an estimate of expected expense in 1998; this approach only explores persistence over
a two year period. In the economic approach, in contrast, a regression relating expenses in 1998
to age, gender, and expense in the previous four years is used to generate expected expense in the
last year both for drug spending and for spending on other types of inpatient and outpatient
medical care.3
This expected expense (estimated under either method) compared to actual expense
generates an estimate of the variance of expenses, which is combined with an assumed uniform
risk aversion coefficient to generate a value for the risk premium (Phelps 2003). The same
approach to estimating the risk premium is used in both the statistical and economics methods;
the methods differ in how they generate estimates of the variance in spending for individuals.
Note that the more predictable the expense, the lower the variance and therefore the lower the
buyer risk premium (and the more likely adverse selection, other things equal). Adding the risk
premium to the expected expense yields a “reservation price” for full insurance coverage for a
given type of expense for each person. If the reservation price for a person at a given risk level
is less than the insurance premium that would be charged, we assume that the person declines
coverage. (Allowing the risk aversion coefficient to vary across individuals (for a given value of
the variance of spending) would not alter the results as long as it is not correlated with expected
expense or variance.)

10
The key step then is to determine, for a given “policy” (described by full coverage of the
batch of covered expenses: all expenses; all expenses less drug spending; drug spending only)
whether there is a stable equilibrium or whether there is a “spiral” that drives some or all
potential insureds at a given risk level out of the market. That is, we ask what proportion of the
initial population would be willing to pay the premium a (hypothetical actuarially fair) insurer
would have to charge to cover their expenses.4
We consider full coverage insurance without patient cost sharing, and initially ignore
moral hazard. We also ignore insurer administrative costs and initially assume that the insurance
premium must be strictly community rated but sufficient to cover benefits costs, so that the
premium charged for a policy offered to a given set of people is the average expected expense
for people in that set. Offering that policy at that premium is then a potential equilibrium if each
person in the set has a reservation price for insurance that equals or exceeds the insurance
premium. For example, one could begin with the question of whether the community rated
premium is below the reservation price of the people in the lowest percentile of expected
expenses in the set. If the reservation price falls short of the premium for some of the lower risk
percentiles, we then delete those persons from the data set, recompute the breakeven premium,
and check to see if it is below the reservation price of the lowest risk percentile remaining.
Finally, as mentioned above, we assume pure community rating unless explicitly noted
otherwise.

A Simple “Statistical” Model

11
We wish to illustrate how adverse selection is related to the degree of persistence of
spending over time and the relative importance of that influence on expected expense. We begin
with a simple benchmark model that gives maximum influence to previous period spending.
We first classify the 141,000 observations on adults by age and gender into 18 cells and,
within each age-gender cell, by deciles of 1997 spending. Using the population represented by
all of the observations that fell in a decile in 1997, we calculate the mean 1998 expense for that
population. We then assume, for each decile age-gender cell, that this quantity is the estimate of
expected expense for everyone in the cell.5 (We have also estimated models with disaggregation
into unit percentiles with similar results.) That is we assume that consumers used this realized
mean as their estimate of expenses they expect in 1998 (To the extent that individual consumers
use more information than we have assumed, adverse selection will be even worse.) We also
assume that the variance of within-cell spending about the cell mean provides an estimate (used
by consumers in that cell) of the “expected variance” of spending for individuals in each cell.
To calculate the risk premium, we must make an assumption about risk aversion. We
use various assumed values for the “coefficient of risk aversion” (Phelps 2003). If, for example,
we use a coefficient of risk aversion of 0.0002, we calculate the risk premium RP according to
the formula:

RP = 0.5 (0.0002)(variance of spending).

We then define the reservation price P by: P=RP + (expected expenses). 6

12
If all persons were expected to purchase insurance, the 1998 competitive (breakeven)
community-rated premium would be the mean of 1998 benefits B. (Other administrative costs
and insurer profit are ignored here.) That premium would only be a competitive equilibrium
price if every person had a higher reservation price than the premium. If that were the case, all
would buy insurance, and average expenses for insured persons would turn out to be just covered
by the insurer’s premium, which equals that population average expense.
Suppose, however, that P for the lowest risk decile is less than B. All of the risks in that
decile will decline coverage, and an insurer would anticipate experiencing expenses that are the
mean of expenses for persons in the other nine deciles, an amount larger than B. We then
determine whether P for the second lowest decile is higher or lower than this new mean. If not,
the premium will have to increase further, and the process continues until we reach a decile at
which the value of P for that decile is greater than the mean expense or premium for the
remaining population of purchasers. If the only group for which this is true is the highest decile
of 1997 expenses, we can say that there has been a “death spiral” in which all but the highest
risks have been driven from the market.
Table 4 shows the simulation results from this process. (Note that, because the table
shows the result of a simulation, not an estimation, there are no goodness of fit or other statistical
measures.). The numbers in the table indicate the decile of spending above which insurance
would be purchased in equilibrium for a range of plausible values for risk aversion.7 For
example, if r = 0.0002, the equilibrium for total spending occurs in the seventh decile. This
means that somewhat more than half of the population (those in deciles 1 to 6) would not buy
insurance to cover all medical care costs because the premium exceeds their reservation prices,
but a sizeable minority would be willing to purchase. In contrast, according to this method the

13
equilibrium premium for drug-only coverage occurs in the tenth (highest) decile. This means
that only the very highest risks (if anyone) would buy drug coverage. Altering the assumed
degree of risk aversion affects the proportion of the population which would buy comprehensive
coverage, but there is no plausible level of risk aversion at which most people buy stand-alone
drug coverage.

An Economic Model

The alternative estimation approach begins with a regression of 1998 expenses on a
constant term and expenses in the previous four years, controlling (with binary variables) for age
and gender. The regression equation is:

4
n
DRUGEXP = ∑ α ik DRUGEXP
+ ∑ AGEGENDERDUM
it
t−k
j
k =1
j

where DRUGEXPit is the drug expense of a person i in period t, and AGEGENDERDUMj is a
binary variable for whether the person is in the jth of n different age-gender cells.
We used a linear functional form based on previous work that showed a linear form to be
a good predictor of expected expenses (Pauly and Herring, 1999) and preliminary analysis of the
data that confirmed this result for this data. Table 5 presents the variables used and some
statistics from these regressions. As expected, the adjusted R squared is much higher for the
drug only regression (0.6) compared to the other two regressions (0.19 and 0.13); drug expenses
are much more predictable. (Coefficients for the 17 binary age-sex variables are not shown.)

14
Also, the coefficients on previous period spending are larger and more precisely estimated for
drug only spending than for the other two measures of spending. While current period drug
spending is largely determined by drug spending in the immediate past period, current period
spending on other types of medical care depends strongly on spending over several years in the
recent past.
We next calculate the standard error of the prediction from the regression, and use this as
an estimate of the variance of expenses for each individual. For various values of risk aversion,
we then calculate the (proportional) risk premium. For example, for total expenses and r =
0.0001, the proportional risk premium is 0.745. This implies that, rather than go without
insurance, the person would be willing to pay a premium 1.745 times as high as expected
expense (equivalent to a maximum loading as a percentage of premium of 43%). In contrast, the
proportional risk premium for drug-only coverage is much lower, at 0.054. Severe adverse
selection occurs in drug-only coverage because of the combination of high predictability of drug
spending and consequent low willingness to pay much more than expected expenses.
We apply the same proportional risk premium to each person’s expected expenses to
generate an estimate of the reservation price. We then arrange individuals in order based on
expected expenses and follow the same procedure as in the previous case.
Table 6 shows the results in terms of the percentile of the distribution of expected
expenses at which people buy coverage, under the assumption of pure community rating. The
results are striking: despite some adverse selection, comprehensive total coverage can be sold to
much of the population if people are moderately risk averse; there will not be a serious “spiral.”
But even at the highest level of risk aversion, very few buy stand-alone drug coverage. With the
lowest value of risk aversion (r = 0.0001) there is also a fairly severe problem of adverse

15
selection even with more comprehensive coverage. With higher levels of risk aversion, however,
death spirals do not occur for more comprehensive coverage, and 70 to 99 percent or more of the
population would choose in equilibrium to obtain this insurance rather than go without. The
proportion of lower risks which drops out is, of course, higher if drug expenses are included in
the comprehensive coverage than if they are left uncovered.
We investigated what would happen if, instead of pure community rating, insurers were
able or permitted to use modified community rating in which premiums varied by purchaser age
and gender (which are easy to determine), but not by prior-period medical care spending. We
assume that premiums are set equal to average benefits in gender-five-year age cells. (Even our
large data set does not allow precise estimates of spending for single-year-age cells.) As one
would expect, Table 7 shows that permitting some risk rating reduces the predicted amount of
adverse selection and leads to a larger proportion of the population buying coverage. (In this
model, high risks never find premiums to be “unaffordable,” since there is no moral hazard and
no income effects on the risk premium.) However, even with modified community rating, standalone drug coverage cannot be profitably marketed; there are still death spirals under all
assumptions about risk aversion.
What happens to these estimates if we add the possibility that the expenses consumers
will make without insurance may be less than those they make when they have coverage? That
is, what happens if we take account of moral hazard, which seems to characterize outpatient drug
spending (Newhouse, et al. 1993; Hillman, et al. 1999)? If some of the expenses made by
insured persons are caused by moral hazard, and therefore have values to consumers that are less
than their costs, insurance coverage will be less attractive than in the no-moral-hazard case
(Pauly 1971). More people will decline coverage; and adverse selection will be worse.

16
We simulate the effect of moral hazard by assuming that 20 percent of insured drug
spending is attributable to moral hazard.8 Under conventional economic assumptions, the value
of this additional spending will be half of its cost;9 the effect of moral hazard therefore is to
reduce the total value of drug insurance by 10 percent. As would be expected, the combination
of moral hazard and adverse selection reduces the proportion estimated to buy comprehensive
coverage even further, by about 10 percent. As before, almost no one buys stand alone drug
insurance.
Finally, we specifically examine the MEDSTAT experience of the age group closest to
Medicare: those aged 55 to 59 in 1994 (who were 60 to 64 at the end of the period). As already
noted in Table 3, the year-to-year correlation of spending is highest in the oldest age group. (The
expense prediction regression for this subgroup (not shown) is estimated from data for this
subgroup only.) Table 8 shows that, as before, adverse selection prevents the purchase in market
equilibrium of drug-only coverage. Compared to Table 6, the market share of coverage that
bundles drug spending with other medical expenses (total expenses) is smaller for this age group
than for the overall population at low values of risk aversion, but is higher at higher values of
risk aversion.
These simulation-based estimates of the proportion of the population remaining in the
market are obviously not definitive, but they do strongly suggest that, for reasonable assumptions
about parameter values, it would be very difficult for a market to offer unsubsidized stand-alone
drug coverage, even in the under-65 market. Of course, the presence of a substantial tax subsidy
coupled with offering of group insurance coverage may make such a policy feasible in the
employment-based group insurance market. Even here, there would likely be problems if standalone insurance were offered in a multiple-choice setting. What is most important in this

17
analysis, however, is the comparison of market equilibria between all-inclusive coverage and
drug only coverage. Drug-only coverage causes much more severe adverse selection even if it
does not go into a total death spiral. Based on these findings, it should then be unsurprising that
drug-only coverage is rare among the non-elderly. Not only that, but in multiple choice
employment settings, it appears to be relatively rare for an employer to offer a choice among
plans that do and do not offer drug coverage. While offerings vary in other dimensions,
employers tend to choose either all plans with drug benefits, or no plans with drug benefits.

Medicare Drug Spending

We assembled a three-year panel (1997-99) of Medicare beneficiaries from the MCBS.
Persons with incomes so low they were on or were eligible for Medicaid were excluded; the
Medicare population we study is the one that might be expected to be potential purchasers of
voluntary insurance. The number of observations is 2945 in each year. We regressed 1999
spending for each person on spending in the prior two years along with additional binary
variables (age and gender). (Regression results available from the authors) As before, the
explanatory power of prior periods’ spending is much greater for drug spending than for total
spending ( R 2 = 0.34 for drug spending and 0.18 for total spending), and there is a statistically

significant effect of prior years’ spending on total spending.
We then used the coefficients and statistics from this regression to determine the probable
extent of adverse selection. Table 9 shows (using the same methods as earlier) that stand-alone
drug spending is generally infeasible for the Medicare population, even at breakeven premiums.
However, bundled coverage could induce voluntary purchasing if risk aversion is moderate.

18

Needed Medicare Subsidy

Ignoring moral hazard and the possibility of risk rating, we estimated the subsidy to
stand-alone drug coverage needed to get 80 percent of the Medicare population to voluntarily
buy such coverage, if their only other alternative was no coverage. (This calculation does not
take account of the availability of coverage through Medicaid or employer programs; it is
intended to be illustrative of the orders of magnitudes involved.) We do this by setting the
subsidy equal to the difference between the willingness to pay of the group at the 80th percentile
and the breakeven premium for the 80 percent highest risks. Table 10 shows that the estimated
subsidy is large as a percentage of the premium for this group. Adding the administrative loading
costs would doubtless raise the absolute and relative subsidies needed.

Conclusion

This analysis leads us to strongly suspect that drug-only coverage cannot be sold in
competitive insurance markets at premiums that cover its cost. Even for middle class people, its
sale would require a substantial subsidy.
These results are also very germane to discussions of publicly funded reinsurance of large
medical expenses that provoke adverse selection (and intrusive underwriting screening to avoid
adverse selection) in private insurance (Swartz 2002). The results imply that this problem is
likely to be especially severe for drug expenses, even more so than for larger expenses associated
with other types of medical care which display less persistence over time. One might therefore

19
conclude that reinsurance that would provide the most appropriate incentives and relief to
insurers would take into account both the amount and the persistence of large claims.
Another main result is that all-inclusive insurance policies will be less subject to adverse
selection than drug only coverage for the same population. Having said this, however, we cannot
conclude that unregulated competitive markets will necessarily be able to furnish such coverage.
People in the lowest ranks of expected drug spending could have higher expected utility from
coverage that excludes drugs than from coverage that includes it. That is, coverage that excludes
drugs may drive out all-inclusive coverage (that, of course, includes drugs). As long as it is
permitted to sell such coverage, and ignoring other economies or jointness advantages of
comprehensive coverage, we conclude that “drug excluding” coverage would tend to drive out
“drug including” coverage. However, it is instructive that, even in unregulated under-65
markets, the phenomenon of “drug excluding” coverage is now rather uncommon. In any case,
unsubsidized drug-only coverage that would supplement a policy that covers other expenses
would barely survive, even if cost offsets are assumed to be zero.
Are there devices insurers could incorporate into their policies to mitigate the effects of
adverse selection? One simple solution would be to limit the frequency with which people are
permitted to change coverage, but it is very difficult to lock low risks into policies with such
provisions. Another, more useful method is to incorporate guaranteed renewability at
nondiscriminatory premiums as a required policy provision. This device, if properly used, can
retain the low risks in the pool and greatly diminish the opportunities for adverse selection
(Pauly 2003, Herring and Pauly 2003).
Current discussions of drug coverage for the Medicare population often envision standalone but fairly generously subsidized community-rated coverage for much of the population.

20
The adverse selection we have identified will be a challenge that must be taken into account, but
one that those subsidies (in the short run) and integrated coverage (in the long run) may help to
overcome.10 However, our results suggest that the subsidy will need to be very generous indeed.
One long-term policy choice is between generous subsidies to stand-alone coverage and less
heavily subsidized but more carefully designed comprehensive insurance. Another policy choice
(for a given public budget) is between a heavily subsidized policy with high deductibles and low
adverse selection and more generous coverage with more beneficiary payment of premiums but
more adverse selection. How much subsidy is needed and how much redesign would help are
questions which should definitely be investigated further.

21

Table 1
Percent of those initially in the highest quintile who remained in highest quintile
after 19941

1995

1996

1997

1998

Inpatient, Outpatient, and Drug Expenditures

54

50

48

46

Inpatient and Outpatient Expenditures

47

43

42

40

Drug Expenditure Only

76

69

63

60

N = 28, 146 (in highest quintile).

1

100% of sample in highest quintile in 1994

22

Table 2
% spending more than $5000 in second year, by age, comparison of results
Age

Our Data

Eichner, et al.

0-17

20.59

19.21

18-35

19.46

20.79

36-45

24.14

25.07

46-55

25.78

28.6

56-65

29.64

26.6

23

Table 3
Ratio of Top Quintile Average Spending to Overall Average Spending2
Year

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Total Spending

3.9

2.5

2.3

2.2

2.2

Drug Spending

3.9

3.5

3.2

3.0

2.8

2

N= 140,981(for overall spending); N= 28,146 (for highest quintile)

24

Table 4
“Statistical” Demand Simulation with Community Rating: Lowest Decile at which
Insurance is Purchased, by Type of Coverage at Level of Risk Aversion
CRA=.0001

CRA=.0002

CRA=.0003

CRA=.0009

Total

9th decile

7th decile

5th decile

1st decile

Total-Drug

9th decile

5th decile

5th decile

1st decile

Drug Only

10th decile

10th decile

10th decile

10th decile

25

Table 5
Regression Coefficients and “t” Statistics3
Dependent Variable: Spending in 1998

Adj. R-Squared

Coefficient

t

drug 97

.7788105

252.104

drug 96

.1420874

30.871

drug 95

.0477469

9.038

drug 94

.05911

14.364

total 97

.3428897

116.631

total 96

.134076

40.740

total 95

.1210086

32.510

total 94

.0962468

30.061

inout 97

.3010067

102.155

inout 96

.111741

34.359

inout 95

.0954854

26.032

inout 94

.082087

26.149

0.6081

0.1887

0.1316

3

N = 140,981; Prob>F = 0.0000 for all three regressions.

26
Table 6
“Economic” Demand Simulation with Pure Community Rating: Lowest Percentile
at which Insurance is Purchased, by Types of Coverage and Level of Risk Aversion
CRA=.0001

CRA=.0002

CRA=.0003

CRA=0.0009

Total

95th percentile

27th percentile

12th percentile

3rd Percentile

Total-Drug

83rd percentile

15th percentile

6th percentile

1st Percentile

Drug Only

99th percentile

99th percentile

99th percentile

98th Percentile

27

Table 7
“Economic” Demand Simulation with Modified Community Rating: Lowest
Percentile at which Insurance is Purchased, by Type of Coverage and Level of Risk
Aversion
CRA=0.0001

CRA=0.0002

CRA=0.0003

CRA=0.0009

Total

92nd percentile

7th percentile

3rd percentile

1st percentile

Total-Drug

55th percentile

4th percentile

1st percentile

1st percentile

Drug Only

99th percentile

99th percentile

99th percentile

98th percentile

28

Table 8
“Economic” Demand Simulation for Persons 60-64 with no Moral Hazard and Pure
Community Rating: Lowest Percentile at which Insurance is Purchased, by Type of
Coverage and Level of Risk Aversion4

4

CRA=0.0001

CRA=0.0002

CRA=0.0003

CRA=0.0009

Total

99th percentile

70th percentile

1st percentile

1st percentile

Total-Drug

99th percentile

1st percentile

1st percentile

1st percentile

Drug Only

99th percentile

99th percentile

99th percentile

98th percentile

N=14,478

29

Table 9
“Economic” Demand Simulation with Pure Community Rating for Medicare
Population: Lowest Percentile at which Insurance is Purchased by Type of
Coverage and Level of Risk Aversion
CRA=0.0001

CRA=0.0002

CRA=0.0003

CRA=0.0009

Total

89th percentile

1st percentile

1st percentile

1st percentile

Drug Only

99th percentile

99th percentile

99th percentile

64th percentile

30
Table 10
Estimated Subsidy Necessary to Induce 80 Percent of Medicare Sample to Purchase
Comprehensive Stand-Alone Prescription Drug Coverage, by Level of Risk Aversion
Subsidy for 80% Purchase
CRA
$

% of Premium

.0001

908

91

.0002

883

89

.0003

857

86

.0009

704

71

31
References

Atherly, A. (2002). “The Effect of Medicare Supplemental Insurance on Medicare
Expenditures,” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 2(2): 137-162.

Coulson, N.E., and B.A. Stuart (1992). “Persistence in the Use of Pharmaceuticals by the
Elderly: Evidence from Annual Claims,” Journal of Health Economics 11(3): 315-328.

Crippen, D.L. (2002). “Projections of Medicare and Prescription Drug Spending, Statement of
Dan L. Crippen before the United States Senate Committee on Finance, March 7, 2002.”
Washington, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office.

Eichner, M.J., M.B. McClellan, and D.A. Wise (1998). “Insurance or Self-Insurance? Variation,
Persistence, and Individual Health Accounts,” in D. A. Wise, ed., Inquiries in the Economics of
Aging. NBER Project Report Series. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 19-45.

Ettner, S. (1997). “Adverse Selection and the Purchase of Medigap Insurance by the Elderly,”
Journal of Health Economics 16(5): 543-563

Herring, B.J., and M.V. Pauly (2003). “Incentive-Compatible Guaranteed Renewable Health
Insurance Premiums,” NBER Working Paper 9888.

32
Hillman, A.L., M.V. Pauly, J.J. Escarce, K. Ripley, M. Gaynor, J. Clouse, and R. Ross (1999).
“Financial Incentives and Drug Spending in Managed Care,” Health Affairs 18(2): 189-200.

Keeler, E.B., J. Buchanan, J.E. Rolph, J.M. Hanley, and D. Reboussin (1988). The Demand for
Episodes of Medical Treatment in the Health Insurance Experiment. Santa Monica, Calif.:

RAND.

Long, S. (1994). “Prescription Drugs and the Elderly: Issues and Options,” Health Affairs 13(2,
Part II): 157-174.

Newhouse, J.P., and the Insurance Experiment Team (1993). Free for All?: Lessons From the
RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Pauly, M.V. (2003). Time, Risk, Precommitment, and Adverse Selection in Competitive
Insurance Markets. Paper presented at CESifo Summer Institute, Venice, Italy, July 2003.

---, and B.J. Herring (2000). “An Efficient Employer Strategy for Dealing with Adverse
Selection in Multiple-Plan Offerings: An MSA Example,” Journal of Health Economics 19(4):
513-528.

---, and B.J. Herring (1999). Pooling Health Insurance Risks. Washington, D. C.: AEI Press.

---, (1971). Medical Care at Public Expense. Westport, Conn.: Praeger Publishers, Inc.

33

Phelps, Charles E. (2003). Health Economics (3rd Edition). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Swartz, K. (2002). “Government As Reinsurer For Very-High-Cost Persons In Nongroup Health
Insurance Markets,” Health Affairs Web Exclusive 23 October.
http://www.healthaffairs.org/WebExclusives/Swartz_Perspective_Web_Excl_102302.htm, 31
October 2002.

van Vliet, R.C.J.A. (1992). “Predictability of Individual Health Care Expenditures,” Journal of
Risk and Insurance 59(3): 443-460.

Wolfe, J.R., and J.H. Goddeeris (1991). “Adverse Selection, Moral Hazard, and Wealth Effects
in the Medigap Insurance Market,” Journal of Health Economics 10(4): 433-459.

Wouters, A.V. (1991). “Disaggregated Annual Health Services Expenditures: Their
Predictability and Role as Predictors,” Health Services Research 26(2): 247-272.

34

1

Supported by a grant from The Merck Company Foundation. The authors thank MEDSTAT,

and especially William Marder, for assistance with this data. The views expressed here are those
of the authors, and not necessarily those of The Merck Company Foundation or of MEDSTAT,
Inc.

2

Since the youngest members of this cohort were 18 in 1994, this represents all adult workers

and dependents who remained under age 65 in the period.

3

The statistical approach takes into account any differences across cells in the extent to which

persistence might itself vary with age or gender. The simple regression model in the economic
approach does not allow for such interaction effects, based on preliminary analysis which found
them to be small. Note that this approach assumes that people only use their prior spending to
predict their expenses next period. If they have additional information (e.g., I know that this will
be the year I plan to get my bum knee fixed but insurers do not), adverse selection will be worse
than what is estimated here.

4

We therefore use only the Medstat claims data and estimate breakeven premiums based on the

claims data. We do not use direct measures of premiums actually paid for coverage of those
claims.

5

We assume that both insurers and insureds have the same average estimate. While some cells

are small so that the observed sample mean might not be a precise estimate of the population

35

mean for people with those characteristics, that imprecision will only apply to a small fraction of
the total population.

6

For an explanation of this method, see Phelps (2003), Chapter 10 and especially Appendix A.

7

Phelps (2003) labels 0.0003 a “moderately high” value of risk aversion, but Pauly and Herring

(2000) found it necessary to use a higher level (0.00095) to generate realistic results in a
simulation of adverse selection for comprehensive group insurance. A level of 0.0003 would
imply that a person would, in Phelps’ example, be willing to buy insurance as long as a premium
were no more than 26 percent greater than expected benefits.

8

This value is chosen to be consistent with the -0.2 demand elasticity reported by the RAND

Health Insurance Experiment. See Keeler, et al., 1988.

9

The assumptions here are that the demand curve is approximately linear over the relevant range

and that there are no important income effects on the demand for medical care.

10

One offset is that greater predictability of drug spending should make it easier in principle to

risk adjust payments to insurers. The insurer used by someone with high current period expenses
will receive a larger payment than the insurer used by someone with low current period
incentives. This diminishes insurer incentives to cream skim, but it does not diminish the
incentive to the high spender to choose the more generous plan.

