NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANK CONCENTRATION AND CRISES
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 9921
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9921
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

We thank John Boyd, Jerry Caprio, Maria Carkovic, Patrick Honohan and participants in the World Bank
Concentration and Competition Conference for comments and Paramjit K. Gill for outstanding research
assistance. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Bank Concentration and Crises
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9921
August 2003
JEL No. G21, G28, L16
ABSTRACT
Motivated by public policy debates about bank consolidation and conflicting theoretical predictions
about the relationship between the market structure of the banking industry and bank fragility, this
paper studies the impact of bank concentration, bank regulations, and national institutions on the
likelihood of suffering a systemic banking crisis. Using data on 70 countries from 1980 to 1997, we
find that crises are less likely in economies with (i) more concentrated banking systems, (ii) fewer
regulatory restrictions on bank competition and activities, and (iii) national institutions that
encourage competition.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org
Asli Demirguc-Kunt
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org
Ross Levine
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

I.

Introduction
The consolidation of banks around the globe is fueling an active public policy debate on the

impact of consolidation on financial stability.1 Indeed, economic theory provides conflicting
predictions about the relationship between the market structure of the banking industry and banking
system fragility. Motivated by public policy debates and ambiguous theoretical predictions, this
paper investigates empirically the impact of bank concentration on banking system stability.
Some theoretical arguments and country comparisons suggest that a less concentrated banking
sector with many small banks is more prone to financial crises than a concentrated banking sector
with a few large banks (Allen and Gale, 2000, 2003). First, proponents of the “concentrationstability” view hold that large banks can diversify better so that banking systems characterized by a
few large banks will be less fragile than banking systems with many small banks.2 Second,
concentrated banking systems may enhance profits and therefore lower bank fragility. High profits
provide a “buffer” against adverse shocks and increase the franchise value of the bank, reducing
incentives for bank owners to take excessive risk (Hellmann, Murdoch, and Stiglitz, 2000). Third,
some hold that a few large banks are easier to monitor than many small banks, so that corporate
control of banks will be more effective and the risks of contagion less pronounced in a concentrated
banking system. According to Allen and Gale (2000), the U.S., with its large number of small banks,
supports this “concentration-stability” view since it has had a history of much greater financial
instability than the U.K or Canada, where the banking sector is dominated by fewer larger banks.

1

See Group of Ten (2001), Bank for International Settlements (2001), International Monetary Fund (2001), and Boyd and
Graham (1998, 1991).
2
Models by Diamond (1984), Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984), Boyd and Prescott (1986), Williamson (1986), Allen
(1990), and others predict economies of scale in intermediation.

1

An opposing view is that a more concentrated banking structure enhances bank fragility.
First, advocates of the “concentration-fragility” view note that large banks frequently receive
subsidies through implicit “too big to fail” policies.3 This greater subsidy for large banks may in turn
intensify risk-taking incentives, increasing the fragility of concentrated banking systems (Boyd and
Runkle, 1992 and Mishkin, 1999).4 Second, proponents of the concentration-fragility view would
disagree with the proposition that a few large banks are easier to monitor than many small banks. If
size is positively correlated with complexity, then large banks may be more opaque than small banks,
which would tend to produce a positive relationship between concentration and fragility. Finally,
Boyd, and De Nicolo (2003) stress that banks with greater market power tend to charge higher
interest rates to firms, which induces firms to assume greater risk. If concentration is positively
associated with banks having market power, this model predicts a positive relationship between
concentration and bank fragility.
Despite conflicting theoretical predictions and policy debates, there is surprisingly little crosscountry empirical evidence on bank structure and fragility. For the United States, Boyd and Runkle
(1993) examine 122 bank holding companies. They find that there is an inverse relationship between
size and the volatility of asset returns, but no evidence that large banks are less likely to fail. In fact
they observe that large banks failed somewhat more often in the 1971-90 period. They explain this
result by showing that larger banks are more highly leveraged and less profitable in terms of asset
returns.
3

Even in the absence of deposit insurance, banks are prone to excessive risk-taking due to limited liability for their equity
holders and to their high leverage (Stiglitz, 1972).
4
There is a literature that examines deposit insurance and its effect on bank decisions. According to this literature (e.g.
Merton (1977), Sharpe (1978), Flannery (1989), Kane (1989), and Chan, Greenbaum and Thakor (1992)) – mis-priced
deposit insurance produces an incentive for banks to take risk. If the regulatory treatment were the same for insured
banks of all sizes, these models would predict no relationship between bank size and riskiness. Since regulators fear
potential macroeconomic consequences of large bank failures, most countries have implicit “too large to fail” policies
which protect all liabilities of very large banks whether they are insured or not. Thus, largest banks frequently receive a

2

Although there is a growing cross-country empirical literature on banking crises, this
literature does not address the issue of banking structure. Earlier work has mostly focused on
identifying (i) the macroeconomic determinants of banking crises (Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache,
1998, henceforth DD), (ii) the relationship between banking and currency crises (Kaminsky and
Reinhart, 1999), (iii) the impact of financial liberalization on bank stability (DD, 1999), and (iv) the
impact of deposit insurance design on bank fragility (DD, 2003). Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2004)
examine the relationship between bank regulations and crises, but they do not examine bank
concentration and they use pure cross-country comparisons rather than panel analyses.
This paper studies the impact of bank concentration, bank regulations, and national
institutions on the likelihood of suffering a systemic banking crisis using data on 70 countries over
the period 1980-1997. This is the first paper to examine the impact of concentration on crises across
a broad cross-section of countries while controlling for differences in regulatory policies, national
institutions governing property rights and economic freedom, the ownership structure of banks, and
macroeconomic and financial conditions.5 To draw accurate inferences about the impact of banking
structure on crises, we control for an array of factors that may influence both bank concentration and
fragility. We control for international differences in the generosity of deposit insurance regimes,
capital regulations, restrictions on bank entry, and regulatory restrictions on bank activities.
Furthermore, to assess the impact of concentration on crises, we need to control for cross-country
differences in bank ownership, i.e., the degree to which the state and foreigners own the country’s
banks. Finally, we control for the overall institutional environment governing economic activity as

greater net subsidy from the government (O’Hara and Shaw, 1990). This subsidy may in turn increase the risk-taking
incentives of the larger banks. For an analysis of the corporate governance of banks, see Macey and O’Hara (2003).
5
Demirgüç-Kunt, Laeven and Levine (2004) investigate the impact of bank concentration and regulations on bank net
interest margins, but they do not examine bank fragility.

3

well as the level of economic development, economic growth, inflation, terms of trade changes, credit
growth, etc.
The paper has three major findings. First, we find that crises are less likely in more
concentrated banking systems. This is consistent with the concentration-stability view’s argument
that banking systems characterized by a few, large banks are more stable than less concentrated
banking markets. Second, the paper shows that more competition lowers the probability that a
country will suffer a systemic banking crisis. The data indicate that fewer regulatory restrictions on
banks – lower barriers to bank entry and fewer restrictions on bank activities – reduce bank fragility.
Third, countries with national institutions that promote competition in general have a lower
likelihood of suffering a systemic banking crisis. These results are not driven by reverse causality
and are robust to an array of sensitivity checks. In terms of linking the results back to specific parts
of the concentration-stability view, the finding that competition reduces fragility is inconsistent with
the argument that concentrated banking systems boost profits and therefore reduce fragility. Rather,
the evidence is more consistent with the views that concentrated banking systems tend to have banks
that are better diversified or easier to monitor than banks in less concentrated banking systems.
The results must be qualified. We investigate systemic banking crises, which are very
difficult to define and date. Consequently, we use different definitions of and dates for crises and
obtain robust results. Nevertheless, future work that assesses the impact of the market structure of
the banking industry and bank regulations on individual bank fragility will provide a valuable
complement to our research.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data set and presents
summary statistics. Section III explains the methodology used in empirical tests. Section IV contains
the main results and Section V concludes.

4

II.

Data and Summary Statistics

This section describes the data. The Appendix provides more detailed variable definitions
and data sources.
Crisis is a dummy variable that equals one if the country is going through a systemic crisis,
and zero if it is not. Following DD (2003), we identify and date episodes of banking sector distress
using primarily information from Lindgren, Garcia and Saal (1996) and Caprio and Klingebiel
(1999). Then, these episodes of distress are classified as systemic if emergency measures were taken
to assist the banking system (such as bank holidays, deposit freezes, blanket guarantees to depositors
or other bank creditors), or if large-scale nationalizations took place. Episodes were also classified as
systemic if non-performing assets reached at least 10 percent of total assets at the peak of the crisis,
or if the cost of the rescue operations was at least 2 percent of GDP. Many crises run for multiple
years. We exclude the years after the initial year of the crisis because during a crisis, the behavior of
some of the explanatory variables is likely to be affected by the crisis itself, leading to reverse
causality. Note, however, that including the crisis years does not change the conclusions. Also, some
countries experience more than one crisis. For instance, Turkey suffered systemic banking crises in
1982, 1991, and 1994. For the period 1980-1997, the sample includes all countries covered in the
International Financial Statistics, excluding countries in transition, those without data, etc., as
discussed in DD (2003). This results in 79 countries and 51 crisis episodes. Table 1 lists this
information. Later in the paper we also investigate robustness of our results to differences in the crisis
definition.
Concentration equals the share of assets of the three largest banks. We compute a measure of
bank concentration using the Bankscope database compiled by Fitch-IBCA, which reports bank
balance sheet data in a large cross-section of countries beginning in 1988. However, because the

5

sample of banks covered increased significantly over the sample period, changes in the measure of
concentration may just reflect changes in coverage. To reduce this potential problem, we average the
measure over the period 1988-1997. We have data on concentration for 70 countries including 47
crisis episodes. As reported in Tables 1 and 2, most countries have concentrated banking systems
with a sample mean of 72 percent. Still, there is wide variation in the sample, with concentration
levels ranging from less than 20 percent for the U.S. to 100 percent for many African countries.
Simple correlations do not show a significant relationship between the crisis dummy and bank
concentration, although the sign is negative.
Using this measure of concentration may blur the interpretation of estimation results since for
many observations the crisis date would precede the time period for which we have the concentration
values. However, we also use the initial level of concentration at the start of the sample period and
focus on crises that occurred after this date. Although this cuts the number of observations in half
and reduces crisis episodes to 20, we confirm our results.
To investigate the relationship between banking crises and bank concentration, we control for
many factors. Specifically, we begin with the econometric specification in DD (2003) and include
the same regressors. Thus, we include the rate of growth of real GDP, the change in the external
terms of trade, and the rate of inflation, to capture macroeconomic developments that are likely to
affect the quality of bank assets. The short-term real interest rate is included to capture the banks’
cost of funds. Also, higher real interest rate may affect bank profitability increasing default rates.
Bank vulnerability to sudden capital outflows triggered by a run on the currency and bank exposure
to foreign exchange risk are measured by the rate of exchange rate depreciation and by the ratio of
M2 to foreign exchange reserves. Lagged credit growth is also a control since high rates of credit
expansion may finance an asset price bubble that may cause a crisis when it bursts. We also include

6

DD’s (2003) index of moral hazard caused by deposit insurance generosity since they find that it
contributes significantly to financial fragility.6 Finally, GDP per capita is used to control for the level
of development of the country, which DD (2003) included it to proxy for the quality of regulations
and the general institutional environment. Thus, we leave GDP per capita out of the benchmark when
we explore the impact of specific banking regulations and institutional indicators.
Simple correlations in Table 2 suggest that banking crises are more likely in countries with
higher levels of inflation and exchange rate depreciation, and less likely in growing countries with
higher GDP per capita.
In addition to bank concentration, we augment the benchmark specification in DD by using
measures of bank regulation and supervision, bank ownership, the competitiveness of the banking
system and the economy in general, and a summary institutional index. Measures of bank regulation
and supervision come from Barth, et al., (2001, 2004). The data set is collected through surveys of
government officials in the late 1990s, but according to additional analyses by Barth, et al., (2001)
and Carkovic and Levine (2002), these aspects of bank regulation do not change much.
We use four measures of bank regulation and supervision.
Fraction of Entry Denied is the number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the
number of applications received from domestic and foreign entities. This is a measure of entry
restrictions in banking and thus the contestability of the market. To the extent restricted entry
increases bank profits, this variable would be associated with a lower rate of fragility. If however,
restricted entry induces inefficiencies in the banking market, it could also lead to greater fragility.

6

To build an aggregate index of moral hazard, DD (2003) estimate the first principal component of various deposit
insurance design features. Specifically, they use coinsurance, coverage of foreign currency and interbank deposits, type
of funding, source of funding, management, membership, and the level of explicit coverage to create this aggregate index
that increases with the generosity of the deposit insurance regime. The index varies over time since different countries
adopted deposit insurance or revised its design features at different points in time.

7

Activity Restrictions aggregates measures that indicate whether bank activities in the
securities, insurance, and real estate markets and ownership and control of nonfinancial firms are (1)
unrestricted, (2) permitted, (3) restricted, or (4) prohibited. The aggregate indicator has therefore a
possible maximum variation between four and 16, with higher numbers indicating more restrictions
on bank activities and nonfinancial ownership and control. If these restrictions manage to keep banks
from entering lines of business that are too risky for them to adequately evaluate or manage, banking
systems with greater restrictions may be more stable. If however, restrictions prevent firms from
diversifying outside their traditional lines of business, they may increase the fragility of the system.
Required Reserves is the ratio of bank assets that regulators require banks to hold as reserves.
Banking systems with higher ratios of required reserves may be more stable since they would have a
greater buffer to absorb liquidity shocks. However, greater required reserves are also a tax on the
banking system, which may lower profits and raise fragility.
Capital Regulatory Index is a summary measure of capital stringency, and it is given by the
sum of initial capital stringency and overall capital requirements. To the extent that book capital is
an accurate measure of bank solvency we expect better capitalized banks to be less fragile.
Table 2 indicates that fraction denied, activity restrictions, and required reserves are positively
and significantly correlated with each other. Capital regulatory index is also positively correlated
with required reserves but negatively correlated with activity restrictions. The moral hazard index is
negatively and significantly correlated with all regulatory variables except capital regulatory index
where the correlation is positive. It is also interesting that deposit insurance schemes in concentrated
banking systems tend to be designed such that moral hazard is significantly lower. Among the
regulatory variables only activity restrictions is significantly correlated –albeit at ten percent - with
the crisis dummy, and the sign is positive.

8

We also control for ownership. If public banks are considered to have government
guarantees, banking systems with a larger share of public banks may be less prone to banking runs.
However, inefficiencies in public banks may also make them more fragile, destabilizing the system.
Indeed, Caprio and Martinez-Peria (2000) and Barth, et al., (2001) find evidence supporting the
former argument.
The extent of foreign bank ownership is another important control. To the extent foreign
banks improve domestic banks’ efficiency (as found in Claessens, Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga,
2001), they may also make the system more stable. However, reduction in profits due to higher
competition from foreign banks may also hurt the domestic banks making the system more fragile.
State Ownership and Foreign Ownership are from Barth, et al., (2001), defined as the
percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50 percent or more government or foreign
owned. As in the case of regulatory variables, the assumption is that ownership of banks does not
vary significantly over the years.7 Simple correlations in Table 2 do not reveal significant
relationships between bank ownership variables and crisis occurrence.
We also use three additional variables to capture the extent of banking freedoms and general
economic freedoms and institutional environment.
Banking Freedom is an indicator of relative openness of the banking system. Specifically, it
is a composite index of whether foreign banks and financial services firms are able to operate freely,
how difficult it is to open domestic banks and other financial services firms, how heavily regulated
the financial system is, the presence of state-owned banks, whether the government influences

7

We also use state bank data from La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) who report figures on the percentage
of assets of the largest 10 banks owned by the government. For each country there are two data points, one for 1995, and
one referring to public ownership “before the privatizations of the 1990s.” In the regression, we use the latter figures for
the 1980s and the former for the 1990s.

9

allocation of credit, and whether banks are free to provide customers with insurance products and
invest in securities. Higher values indicate fewer restrictions on banking freedoms.
Economic Freedom is an indicator of how a country’s policies rank in terms of providing
economic freedoms. It is a composite of ten indicators ranking policies in the areas of trade,
government finances, government interventions, monetary policy, capital flows and foreign
investment, banking and finance, wages and prices, property rights, regulation, and black market
activity. Higher scores indicate polices more conducive to competition and economic freedom. Both
variables are available from the Heritage Foundation and are average values for the 1995-97 period.
To the extent freedoms allow banks to improve efficiency and to engage in different activities and
diversify their risks, we expect increased level of freedoms to reduce fragility. However, it is also
true that greater freedoms allow banks to undertake greater risks, particularly if the underlying
institutional environment and existing regulations and supervision distort risk-taking incentives.
Thus, overall greater freedoms may also lead to greater bank fragility.
KKZ_Composite is an index of the overall level of institutional development constructed by
Kaufman, Kraay and Zoido-Lobaton (1999). The underlying indicators are voice and accountability,
government effectiveness, political stability, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption.
This index is available for 1998. We expect better institutions to lead to reduced bank fragility,
controlling for all other factors. Simple correlations indicate that the crisis dummy is negatively and
significantly correlated with the two freedom indicators and the institutions variable. Countries with
better institutions also tend to have more competitive banking systems with fewer regulatory
restrictions.

10

III.

Methodology

In estimating the crisis model, we follow DD (1998, 2003) and use a logit probability model.
Using this model of banking crisis, we can test the hypothesis that bank concentration and
competition have an impact on fragility when controlling for other factors. Thus, we estimate the
probability that a systemic crisis will occur at a particular time in a particular country, assuming that
this probability is a function of the explanatory variables (X(i,t)) discussed above. Let P(i, t) denote a
dummy variable that takes the value of one when a banking crisis occurs in country i and time t and a
value of zero otherwise. β is a vector of n unknown coefficients and F(βΝX(i, t)) is the cumulative
probability distribution function evaluated at βΝX(i, t). Then, the log-likelihood function of the
model is:
Ln L = 3t=1..T 3i=1..n{P(i,t)ln[F(βΝX(i,t))] + (1-P(i,t)) ln[1- F(βΝX(i,t))]}.
In modeling the probability distribution we use the logistic functional form, which is
commonly used in studying banking difficulties.8 We estimate the model with robust standard errors
since there may be heteroskedasticity across different observations. Observations within each
country group may also be correlated. We also deal with this problem below, by relaxing the
assumption that errors are independent within country observations.
When interpreting the regression results, it is important to remember that the estimated
coefficients do not indicate an increase in the probability of a crisis given a one-unit increase in the
corresponding explanatory variables. Instead, the coefficients reflect the effect of a change in an
explanatory variable on ln(P(i,t)/(1-P(i,t))). Therefore, the increase in probability depends on the
original probability and thus upon the initial values of all the independent variables and their
coefficients. While the sign of the coefficient does indicate the direction of the change, the

11

magnitude depends on the slope of the cumulative distribution function at β’X(i,t). In other words, a
change in the explanatory variable will have different effects on the probability of a crisis depending
on the country’s initial crisis probability. Under the logistic specification, if a country has an
extremely high (or low) initial probability of crisis, a marginal change in the independent variables
has little effect on its prospects, while the same marginal change has a greater effect if the country’s
probability of crisis in an intermediate range.
In the analysis presented below, we investigate the impact of bank concentration variable and
different regulatory, competition, ownership and institutional variables on bank fragility one at a
time. We also analyze if the impact of concentration is robust to controlling for regulatory variables
and indicators of competition and institutional development and whether there are significant
interactions with concentration and these variables. Finally, we explore the potential non-linearity of
the crisis-concentration relationship, and discuss the robustness of our results to different definitions
of concentration and reverse causality.

8

In addition to DD (1998,1999, 2003) also see Cole and Gunther (1993), Gonzalez-Hermosillo et al. (1997), and
Demirguc-Kunt (1989).

12

IV.

Results
A. Main findings
1. Concentration and crises
The concentration variable enters the regressions negatively, significantly, and with an

economically large coefficient. This result suggests that concentrated banking systems are less
vulnerable to banking crises (Table 3). Evaluating the marginal impact of concentration on the
probability of crisis at the mean values for all variables, we see that a one standard deviation increase
in concentration leads to a decrease in crisis probability of one percent. Since crisis probabilities at
any point in time are quite low, with a mean value of four percent, this is a substantial reduction.
This result is supportive of the concentration-stability view that concentration fosters a more stable
banking system.
Among the control variables, GDP growth and per capita GDP enter negatively, while the real
interest rates enter positively, as suggested by economic theory and earlier empirical studies. Credit
growth is positive, but significant only at the ten percent level, which lends weak support to the
argument that credit booms signal future fragility. Confirming the results of DD (2003), moral
hazard enters positive and significantly, indicating that deposit insurance design can have an
important impact on fragility, and the result is weaker controlling for bank concentration. The model
also fits the data well, classifying 65 percent of all observations and over 70 percent of crisis
observations accurately.9
In column (3) we also add a squared concentration variable to the specification to check for
potential nonlinearities in the relationship between concentration and banking crises. When including
the squared term, the concentration variable retains a negative and significant coefficient at the ten

13

percent level, while the squared concentration term is positive and insignificant. Testing for the joint
significance of the two variables, we see that together the coefficients are significantly different from
zero at the five percent level. This indicates that, although weak, at very high levels of concentration,
there is an offsetting effect at work where concentrated banking systems are no longer as stable.
Below, we try to understand the nature of this nonlinearity better. Finally, the table shows that the
concentration result is not sensitive to excluding GDP per capita from the regression.
2. Concentration, regulations, and crises
In Table 4, we include indicators of bank regulation to the specification. These specifications
exclude GDP per capita since it is also a proxy for the institutional environment. We have also
estimated specifications where we have left out the concentration variable and included only the
regulation supervision variables one at a time. The results on these variables are virtually unchanged,
thus we do not report them for brevity.
The results indicate that tighter entry restrictions and more severe regulatory restrictions on
bank activities boost bank fragility (Table 4). These are consistent with the results obtained by Barth
et al. (2004), who examine the impact of entry restrictions on crises in a purely cross-country
investigation that does not control for bank concentration. A higher fraction of entry applications
denied- a proxy for tighter entry regulations – leads to higher levels of fragility in the banking
system. This is consistent with the argument that restricted entry reduces the efficiency of the
banking system, also making it more vulnerable to external shocks. Similarly, we find that
restrictions on bank activities increase crisis probabilities. This result indicates that overall these
restrictions prevent banks from diversifying outside their traditional business, reducing their ability to

9

In classifying observations, predicted probabilities significantly higher than 4 percent (no of crisis observations divided
by total number of observations which equals the sample mean of the crisis dummy) are classified as crisis observations
and those below 4 percent are classified as no crisis.

14

reduce the riskiness of their portfolios. The required reserves and capital regulatory index do not
enter with significant coefficients.
The results also indicate that the concentration result is robust to inclusion of regulatory
variables. The overall effect of bank concentration on crisis likelihood is still negative and
significant. In unreported regressions we have also explored specifications where we have interacted
the concentration variable with these regulatory variables, but the interaction terms did not enter
significantly.
3. Concentration, ownership, institutions, and crises
In Table 5, we explore the impact of concentration, bank ownership, and the overall
institutional environment variables on bank fragility. We examined each of the ownership and
institutional indicators both with and without concentration included in the regression. Since the
coefficients on the ownership and institutional variables are not significantly different in either
specification, we only report the results of the regressions that include concentration. The first two
columns explore the impact of bank ownership on fragility.
The data do not indicate a strong link between bank fragility and either state or foreign
ownership. While some regressions indicate a positive impact of state ownership on bank fragility,
this result is not very robust.10 The impact of foreign ownership on fragility is negative, but
insignificant.
In contrast, the variables that capture the general openness and competitiveness of the banking
system and the economy enter with negative and very significant coefficients. Thus countries with
greater freedoms in banking and generally more competitive economic policies are less likely to
experience banking crises. This is the case despite the fact these policies also tend to reduce entry

10

In the specification that excludes bank concentration, state ownership is not significant. Replicating these regressions
using LLS (1999) measure of state bank ownership confirm these findings.

15

barriers and are correlated with reduced levels of bank concentration. Better institutional
environment is also associated with a lower probability of systemic crisis, as expected. The evidence
is consistent with theories that emphasize the stabilizing effects of competition (Boyd and De Nicolo,
2003), but inconsistent with the many models that stress the destabilizing effects from competition.11
The results on bank concentration are robust to including bank ownership and general
competition and institutional variables. In unreported regressions we also explored whether the
impact of concentration on fragility differs in countries with different levels of freedoms and
institutional development, by including interaction terms in the regressions. None of these interaction
terms were significant, suggesting that bank concentration reduces fragility regardless of the
competition environment or the institutional development of the country.
4. Concentration, regulations, ownership, institutions, and crises
In Table 6, we simultaneously include bank concentration, regulations, ownership, and
institutions. In each specification we enter bank concentration, the index of overall institutional
development, and a measure of regulation.
Bank concentration remains significantly, negatively associated with bank fragility even when
controlling for the regulatory variables and overall institutional development. Indeed, the size of the
coefficient on concentration is not substantially affected by expanding the conditioning information
set.
In contrast, the regulatory restriction variables and the overall institutional development
indicators exhibit substantial multicollinearity. Their independent significance is materially
weakened in Table 6 when they are included jointly. These results suggest that regulatory
11

Boyd and De Nicolo (2003) stress that competition exerts a stabilizing impact on banks because more competitive
banks charge lower interest rates to firms and these lower rates reduce the likelihood of default. This prediction is
consistent with our results. However, Boyd and De Nicolo (2003) use bank concentration as an indicator of bank

16

approaches to banking are part of the overall national approach to openness, competition, and private
property in the economy.
The evidence in Table 6 suggests that bank concentration is not a simple proxy for regulatory
restrictions or national institutions. Bank concentration enters negatively in the crisis regression
when controlling for regulations and institutions. These findings support the view that concentrated
banking systems are more stable than less concentrated systems. The data are inconsistent with
theories that predict more fragility in more concentrated banking systems.
The findings that (i) concentration lowers fragility and (ii) low competition raises fragility
imply that future research needs to move beyond a simple “concentration-stability” versus
“concentration-fragility” debate where concentration is viewed as a simple proxy for market power.
There are at least three possible explanations for our finding that concentration is negatively
associated with bank fragility. First, concentrated banking system may have bigger banks that are
better diversified than less concentrated banking systems. Second, concentrated banking systems
may reduce fragility by boosting bank profits. Third, concentrated banking systems with a few large
banks may be easier to monitor than a banking system with many small banks. Recall, however, that
this paper finds that greater competition in banking promotes bank stability, which is inconsistent
with the argument that concentration enhances stability by boosting bank profits. If our measures of
regulatory restrictions and market openness do a reasonably good job of measuring the
competitiveness of the banking industry, then the finding that concentration remains negatively
associated with the probability of suffering a systemic banking crises while controlling for the
competitiveness of the market implies that concentration is measuring “something else” besides
market power. Thus, within the concentration-stability view, at least two remaining explanations

competition. Thus, they stress that concentration will exert a destabilizing impact on banks, which is inconsistent with
our results.

17

may account for the positive link between concentration and stability: more diversification and easier
monitoring. We hope that future studies at the individual bank-level can identify why bank
concentration is negatively correlated with bank fragility even after controlling for the degree of
competition in the banking industry.12
B. Sensitivity analyses
In Table 7, we try to better understand how the relationship between concentration and
fragility changes at high levels of bank concentration. In columns (1) to (6) we define a high
concentration dummy for different cut-off levels of concentration using 45th to 70th percentiles, where
the dummy takes the value one at this cut-off value of concentration or higher. Results indicate that
the high concentration dummy is significant between the 45th and 65th percentiles, for concentration
levels between 74 and 84 percent. However, once we hit the 70th percentile, at concentrations levels
of 87 percent or higher, the effect is no longer significant. The loss of significance may be due to the
fact that we only have 11 countries with concentration levels of over 87 percent that experienced a
crisis, and when the sample becomes very imbalanced with respect to crisis/non-crisis observations
estimation becomes imprecise. In the last column, we estimate a polynomial, including squared and
cubed concentration terms. The squared term is positive and the cubed term is negative in this
specification, both significant at ten percent, suggesting that there are indeed nonlinear effects at high
levels of concentration. To see if in addition to the intercept change there is also a slope change at
high concentration levels, we also explored specifications where we included an interaction term of
12

We tried to assess directly the views that (1) concentration is negatively related to bank fragility because a few large
banks tend to be better diversified and (2) concentration is negatively related to bank fragility because a few large banks
are easier to monitor than many small banks. However, the available measures of these two views at the country level are
very crude. To proxy for the diversification channel, we used measures of bank size, economy size, an indicator of the
ability of banks to diversify abroad, and an indicator of whether regulatory authorities enforce diversification guidelines.
When controlling for these variables, concentration remained significant and these proxies for diversification did not enter
significantly. To measure monitoring complexity, we used the number of banks in the economy and the indicator of
regulatory restrictions on bank activities (since more complex financial institutions – that is, banks that are able to engage

18

the concentration variable and high concentration dummy. The coefficient estimate was not
significant.
We conclude that while there is some evidence that the impact of concentration on stability is
less strong at high levels of concentration, this result is somewhat sensitive to how we define high
concentration. In sum, our results indicate that the overall effect of concentration on fragility is
negative at all levels of bank concentration, even after we control for bank regulation and
supervision, differences in bank ownership, the level of competitiveness in banking and the economy
and general institutional development.
In Table 8, we investigate the sensitivity of our results to the way we define the crisis dummy
and the concentration variable. As discussed above, when a crisis lasts for more than one year, we
only include the first year of the crisis and omit the other years. In column 2, we include these crisis
period observations that occur after the first year of the crisis and treat them as crisis observations. In
column 3, we include these crisis period observations that occur after the first year of the crisis and
treat them as non-crisis observations. As shown, the results are not sensitive to the treatment of the
crisis period observations that occur after the first year of the crisis. In the next two columns we
redefine the crisis dummy using the definitions provided in Caprio and Klingebiel (1999). Column 4
still focuses on systemic bank crises13 and column 5 also includes borderline crises.14 Since the focus
of our study is on systemic crises, we think it is more accurate to only examine system-wide failures.
Nonetheless, concentration is still negative and significant at the ten percent level.

in underwriting, brokerage activities, insurance activities, etc. – maybe more difficult to monitor). Again, these proxies
did not change our findings on concentration.
13
Portugal and Guyana are re-defined as noncrisis countries and India, Italy, Jordan, Papua New Guinea, and US are
excluded from the sample since they are classified as borderline as opposed to systemic banking crises.
14
Portugal and Guyana are re-defined as noncrisis countries and the following crises are added to the sample Burundi
(1994-97), Canada (1983-85), Congo (1992-97), Denmark (1987-92), and France (1994-95).

19

Next we turn to the definition of the concentration variable. In column 6 we first replicate the
baseline regression replacing the concentration variable by the one obtained from Barth, et al.,
(2001). This measure of concentration, obtained through surveys of bank regulators, is calculated as
the fraction of deposits held by the five largest commercial banks in each country as of end-1999.
We expect this measure not to suffer from problems of differential coverage in each country since the
source is the bank regulators themselves. Using this different measure of bank concentration, we get
very similar results.
There may exist concerns regarding reverse causality. This would be the case if systemic
crises led to lower levels of concentration in the banking system through greater entry or changes in
general competition policies. When we inspect individual crisis cases in our sample, however, we do
not see a significant pattern of reduced concentration after the crisis episodes and the concentration
levels do not vary significantly from year to year.15 Nevertheless, we estimate a specification where
we define concentration as the initial level of concentration (1988 or the first available year) instead
of the 1988-97 average. As can be seen in column 7 of Table 8, this does not change our results
significantly, which is consistent with the observation that concentration does not vary much over
time. This estimation is still subject to problems though, since some of the crisis episodes have taken
place before the date for which we have data for concentration. Thus, we drop all those crisis
episodes that precede the initial concentration date. This leaves us with only 20 crisis episodes and
less than half of the total number of observations, yet the concentration variable still remains negative
and significant (column 8, Table 8). These results lead us to believe that the negative impact of
concentration on banking system fragility is not due to reverse causality.
So far in the analysis, we have allowed for heteroskedasticity of errors and corrected for it,
but assumed that the errors are independent. However, given that we use a panel data set, it is likely

20

that the error terms within individual country observations are correlated with each other. Table 9,
column 1 reports our results relaxing the assumption that within country observations are
independent. Concentration still enters with a negative and significant coefficient. In column 2, we
estimate a logit model with random country effects. Again, the results are not significantly different.
We also investigate the sensitivity our results to using alternative samples. In column 3 of
Table 9, we exclude from the sample all countries with populations less than 1 million. Results are
not sensitive to excluding small countries. In column 4, we exclude all African countries since they
tend to have very high bank concentration ratios. We see that our results are not driven by African
observations. In column 5, we exclude all developed countries from the analysis. Again, we see that
concentration significantly reduces fragility also in the sample of developing countries. Finally, in
column 6 we exclude a few outlier observations in terms of inflation and interest rates, which leaves
the results unchanged.16

V.

Conclusions
This paper investigates the impact of bank concentration, bank regulations, bank ownership,

and the overall competitive/institutional environment on banking system fragility. We use crosscountry data on 70 countries and 47 crisis episodes. In concluding, we emphasize three findings.
First, bank concentration has a stabilizing effect. Concentrated banking systems are less
likely to experience systemic banking crises, even after controlling for a wide array of
macroeconomic, regulatory and institutional factors. There is also some evidence that the stabilizing
effect of bank concentration is weaker at higher levels of concentration, although this does not
change the fact that the overall impact of concentration on fragility is negative and that the

15

Also note that the actual crisis period immediately following the crisis is taken out of the estimations.
Excluded observations are Gabon (1993) and Ivory Coast (1993) because their M2/reserves values are outliers and Peru
(1991) because its inflation and real interest rate values are outliers.

16

21

relationship holds when controlling for bank regulations and the overall competitive/institutional
climate.
Second, confirming the earlier results of Barth et al. (2003), we find that entry barriers and
activity restrictions have a destabilizing effect on banking systems. Banking systems where a larger
fraction of entry applications are denied, and those where regulations restrict banks from engaging in
non-loan making activities have a greater likelihood of experiencing a systemic crisis. The data do
not support the view that more competition induces greater fragility. Quite to the contrary, more
competitive banking systems and those with fewer entry regulations and activity restrictions tend to
be more stable.
Finally, we find that countries with better-developed institutions and with policies that
promote competition throughout the economy are less likely to suffer from systemic banking crises.
The composite indicator of institutional development always has a negative and significant sign in the
fragility regressions. Moreover, we find that it is difficult to identify the independent effect of bank
regulations and bank policies that promote competition from the overall institutional environment.
Countries with better institutions (property rights, rule of law, political openness, low corruption,
etc.) also tend to be countries with bank regulations and bank policies that support openness and
competition. Thus, while bank regulations and policies that foster competition and contestability
promote bank stability, these regulations and policies cannot be viewed in isolation from the overall
institutional environment.

22

References
Allen, Franklin, 1990. “The Market for Information and the Origin of Financial Intermediation.”
Journal of Financial Intermediation 1, no. 1, May.
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2000. Comparing Financial Systems. Cambridge and London:
MIT press.
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2003. “Competition and Financial Stability.” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, forthcoming.
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio Jr., and Ross Levine, 2001, “Banking Systems Around the Globe:
Do Regulation and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” In: F. Mishkin (ed.),
Financial Supervision and Regulation: What Works and What Doesn’t, Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press, 31-88.
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio Jr., and Ross Levine, 2004, “Bank Supervision and Regulation: What
Works Best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.
Beck, Thorsten; Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli; Levine, Ross, 2000, “A New Database on the Structure and
Development of the Financial Sector” The World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605.
Boyd, J.H., and De Nicolo, G., 2003. “Competition and Bank Risk Revisited” University of
Minnesota mimeo.
Boyd, J. H. and S. Graham (1991). “Investigating the Banking Consolidation Trend,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Spring, 1-15.
Boyd, J. H. and S. Graham (1998). “Consolidation in US Banking,” in Y. Amihud and G. Miller
(eds.), Bank Mergers and Acquisitions, Norwell, MA. Kluwer, pp. 113-135.
Boyd John H., and David E. Runkle, 1993. “Size and Performance of Banking Firms: Testing the
Predictions of Theory.” Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 47-67.
Boyd John H., and Edward C. Prescott, 1986. “Financial Intermediary-Coalitions.” Journal of
Economic Theory 38, 211-232.
Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingebiel, 1999, “Episodes of Systematic and Borderline Financial
Distress”, mimeo, The World Bank.
Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria, 2000. “Avoiding Disaster: Policies to Reduce
the Risk of Banking Crises.” Discussion Paper. Egyptian Center for Economic Studies.

23

Carkovic, Maria and Ross Levine, 2002. “Finance and Growth: New Evidence and Policy Analyses
for Chile,” In Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, Editors, Economic Growth: Sources,
Trends, and Cycles, Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile, pp. 343-376.
Chan, Yuk-Shee, Stuart Greenbaum, and Anjan Thakor, 1992. “Is Fairly Priced Deposit Insurance
Possible?” Journal of Finance 47, 227-245.
Claessens, Stijn, Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga, 2001. “How Does Foreign Entry Affect
Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance, 25(5),
Cole, R. A. and Gunther, J.W., 1993. “Separating the Likelihood and Timing of Bank Failure.” Finance
and Economics Discussion Series No. 93-20, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Washington D.C.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, 1989. "Deposit-Institution Failures: A review of Empirical Literature,"
Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Vol. 25, No.4.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 1998, “The Determinants of Banking Crises in
Developing and Developed Countries”, IMF Staff Papers, 45 (1), pp. 81-109.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 1999, “Financial Liberalization and Financial
Fragility”, in B. Pleskovic and J.E. Stiglitz (Eds.) Proceedings of the 1998 World Bank
Conference on Development Economics, Washington, DC, The World Bank.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 2003, “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking
System Stability? An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 15 (3),
pp.1337-1371.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Laeven, Luc and Ross Levine, 2004, “Regulations, Market Structure,
Institutions, and the Cost of Financial Intermediation.” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, forthcoming.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1984. “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring.” Review of
Economic Studies 51, 393-414.
Flannery, Mark J., 1989. “Capital Regulation and Insured Banks’ Choice of Individual Loan Default
Risks.” Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 235-258.
Gonzales-Hermosillo, B, Pazarbasioglu, C. And Billings, R., 1997. “Banking System Fragility:
Likelihood Versus Timing of Failure – An Application to the Mexican Financial Crisis,” IMF
Staff Papers.
Group of Ten, 2001. Report on Consolidation in the Financial Sector, Bank for International
Settlements: Basel, Switzerland.

24

Hellman, Thomas, Kevin Murdock, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2000, Liberalization, moral hazard in
banking and prudential regulation: Are capital controls enough? American Economic Review
90(1), pp 147-165.
International Monetary Fund, 2001. Financial Sector Consolidation in Emerging Markets, Chapter V,
International Capital Market Report.
Kaminsky, Graciela, and Reinhart, Carmen, 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic Review 89 (3), 473-500.
Kane, Edward J., 1989. The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did It Happen? Washington: Urban Institute
Press.
Kaufman, D., Kraay, A., Lobaton, P.Z. 1999. “Governance Matters.” World Bank Policy Research
Department Working Paper No. 2196.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, 2002. “Government Ownership of
Banks.” Journal of Finance, 57(1), 265-301.
Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Gillian Garcia, and Matthew I. Saal, 1996, Bank Soundness and
Macroeconomic Policy, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Macey, J.R., O’Hara, M., 2003, “The corporate governance of banks,” FRBNY Economic Policy
Review 9, 91-107.
Merton, Robert C., 1977.” An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan
Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory.” Journal of Banking and
finance 1, 3-11.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1999. “Financial Consolidation: Dangers and Opportunities.” Journal of
Banking and Finance 23, 675-691.
O’Hara, Maureen and Shaw, W., 1990. “Deposit Insurance and Wealth Effects: The Value of Being
‘Too Big to Fail’,” Journal of Finance, December.
Ramakrishnan, Ram and Anjan V. Thakor, 1984. “Information Reliability and A Theory of Financial
Intermediation.” Review of Economic Studies 51, 415-432.
Sharpe, William F., 1978. “Bank Capital Adequacy, Deposit Insurance and Security Values.” Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 13, 701-718.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1972. “Some Aspects of the Pure Theory of Corporate Finance: Bankruptcies and
Takeovers.” Bell Journal of Economics 3 (3), 458-82.
Williamson, Stephen D., 1986. “ Costly Monitoring, Financial Intermediation, and Equilibrium
Credit Rationing.” Journal of Monetary Economics 18, 159-179.

25

26

Table 1. Bank Concentration and Competition and Banking Crises
GDP per capita is in constant dollars, averaged over the entire sample period. Crisis period denotes the years in which each
country experienced a systemic banking crisis and the duration of said crisis. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the
banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample
period. Sources are in the data appendix.
GDP per capita

Crisis Period

Concentration

Australia

17913

0.65

Austria

25785

0.75

Bahrain

9398

0.93

Belgium

24442

0.64

Belize

2996

Benin

362

Botswana

2781

Burkina Faso

230

Burundi

186

Cameroon

790

(1988-90)

1.00
0.94

(1988-94)
1.00
(1987-93, 1995-98)

0.95

Canada

18252

0.58

Chile

3048

(1981-87)

0.49

Colombia

1802

(1982-85)

0.49

Congo

940

Ivory Coast

843

Cyprus

9267

0.88

Denmark

31049

0.78

Dominican Republic

1426

0.65

Ecuador

1516

Egypt

905

El Salvador

1450

(1989)

0.84

Finland

23304

(1991-94)

0.85

France

24227

Gabon

4625

Gambia

369

Germany

27883

1.00
(1988-91)

(1995-97)

0.96

0.40
0.67

0.44

0.48

Ghana

356

(1982-89)

0.89

Greece

10202

0.79

Guatemala

1415

0.37

Guinea

523

(1993-94)

Guyana

653

(1993-95)

Honduras

694

India

313

(1991-97)

0.47

Indonesia

761

(1992-97)

0.44

1.00
0.44

GDP per capita

Crisis Period

Concentration

Ireland

13419

0.74

Israel

13355

(1983-84)

0.84

Italy

17041

(1990-95)

0.35

Jamaica

1539

(1996-97)

0.82

Japan

35608

(1992-97)

0.24

Jordan

1646

(1989-90)

0.92

Kenya

336

(1993)

0.74

Korea

6857

(1997)

0.31

Lesotho

356

Malawi

154

Malaysia

3197

(1985-88, 1997)

0.54

Mali

260

(1987-89)

0.91

Mauritania

456

(1984-93)

Mauritius

2724

Mexico

3240

(1982, 1994-97)

0.63

Nepal

179

(1988-97)

0.90

1.00

0.94

Netherlands

22976

0.76

New Zealand

15539

0.77

Niger

245

(1983-97)

Nigeria

251

(1991-95)

0.83

Norway

28843

(1987-93)

0.85

Panama

2824

(1988-89)

0.42

Papua New Guinea

1024

(1989-97)

0.87

Peru

2458

(1983-90)

0.69

Philippines

1070

(1981-87)

0.49

Portugal

8904

(1986-89)

0.46

Senegal

562

(1988-91)

0.94

Seychelles

5719

Sierra Leone

260

(1990-97)

1.00

Singapore

20079

South Africa

3680

(1985)

0.77

Sri Lanka

588

(1989-93)

0.86

Swaziland

1254

(1995)

0.95

Sweden

24845

(1990-93)

0.89

Switzerland

42658

Tanzania

0.71

0.77

170

(1988-97)

28

1.00

GDP per capita

Crisis Period

Concentration

Thailand

1886

(1983-87, 1997)

0.54

Togo

366

1.00

Tunisia

1831

0.63

Turkey

2451

United Kingdom

16883

United States

24459

(1980-92)

0.19

Uruguay

5037

(1981-85)

0.87

Venezuela

3558

(1993-97)

0.52

Zambia

464

(1982, 1991, 1994)

0.45
0.57

0.84

29

Table 2. Summary Statistics and Correlations
Summary statistics are presented in Panel A and correlations in Panel B and C. Banking crisis is a crisis dummy, which takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the
value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate
of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is
the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of
concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Fraction of entry
applications denied is the number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the number of applications received from domestic and foreign entities. Activity restrictions
measures the degree to which a bank is able to engage in business of securities underwriting, insurance underwriting and selling, and in real estate investment, management, and
development. Required reserves is the percentage of reserves regulators require to hold. Capital regulatory index measures capital stringency in the banking system. State
ownership measures the percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more government owned, while foreign ownership measures percentage of banking
system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more foreign owned. Banking freedom is an indicator of the relative openness of the banking system. Economic freedom is a composite
measure of institutional factors determining economic freedom. KKZ_composite is a composite measure of governance indicators. Sources are given in the data appendix.

Panel A: Summary Statistics:
Banking crisis
Growth
Terms of trade change
Real interest rate
Inflation
M2/reserves
Depreciation
Credit Growtht-2
Real GDP per capita
Moral hazard
Concentration
Fraction of entry applications denied
Activity restrictions
Required reserves
Capital regulatory index
State ownership
Foreign ownership
Banking freedom
Economic freedom
KKZ_composite

Mean
0.04
3.41
0.15
1.58
14.07
19.87
0.10
6.01
7813.94
-1.09
0.72
0.21
9.44
12.48
5.41
17.84
23.85
3.36
3.17
0.28

Median
0.00
3.45
0.01
2.68
7.75
6.56
0.04
5.09
2302.37
-2.49
0.77
0.08
9.00
10.00
5.50
11.56
11.70
3.00
3.05
-0.03

St.Dev.
0.20
4.25
10.30
19.34
23.42
68.86
0.22
15.84
10299.92
2.24
0.21
0.29
2.64
11.86
1.70
20.95
26.59
0.88
0.61
0.79

Maximum
1.00
23.60
63.24
151.21
350.56
1289.31
2.62
115.42
45950.46
3.98
1.00
1.00
14.00
43.00
8.00
80.00
99.00
5.00
4.50
1.72

Minimum
0.00
-17.15
-51.45
-283.00
-29.17
0.19
-0.35
-54.62
134.54
-2.49
0.19
0.00
4.00
0.00
2.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.9
-1.03

Observations
1230
1216
1191
1160
1220
1222
1238
1203
1222
1238
1106
688
903
692
871
796
710
1184
1184
1220

Panel B: Correlations: Banking Crisis, Concentration, Regulations, and Institutions
Banking crisis

Concentration

Fraction of
entry apps
denied

Activity
restrictions

Required
reserves

Capital
Regulatory
index

Moral
hazard

State
ownership

Foreign
ownership

Banking
freedom

Concentration

-0.032

Fraction of entry
apps denied
Activity
restrictions
Required reserves

0.058

0.001

0.058*

-0.027

0.461***

0.016

0.183***

0.334***

0.233***

Capital regulatory
index
Moral hazard

-0.016

0.053

-0.048

-0.084***

0.229***

0.013

-0.396***

-0.238***

-0.248***

-0.105***

0.107***

State ownership

0.034

0.048

0.433***

0.284***

0.356***

0.039

-0.022

Foreign ownership

-0.050

0.394***

0.059

0.025

0.262***

0.192***

-0.321***

-0.234***

Banking freedom

-0.072***

-0.0249***

-0.382***

-0.477***

-0.101***

0.077***

0.174***

-0.385***

0.190***

Economic freedom

-0.056**

-0.390***

-0.450***

-0.515***

-0.401***

0.069**

0.327***

-0.539***

-0.003

0.745***

KKZ_composite

-0.070***

0.354***

-0.507***

-0.566***

-0.445***

0.067**

0.354***

-0.460***

0.029

0.560***

Economic
freedom

0.861***

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

Panel C: Correlations: Banking Crisis, Concentration, and Macro Indicators
Banking crisis
Real GDP growth
Terms of trade change
Real interest rate
Inflation
M2/reserves
Depreciation
Credit growtht-2
Real GDP per capita
Concentration

-0.139***
-0.021
0.006
0.063***
0.033
0.072***
0.042
-0.061**
-0.032

Real GDP
growth

Terms of trade
change

Real interest
rate

0.046*
0.085***
-0.103***
-0.098***
-0.168***
0.024
-0.055**
-0.076***

-0.050**
0.038
0.007
-0.020
0.000
0.017
-0.007

-0.980***
0.010
-0.546***
0.003
0.026
0.004

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

31

Inflation

M2/reserves

Depreciation

Credit Growtht-2

-0.015
0.616***
-0.007
-0.047*
0.000

-0.031
-0.045*
-0.033
0.100***

-0.054**
-0.201***
0.044*

-0.008
-0.001

Real GDP per
capita

-0.246***

Table 3. Banking Crisis and Concentration
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t +
β5M2/reservesj,t + β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 + β8 Real GDP per capitaj,t+β9 Moral Hazard Indexj,t+β10 Average concentrationj,t+ β11 concentration 2j,t+ εj,t. The
dependent variable is a crisis dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest
rate is the nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international
reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of
moral hazard associated with varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by
the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. White’s
heteroskedasiticy consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.145***
(0.031)
-0.009
(0.010)
0.009***
(0.004)
0.007
(0.008)
0.001
(0.001)
0.667
(1.051)
0.013*
(0.008)
-0.004**
(0.002)
0.154***
(0.070)

-0.169***
(0.035)
-0.014
(0.012)
0.010***
(0.004)
0.008
(0.009)
0.002*
(0.001)
0.441
(1.177)
0.013
(0.009)
-0.004**
(0.002)
0.102
(0.075)

-0.165***
(0.035)
-0.013
(0.012)
0.011***
(0.004)
0.009
(0.009)
0.002
(0.001)
0.488
(1.192)
0.014*
(0.009)
-0.005**
(0.002)
0.117*
(0.080)

-0.166***
(0.036)
-0.015
(0.013)
0.010***
(0.004)
0.009
(0.008)
0.002*
(0.001)
0.807
(1.153)
0.015*
(0.009)

-1.654**
(0.853)

-6.930*
(4.807)
4.013
(3.651)

-1.467**
(0.565)

51

47

47

47

1103

989

989

989

% crises correct

61

66

68

66

% correct

73

73

73

71

47.94***

48.46***

54.38***

37.93***

Real GDP growth
Terms of trade change
Real interest rate
Inflation
M2/reserves
Depreciation
Credit Growtht-2
Real GDP per capita
Moral Hazard Index

Concentration
(Concentration)2

No. of Crises
No. of Observations

2

Model χ

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

0.037
(0.075)

Table 4. Banking Crisis, Regulation and Concentration
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t +
β5M2/reservesj,t + β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 + β8Moral Hazard Indexj,t+β9 Concentrationj,t+ β10 Regulatory measuresj,t+ εj,t. The dependent variable is a crisis
dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest
rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the
real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with
varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each
country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. The Regulatory measures in specifications
(1)-(4) - Fraction of entry applications denied, Activity restrictions, Required reserves and Capital regulatory index, - are included (one at a time) as regressors. Fraction of entry
applications denied measures the number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the total received. Activity restrictions captures bank’s ability to engage in business of
securities underwriting, insurance underwriting and selling, and in real estate investment, management, and development. Required reserves is the percentage of reserves
regulators require to hold Capital regulatory index is a summary measure of capital stringency. White’s heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are given in parentheses.
Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

Concentration
Fraction of Entry Applications
Denied
Activity Restrictions

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-2.320*
(1.554)
1.993***
(0.750)

-1.928**
(1.016)

-2.695***
(1.203)

-2.375***
(1.115)

0.182***
(0.073)

Required Reserves

0.017
(0.017)

Capital Regulatory Index

-0.078
(0.129)

No. of Crises

21

34

27

33

No. of Observations

583

767

572

755

% crises correct

67

74

67

70

% correct

77

75

72

73

Model χ2

31.97***

37.38***

30.38***

37.38***

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

33

Table 5. Banking Crisis, Ownership, Institutions, and Concentration
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t +
β5M2/reservesj,t + β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 +β8 Moral hazard indexj,t + β9 Concentrationj,t + β10 Regulatory measuresj,t+ εj,t. The dependent variable is a crisis
dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest
rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the
real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with
varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each
country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. The Regulatory measures in n
specifications (1)-(5) - State ownership, Foreign ownership, Banking freedom, Economic freedom, and KKZ_composite - are included (one at a time) as regressors. State
ownership is the percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more government owned. Foreign ownership is the percentage of banking system’s assets in banks
that are 50% or more foreign owned. Banking freedom is an indicator of relative openness of banking and financial system, while economic freedom is a composite of 10
institutional factors determining economic freedom. KKZ_composite is an aggregate measure of six governance indicators. White’s heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors
are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

Concentration
State ownership

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-2.571***
(1.132)
0.015**
(0.008)

-2.199**
(1.089)

-1.777**
(0.839)

-1.752**
(0.840)

-1.651**
(0.810)

Foreign ownership

-0.003
(0.008)

Banking Freedom

-0.513***
(0.164)

Economic Freedom

-0.554***
(0.227)

KKZ_composite

-0.484***
(0.203)

No. of Crises

32

31

47

47

47

No. of obs.

686

609

955

955

989

% crises correct

75

71

68

66

68

% correct

69

66

69

70

72

Model χ2

30.90***

33.66***

52.31***

47.01***

48.77***

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

34

Table 6. Banking Crisis, Governance, Ownership, Institutions, and Concentration
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t +
β5M2/reservesj,t + β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 +β8 Moral hazard indexj,t +β9 KKZ_compositej,t + β10 Concentrationj,t+,t β11 Regulatory measuresj,t+ εj,t. The dependent
variable is a crisis dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the
nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves.
Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of moral
hazard associated with varying deposit insurance schemes. KKZ_composite is an aggregate measure of six governance indicators. Concentration is a measure of concentration in
the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope
database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. The Regulatory measures in n specifications (1)-(4) – Fraction of entry applications, denied, Activity restrictions, and
State ownership - are included (one at a time) as regressors. Fraction of entry applications denied measures the number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the total
received. Activity restrictions captures bank’s ability to engage in business of securities underwriting, insurance underwriting and selling, and in real estate investment,
management, and development. State ownership is the percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more government owned. Banking freedom is an indicator
of relative openness of banking and financial system, while economic freedom is a composite of 10 institutional factors determining economic freedom. White’s
heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Concentration

-1.651**
(0.810)

-2.324*
(1.588)

-1.962**
(0.992)

-2.515***
(1.141)

KKZ_composite

-0.484***
(0.203)

0.018
(0.517)

-0.138
(0.329)

-0.319
(0.313)

Fraction of Entry Applications
Denied
Activity Restrictions

2.016*
(1.182)
0.162*
(0.992)

State ownership

0.011
(0.009)

No. of Crises

47

21

34

32

No. of obs.

989

583

767

686

% crises correct

68

67

74

75

% correct

72

77

74

70

Model χ2

48.77***

43.78***

46.01***

40.04***

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

35

Table 7. Banking Crisis and High Concentration: Robustness Tests
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t +
β5M2/reservesj,t + β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 + β8 Real GDP per capitaj,t+β9 Moral Hazard Indexj,t+β10 Average concentrationj,t+ β11High concentrationj,t+ εj,t. The
dependent variable is a crisis dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest
rate is the nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international
reserves. Credit growth is the real growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of
moral hazard associated with varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by
the three largest banks in each country, averaged over the sample period. High concentration is a dummy taking a value of one in cases where the banking concentration is greater
than or equal to the cutoff listed in the footnote of the table. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. Specifications (1)- (6)
use high concentration at the 45th, 50th, 55th, 60th, 65th, and 70th percentile, respectively. White’s heteroskedasiticy consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed
variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

Concentration
High Concentration

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-3.453***
(1.386)
0.891*
(0.559)

-4.118***
(1.359)
1.330**
(0.635)

-4.255***
(1.306)
1.457**
(0.651)

-4.513***
(1.350)
1.731***
(0.685)

-4.513***
(1.351)
1.731***
(0.685)

-2.296**
(1.237)
0.506
(0.657)

-30.294**
(15.178)

Concentration2

43.831*
(25.830)
-20.968*
(13.735)

Concentration3

No. of Crises

47

47

47

47

47

47

47

No. of Observations

989

989

989

989

989

989

989

% crises correct

70

75

75

70

70

66

75

% correct

72

72

62

73

73

72

73

Model χ

48.67***

51.49***

56.18***

56.05***

56.05***

52.33***

55.35***

Value of cutoff

0.73927

0.76707

0.78977

0.83955

0.84154

0.87530

2

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

36

Table 8. Banking Crisis and Concentration: Alternative Crisis and Concentration Measures
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t +
β5M2/reservesj,t + β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 + β8 Real GDP per capitaj,t+β9 Moral Hazard Indexj,t+β10 Average concentrationj,t+ εj,t. The dependent variable is a crisis
dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate
minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real
growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with
varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each
country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. Specification (2) includes the crisis period
as crisis observations. Specification (3) includes the crisis period (after the initial crisis year) as non-crisis observations. Specifications (4) and (5) use alternative definitions of
crisis based on Caprio and Klingebiel (1999). In specification (6) Average Concentration is replaced by the concentration data from Barth, Caprio and Levine (2001) – Bank
Regulation and Supervision, for the entire sample period. In specification (7) Average Concentration is replaced by Initial Concentration, for the entire sample period. In
specification (8) Initial Concentration is restricted to the actual starting date and the years following that date (for many of the countries, the restricted sample is either 1988-97 or
1990-97) White’s heteroskedasiticy consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Concentration

-1.654**
(0.853)

-0.960**
(0.448)

-1.476**
(0.791)

-1.432*
(0.912)

-1.337*
(0.823)

-1.536*
(1.010)

-1.699**
(0.846)

-3.534***
(1.477)

No. of Crises

47

202

47

40

50

32

47

20

No. of Observations

989

1144

1144

938

980

730

989

410

% crises correct

66

59

68

70

72

72

66

70

% correct

73

67

67

69

61

75

74

77

48.46***

90.50***

37.54***

49.56***

56.50***

47.99***

47.29***

40.62***

2

Model χ

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

37

Table 9. Banking Crisis and Concentration: Additional Robustness Tests
The logit probability model estimated is Banking Crisis [Country=j, Time= t]= α + β1 Real GDP growthj,t+ β2 Terms of trade changej,t + β3 Real interest ratej,t + β4 Inflation j,t +
β5M2/reservesj,t + β6Depreciationj,t + β7 Credit growthj,t-2 + β8 Real GDP per capitaj,t+β9 Moral Hazard Indexj,t+β10 Average concentrationj,t+ εj,t. The dependent variable is a crisis
dummy that takes on the value of one if there is a systemic and the value of zero otherwise. Growth is the rate of growth of real GDP. Real interest rate is the nominal interest rate
minus the contemporaneous rate of inflation. Inflation is the rate of change of the GDP deflator. M2/reserves is the ratio of M2 to international reserves. Credit growth is the real
growth of domestic credit, lagged two periods. Depreciation is the rate of change of the exchange rate. Moral hazard is an aggregate index of moral hazard associated with
varying deposit insurance schemes. Concentration is a measure of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks in each
country, averaged over the sample period. Bank data are from the BankScope database of Fitch IBCA. The sample period is 1980-1997. In specification (1) the sample is clustered
by country. In specification (2) the estimation includes random country effects. In specification (3) the sample excludes all countries with populations less than 1 million. In
specification (4) the sample excludes all African countries. In specification (5) the sample excludes all developed countries. In specification (6) we remove outliers found in three
control variables – real interest rate, inflation, and m2/reserves. White’s heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. Detailed variable definitions and
sources are given in the data appendix.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Concentration

-1.654***
(0.755)

-1.654***
(0.799)

-1.709**
(0.900)

-2.094**
(1.113)

-1.519**
(0.856)

-1.706**
(0.859)

No. of Crises

47

47

45

35

39

47

No. of Observations

997

989

927

734

670

987

% crises correct

66

67

69

77

68

% correct

73

73

68

52

73

56.74***

45.18***

29.01**

48.89***

2

Model χ

54.50***

40.96***

***,**, and * indicate statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively.

38

Data Appendix
Variable Name

Definition

Source

Banking crisis

Demirguc-Kunt and Detragaiche (2001)

Growth

Dummy takes on value of one during episodes identified as a
systematic banking crises
Rate of growth of real GDP

Terms of trade change

Change in the terms of trade

WDI (World Bank)

Real interest rate

IFS (IMF)

Inflation

Nominal interest rate minus the contemporaneous rate of
inflation
Rate of change of GDP deflator

IFS (IMF)

M2/reserves

Ratio of M2 to international reserves

IFS (IMF)

Depreciation

Rate of depreciation

IFS (IMF)

Credit growth

Rate of growth of real domestic credit to the private sector

IFS line 32d divided by GDP deflator

GDP/CAP

Real GDP per capita

WDI (World Bank)

GDP

Real GDP in billions of US dollars

WDI (World Bank)

Moral hazard index

Principal component indicator measuring the generosity of
deposit insurance, based on co-insurance, coverage of foreign
currency and interbank deposits, type and source of funding,
management, membership and level of explicit coverage.
Degree of concentration in the banking industry, calculated as
the fraction of assets held by the three largest banks. Averaged
over the 1988-97 period.
Total banking assets divided by number of banks.

DD (2003)

Survey question 7.2 asks if banks are prohibited from making
loans abroad (yes=1, no=0).
No. of banks in hundreds.

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Fraction of entry applications denied

Number of entry applications denied as a fraction of the number
of applications received from domestic and foreign entities

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Activity restrictions

Sum of four measures that indicate whether bank activities in
the securities, insurance, and real estate markets and ownership
and control of nonfinancial firms are (1) unrestricted, (2)
permitted, (3) restricted, or (4) prohibited
Ratio of reserves required to be held by banks

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Concentration
Mean Bank Size
No Foreign Loans
No. of Banks

Required reserves

39

WDI (World Bank)

Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Levine (2000) - Financial Structures Database
BankScope database.

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Variable Name

Definition

Source

Capital regulatory index

Summary measure of capital stringency: sum of overall and
initial capital stringency. Higher values indicate greater
stringency.

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

State ownership

Percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or
more government owned

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Foreign ownership

Percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or
more foreign owned

Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001) - Survey of Bank Regulation and Supervision

Banking Freedom

Indicator of relative openness of banking and financial system:
specifically, whether the foreign banks and financial services
firms are able to operate freely, how difficult it is to open
domestic banks and other financial services firms, how heavily
regulated the financial system is, the presence of state-owned
banks, whether the government influences allocation of credit,
and whether banks are free to provide customers with insurance
and invest in securities (and vice-versa). The index ranges in
value from 1 (very low – banks are primitive) to 5 (very high –
few restrictions). Averaged over 1995-97 period.

Index of Economic Freedom (Heritage Foundation)

Economic Freedom

Composite of 10 institutional factors determining economic
freedom: trade policy, fiscal burden of government, government
intervention in the economy, monetary policy, capital flows and
foreign investment, banking and finance, wages and prices,
property rights, regulation, and black market activity. Individual
factors are weighted equally to determine overall score of
economic freedom. A high score signifies an institutional or
consistent set of policies that are most conducive to economic
freedom, while a score close to 1 signifies a set of policies that
are least conducive. Averaged over 1995-97 period.

Index of Economic Freedom (Heritage Foundation)

KKZ_composite

Composite of six governance indicators (1998 data): voice and
accountability, political stability, government effectiveness,
regulatory quality, rule of law, and corruption. Individual factors
are weighted equally to determine overall score of economic
freedom. Higher values correspond to better governance
outcomes.

Kaufman, Kraay and Zoido-Lobaton(1999)

40

41

