NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICE ELASTICITY OF DEMAND FOR TERM LIFE
INSURANCE AND ADVERSE SELECTION
Mark V. Pauly
Kate H. Withers
Krupa Subramanian-Viswanathan
Jean Lemaire
John C. Hershey
Katrina Armstrong
David A. Asch
Working Paper 9925
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9925
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

This research was supported by grant R01 CA82393-01A1 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, National Institutes of Health. Kate Withers contributed to the project while affiliated with the Wharton
School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Bank of America or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Mark V. Pauly, Kate H. Withers, Krupa Subramanian-Viswanathan, Jean Lemaire, John C.
Hershey, Katrina Armstrong, and David A. Asch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Price Elasticity of Demand for Term Life Insurance and Adverse Selection
Mark V. Pauly, Kate H. Withers, Krupa Subramanian-Viswanathan, Jean Lemaire, John C.
Hershey, Katrina Armstrong, and David A. Asch
NBER Working Paper No. 9925
August 2003
JEL No. D1, D8, D11, D12, D80, D82
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an empirical estimate of "price" and "risk" elasticities of demand for term
life insurance for those who purchase some insurance. It finds that the elasticity with respect to
changes in premiums is generally higher than the elasticity with respect to changes in risk. It also
finds that the elasticity, in the range of -0.3 to -0.5, is sufficiently low that adverse selection in
term life insurance is unlikely to lead to a death spiral and may not even lead to measured effects
of adverse selection on total purchases.
Mark V. Pauly
Health Care Systems Department
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu
Kate H. Withers
VP, Bank of America
201 N. Tryon Street
Charlotte, NC 28255
kate.withers@bankofamerica.com
Krupa Subramanian-Viswanathan
Department of Risk, Insurance, and Healthcare
Temple University
471 Ritter Annex (004-00)
1301 Cecil B. Moore Ave.
Philadelphia, Penna. 19122-6091
ksubrama@temple.edu
Jean Lemaire
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, Penna. 19104
lemaire@wharton.upenn.edu

John C. Hershey
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
568 John M. Huntsman Hall
Philadelphia, Penna. 19104
hershey@wharton.upenn.edu
Katrina Armstrong
School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
1233 Blockley Hall
423 Guardian Drive
Philadelphia, Penna. 19104
karmstro@cceb.med.upenn.edu
David A. Asch
Leonard Davis Institute
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, Penna. 19104
asch@wharton.upenn.edu

Introduction

To many economic theorists, adverse selection seems a pervasive characteristic of insurance
markets. This position seems eminently reasonable. Not only does it seem virtually certain that
insurance buyers will have some information on the probability or amount of loss that insurers
lack, but real world insurers seem obsessed by the thought that those who agree to buy from
them must know something to make that purchase an unusually good deal.

In the face of this theoretical and practitioner consensus, some recent high-quality empirical
economic work is finding the opposite: signs that, in both life and health insurance markets,
there is no detectable adverse selection (Cawley and Philipson 1999; Cardon and Hendel 2001).

While the authors of both articles interpret their results as evidence that, in some way, insurers
must have found out everything insureds know, such a scenario seems implausible on its face. In
both settings, the key risk is limited to an individual’s health state, and that state is notoriously
hard to measure objectively. Witness the skimpy results after enormous effort to measure the
quality of medical care by its outcome; external observers have a hard time knowing as much
about a person’s body as the person does.

However, even if buyers indeed know more than the sellers of insurance, serious adverse
selection would not occur if those buyers were sluggish in their willingness to respond to that
information. Real consumers, after all, have more on their minds than paying attention to small
bargains in insurance markets. In short, low demand responsiveness to risk and premium

2

variation can also cause markets with truly asymmetric information to avoid the instability and
bias associated with adverse selection.

This responsiveness depends on two parameters: the response of insurance demanders to
changes in risk, given price (“risk elasticity”) and the response of insurance demanders to
changes in price, given risk (“price elasticity”). In the traditional Von Neumann-Morgenstern
theory of choice under risk, the responsiveness (measured by elasticity) to the two influences
should be approximately equal and large. The demand for insurance should primarily depend on
the relationship of premium to risk, usually summarized by the “loading” ratio. The word
“approximately” is included because the income effects of an increase in premium that changes
the ratio by a given amount are opposite to those of a reduction in risk that produced the same
effect.

In this paper we estimate price and risk demand elasticities for 1year annually renewable term
life insurance. We then use these estimates to indicate how a hypothetical (but realistic)
information asymmetry would affect this market. Obviously, if information is sufficiently
asymmetric, there can always be adverse selection even with very low price elasticity of demand,
as long as the elasticity is not zero. We therefore argue that, based on the range of plausible
assumptions about variation in risk, information asymmetry would have to be very pronounced
indeed for the insurance market to exhibit strong adverse selection effects; the likelihood of a
“death spiral” is even lower.

3

Life Insurance Purchase and Adverse Selection

One difficulty with using observations of existing practices in the life insurance industry to judge
the chances of adverse selection is that those practices themselves are probably shaped by the
concern buyers and sellers have for selection. That is, both the market equilibrium that prevails
and the institutional structures that support it are potentially endogenous.

To be specific: the best-known economic models of insurance markets with adverse selection
assume that all insurers have costless and accurate information on the total quantity of insurance
each purchaser buys (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976). Then the instrument insurance firms use to
induce lower risks to self-select is a so-called “price-quantity” policy, a combination of premium
and the amount of coverage. The institutional feature which permits insurers to have this kind of
information is the Coordination of Benefits provision that exists for health insurance and some
other types of insurance. These provisions in principle give any insurer the power to determine
the total amount of insurance a buyer has and/or to make payments of benefits dependent on
truthful prior information about the total amount.

Term life insurance, however, has no such provision. While life insurers will sometimes inquire
about how much coverage a prospective buyer already has, there is no mechanism for ensuring
truthful revelation and, more to the point, no evidence that the premium for additional coverage
is in any way affected by the amount of existing coverage. If insurers thought themselves to be
at substantial risk of adverse selection, they might price larger policies at higher unit costs.

4

However, as Philipson and Cawley point out, the typical-firm-level pricing policy for term life
insurance exhibits quantity discounts: unit prices which decline with quantity.

Knowing the total amount of insurance a consumer has bought is important if there is moral
hazard as well as adverse selection. The absence of such provisions for term life is consistent
with the conclusion that moral hazard is small and that adverse selection is small. However, if
observation of the total amount of coverage is itself especially costly, then the main CawleyPhilipson result—that premiums from a given firm fall with quantity from that firm—is not
sufficient to indicate there is no adverse selection. As noted below, the decline in premiums with
coverage could simply reflect the insurer’s administrative cost structure that includes a fixed cost
per customer; the approximately constant-over-quantity marginal premium is what one would
expect if customers could purchase from multiple sellers (so long as the fixed cost is moderate).
No insurer that tried to charge increasing premiums with quantity would be able to sell large
policies. Moreover, insurers do increase their medical information requirements for applicants
for applicants who apply for policies which are large relative to their “needs;” this may be a
defense against adverse selection. In a similar vein, both non-economic and economic (Gokhale
and Kotlikoff 2002) planning models for life insurance purchase do not advise potential buyers
to adjust their life insurance purchases if they face premiums which vary relative to mortality
risk; instead people are advised to buy the insurance their dependents will “need” to replace lost
income and maintain a level of consumption, regardless of the level of the premium or the
person’s risk. That is, buyers are not advised to engage in adverse selection, even when it would
be to their private advantage to do so.

5

An Informal Model of Adverse Selection When Insurance Quantity Is Unknown

We want to model insurance markets with potential adverse selection when insurance firms do
not know the total quantity a given individual purchases.

Let us therefore assume that insurers do not know the total (face) amount of life insurance any
individual has purchased. Next, let us assume that the annual premium P an insurer would
charge for x units of coverage purchased from the firm takes the form

(1) P=c+bx

where c is a fixed component of total firm revenue per policy sold, and b is a (constant) marginal
price per unit of coverage. There is a fixed component to the premium because there is a fixed
component to the administrative cost; the cost of some of the administrative functions (like
processing an application for coverage) does not vary with the amount of coverage purchased.
The key assumption here is that b (and c, for that matter) depends only on the firm’s value of x,
not on the total x the person buys from all sources. Of course, once the marginal price is
independent of x at any firm, then there is no strong incentive to the buyer to buy from more than
one firm.

Assume also that, initially, all buyers have the same level of risk, that they know the level of risk,
and that they choose the amount of insurance to buy by maximizing a risk averse utility function,
given the premium schedule (1).

6

What would then be the expected effect of private information for some or all buyers that
indicates a change in loss probability from its initial (average) level? If the premium schedule is
unchanged, those who discover that they are high risks will optimally buy more coverage, and
those who discover that they are lower risks will cut back. How much either type of buyer will
change depends on the risk elasticity of demand for insurance.

As a result, the initial premium will no longer cover the firm’s benefit costs and administrative
expenses. As the insurer raises the marginal premium in the next period to cover the additional
benefit costs incurred (now more heavily weighted by the higher risks and less heavily weighted
by lower risks), all risks will reduce coverage as long as the price elasticity of demand is not
zero.

If the price elasticity of demand is uniform, regardless of risk, this reduction in coverage will
take the form of an equi-proportional reduction, across all risk classes. Then the process will
achieve a new equilibrium at these smaller quantities. There will be no cycle. This result differs
from the Rothschild-Stiglitz case. No “death spiral” will have occurred. To produce a death
spiral, one would have to assume that the price elasticity of demand is less elastic for higher
risks than for lower risks.

However, the net reduction in coverage from the initial no-information-asymmetry case provides
a measure of the inefficiency associated with adverse selection. If the reduction in coverage is
relatively small in response to a price change, we can say that adverse selection is small.

7

Toward Empirical Analysis

Somewhat surprisingly, while there have been many studies of the “determinants” of life
insurance decisions, there have been few microeconomic studies of the effect of premiums or
price on the demand for term life insurance.3 Such an analysis would be more complex than the
typical demand elasticity estimation for several reasons.

First, the total premium for a policy obviously depends on the amount of coverage purchased: it
represents total expenditure, or average price multiplied by quantity. However as noted,
premiums are not linear in coverage, so that the premium per dollar of coverage is not uniform
over the amount of coverage. Because the “fixed price” term c is positive, the average premium
usually falls as coverage grows; the marginal premium may or may not be constant.

There is a literature on behavior and empirical analysis of demand in situations where consumers
face nonlinear price schedules (Hausman 1985; Hausman and Wise 1980; Nordin 1976). The
behavioral models are consistent with our earlier summary; the quantity demanded is determined
by responding to the substitution effects from the marginal price and to the income effects
associated with the fixed price component.

Second, life insurance is typically sold in national markets, so that there is no obvious or
identifiable source of substantial cross-sectional variation in marginal prices. However,

8

premiums do appear to vary across firms for what seems to be similar coverage. Premiums
change over time, but much of this change is a response to changes in (perceived) mortality rates.
The demand for insurance should depend not on the premium per se but on persons’ (perceived)
mortality rate relative to the premium. The primary source of price variation would then be
variation in premiums not matched by variations in (perceived) risk. Demand might also change
if premiums and mortality rates experience equal proportional changes, because of lifetime
income or wealth effects.

Brown and Goolsbee (2002) have argued that the spread of the Internet lowered markups on
average term insurance premiums, especially for younger buyers.4 There may be some eventual
hope of finding time series variation in marginal premiums, if either profitability or
administrative costs change, but the detailed data on risk-adjusted premiums at the individual
level has yet to become available.

The price elasticity of demand for term life insurance is of more than casual interest. Its value
determines how total insurer revenues would be expected to respond to price changes. For
instance, if demand was greater than unit elastic, the price reduction found by Brown and
Goolsbee would be associated with an increase in insurer revenues. But those revenues would
fall if demand (in the neighborhood of the current price) was relatively inelastic. More relevant

3

Babbel (1985) provides a time series study of the relationship between market-level price and the total amount of
life insurance demanded in the United States. Eisenhauer and Halek (1999) estimate a model of demand for term
life which includes a “loading” variable, but they do not interpret it as the price.
4
The subsequent increase in rates following insurance regulators’ allegations of under-reserving has not been
investigated. Presumably under-reserving was most severe for the types of people who use the Internet. It may be
good for price but not for quality. If both change, the amount demanded could rise or fall depending on relative
magnitudes.

9

for our purposes, the value of price elasticity determines how much information asymmetry will
matter.

A behavioral issue is whether an individual’s demand for insurance depends only on the ratio of
premiums to expected benefits, the traditional “loading percentage”, which in turn implies that
the demand elasticity with respect to premium, given risk, should equal the demand elasticity
with respect to risk, given premium. This percentage plays the role of price in insurance theory
(Ehrlich and Becker 1972), but actual behavior might be different. For example, if doubling
premiums (controlling for risk) has an effect on the amounts and types of insurance demanded,
would we expect to observe the same or a similar effect if the mortality rate halved, holding the
premium constant? Both changes display the same change in the ratio of premiums to benefits.

Another issue, which will be important for our empirical work, deals with consumer information.
The premium a person pays is presumably known by that person; the premiums charged by other
sellers may, however, only be known imperfectly. An even more serious question concerns
consumer perceptions of risk. The right risk measure to use in the behavioral equation is what
the consumer perceives to be the risk of death. However, we only have information on the
mortality rates calculated ex post, which might or might not be known to the consumer. Take the
case of a buyer who is a smoker. The buyer knows that the premium he would have to pay is
higher than if he were a non-smoker, but what would he assume about death probability? Would
he assume the same death probability as low risks, as the average risk, as the average risk for all
smokers (regardless of the volume of smoking), or as the observed death rate for smokers
smoking a certain number of cigarettes? Or would he use the difference in premiums as a

10

measure of the difference in risk (Kunreuther and Pauly, 2003). In our analysis we will explore
the effect of using a number of measures of relative risk..

Demand Estimation in the Presence of Quantity Discounts

If adverse selection were a serious problem in life insurance markets, if insurers could observe
the total quantity of life insurance purchased at the individual level, and if the administrative cost
per unit of insurance were constant over units, conventional microeconomic theory would predict
that in a competitive equilibrium (if it exists) unit prices would be increasing in the face amount
of coverage (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976). However, empirical evidence from the life insurance
market suggests that the unit premium for term insurance declines as the face amount of
coverage increases (Cawley and Philipson 1999); these discounts exist both because average
administrative and selling costs fall as a buyer purchases a larger policy, and because sellers of
insurance are unable to observe the total amount of insurance bought from all sellers. Of course,
with average costs falling with quantity, adverse selection would be consistent with unit
premiums that decline with quantity as long as the decline is less steep than that of costs.

One key question is whether the alleged failure of life insurers to pay attention to insurance
purchased from other sellers is due to a high cost of monitoring insurance quantity or whether it
is due to the fact that there is so little information asymmetry about actual risk that knowledge of
the total quantity would not be helpful. The answer is probably some of both. Compared to
health insurance, say, or even property-casualty insurance, there is no observable benchmark of
loss or cost to which life insurance quantities could be compared. Someone who bought health

11

insurance that paid out more than his medical bills, or homeowners insurance that paid more than
the damage done by a fire would be an obvious candidate as someone with inside knowledge
about risk (not to mention strong incentives for moral hazard before the fact). But there is no
objective loss measure associated with premature mortality, and so more difficulty in identifying
the high risk by noting “excess” insurance purchases. However, it is also true (according to
Cawley and Philipson) that the simple correlation between the amount of insurance purchased
and (actual) mortality is inverse, perhaps reflecting other influences on the demand for life
insurance that are inversely correlated with mortality (such as income) but also perhaps
indicating that buyers do not know more than sellers. Moreover, life insurers do sometimes have
stricter underwriting standards for people applying for large amounts of term life insurance;
variation in standards with quantity might substitute for variation in unit premiums with quantity.

Due to the presence of quantity discounts, each consumer in the life insurance market faces a
downward sloping rather than horizontal supply curve (Cawley and Philipson 1999) at what
might be called the “intensive” margin. In this situation, the observed unit or average price and
quantity are simultaneously determined by the consumer’s demand. This phenomenon adds to
the challenge to estimating the price elasticity of demand for term life insurance using consumerlevel microeconomic data.

In order to generate an unbiased measure of price elasticity, the price used should be exogenous
to the consumer demand framework. There are two reasons why observed prices will not be
exogenous. First, estimating the consumer demand equation using an ex-post unit price paid
(calculated from purchase data) will obviously yield a biased price elasticity estimate due to the

12

endogeneity of price in the consumer demand system. However, if the actual price schedules
that individuals with a given set of risk characteristics face in the market vary exogenously in a
way that can be observed by the econometrician (from offered price schedules), then the
marginal price for each risk group can be obtained either directly from the tariff data or by
estimating an industry-level pricing equation using firm-level offered premiums as the dependent
variable in the regression.5 But if price schedules do not vary much across observations (because
all buyers are purchasing in the same competitive market), or if the prices people find are
correlated with demand (for example, because people with stronger demands search more
extensively for low prices), elasticity estimates will still be potentially biased. The best solution
would be to find exogenous price measures that vary across risk groups. (This is the strategy we
follow below.) Alternatively an instrumental variables approach could be used to control for the
endogeneity of ex-post prices in the consumer demand equation. Good price instruments,
however, are hard to find.

The presence of bulk discounts in the life insurance market introduces non-convexities into the
consumer’s budget constraint. This creates the possibility that there will be multiple tangencies
between the consumer’s indifference curves and budget constraint set (Taylor 1975; Hausman
1985). In order to uniquely identify parameters in the consumer demand function, two price
variables should be included in the demand equation: the marginal price, which captures the
price effect on quantity demanded given that a positive quantity of insurance is purchased; and
the “fixed cost” to the consumer of the opportunity to purchase insurance beyond the minimum
5

It is reasonable to assume that term insurance premiums in the United States are set in a national market, and that
there is one industry supply curve (Brown and Goolsbee 2002). The group specific marginal price for term
insurance is equal to the regression coefficient on the face amount of coverage in a linear pricing equation with a
constant term, and is by definition exogenous to the consumer demand system. We ignore possible simultaneity

13

quantity at a given marginal price (Nordin 1976). The impact of this fixed cost on the size of
policy demanded should primarily be that of an income effect, but it may also serve as indicator
of self-selection into the sample of buyers. That is, people who buy insurance only at a low fixed
price may have lower demands for insurance (on average) than those still willing to buy some
insurance even though the fixed price is high. In principle, then, the coefficient on the fixed cost
could be positive, suggesting a censoring of observations, or negative, suggesting income effects
in quantity demanded.

Price Measure

There are econometric and theoretical justifications for using exogenous measures of marginal
price in order to capture how consumers change coverage when the prevailing premiums change.
If one wants to recover the parameters in the consumer demand system, it is necessary to control
for the two-part pricing of term insurance contracts. We control for the fixed cost to the
consumer of being able to purchase life insurance at the offered marginal premium by including
the fixed cost in the demand equation (see Taylor 1975; Dubin 1985). As noted above, any
effect of the fixed cost will capture the “income effect” on purchasing (for those who demand
positive amounts of insurance), while the marginal price measure captures the “price effect” on
term insurance demand (Dubin 1985).

Secondly, if a competitive insurer’s expected payouts rise because the probability of survival
falls, its premiums will also rise. However, almost all of this increase should affect the marginal

between premium and quantity in the pricing equation, which would arise if insurers set premiums to induce a given
level of demand.

14

price rather than the fixed price, since variations in the mortality rate should not affect the fixed
costs of selling insurance. We assume that this property holds both for changes in survival
probability, given age, over different years and for changes in survival probability for individuals
of different ages at a given point in time. In short, the elasticity parameter that we care about in a
life insurance market is the elasticity of demand with respect to the marginal premium rather
than the total or average premium.

The other characteristic of a price measure is that it should vary to some extent across otherwise
identical buyers. The problem here is that term life insurance at any point in time is generally
sold in a national market. While posted or quoted prices may vary across firms, there is no
obvious reason why buyers with the same set of risk characteristics cannot all have access to the
same set of prices, and would therefore all choose the same (lowest) price. If they do not do so,
we do not know why.

The absence of a clear source of exogenous variation in prices is an issue in generating unbiased
estimates of price elasticity. For example, suppose one plausibly assumes that a demander who
would buy more insurance at a given (marginal) price would search more intensively for a low
price than a person with a smaller demand. On average, those with stronger demands will then
be paying lower prices, but the price measure will be inversely correlated with unobserved terms
in the demand equation. More generally, in the empirical estimates which follow, we pay
attention to possible exogenous causes for variation in prices. We try to find “market-level”
price measures as well as “individual-level” measures.

15

Data Sources

We do not know exactly which prices consumers were facing and which risk measures they were
using to guide their insurance purchasing decisions. Accordingly we experiment with a variety
of specifications using different measures of each.

We use two industry data sources to estimate the price elasticity of demand for term insurance.
The first is a monthly dataset sold by CompuLife that contains firm-level premium data for term
life insurance contracts of 17 different sizes from all major companies in the US market in every
state. The CompuLife datasets are used by life insurance agents to compare premium offerings
across companies, and are generally thought to contain accurate premium information. In the
CompuLife datasets, premium offerings are broken down by the risk characteristics of the
insured persons, including their age, sex, smoking status and health status.

The presence of multiple insurers raises the questions of what quantity premium schedule to use.
Should it be that of a single “typical” insurer, or should it be a composite of those of all insurers
offering contracts to a given risk group? A buyer who selects a firm making the best offer for
one quantity of insurance is not obliged to use that firm for other quantities. Also, not all
insurers offer contracts of all sizes to a given risk group, so buying from the same firm may not
be an option.

We use two alternative estimates of “market” price schedules to test the robustness of our
estimates. In one, we use the premium of the median firm in each demographic cell-quality

16

combination. In the other, we use, as data for the premium regression, the premiums posted by
all firms weighted by the number of offers in a given policy size category. These weights, which
sum to 1 for each policy size, are necessary because the number of offers vary significantly
across the 17 different policy sizes in the CompuLife dataset.

We first use the January 1997 CompuLife dataset to estimate term insurance pricing regressions
for 1-year level term contracts for the median firm in the market as of January 1997 for each risk
class separately. We use two statistical methods to estimate a linear pricing equation for the term
insurance industry. Insurance premiums vary across states, but only to a very modest extent.
We therefore look at premiums offered by the median firm in the largest state (California) to 30,
40, 50 & 60 year olds for all 48 possible combinations of the sex, smoking and health status
categories. We interpolate the estimated marginal prices and fixed costs by single year of age for
all the relevant risk groups to reflect the pricing gradient by age controlling for all other risk
factors. There are 48 separate pricing regressions, each with 17 different values for the quantity
of coverage. We then use the average and marginal prices estimates from these regressions as
explanatory variables to explain the variations in the amounts of coverage purchased by
consumers in another data set, from LIMRA International. The second specification for the
pricing regression makes use of premium offerings from all firms (weighted by the number of
policy size offers in a given contract size class) in the California market to estimate a similar
pricing equation which is used in a similar way.6 Using the marginal price and fixed cost
estimates from the two general techniques described above, we therefore estimated demand
6

We considered estimating the pricing equation with firm-level fixed effects. However, that technique would be
relevant only if consumers typically chose a firm in advance and considered only its price schedule for different
amounts of coverage. However, it is surely possible that a firm with the lowest price for, say, $50,000 of coverage

17

regressions using (as the “exogenous” premium) the estimated marginal premium per $1000
coverage. This “market” premium varies across risk groups, not individuals, and is independent
of the quantity of term insurance purchased, thereby reducing concerns about endogeneity bias.

To explore the effect of possible variation in premiums across persons, we used a second type of
measure: a person-specific marginal premium. This measure of premium is constructed from the
premium reported in the same LIMRA data used for the total quantity of coverage purchased.
We estimate a person-specific marginal premium by subtracting the class-average fixed cost
from the CompuLife pricing regressions from the annual premium the person paid for the life
insurance contract, and then dividing that number by the quantity of coverage purchased. Exactly
why different individuals would pay different premiums for the same coverage is unclear; it
might be related to consumer search behavior. If so, the price paid is to some extent endogenous,
so these results should be interpreted with caution; we should expect these measured elasticities
to be higher in absolute value than in the first case. We also use another person-specific
premium: the ratio of annual premium paid (for the quantity purchased) divided by the predicted
premium based on the person’s fixed cost and marginal price coefficients from the CompuLife
pricing regressions.

Consumer-level data on the quantity of new term life insurance purchased is taken from the 1997
US Buyer’s Study sold by LIMRA International. The 1997 LIMRA Buyer’s study consists of a
random sample of policies bought by customers in a given year by over 35 life insurance
companies comprising approximately half of the life insurance market in terms of number of

might not be the lowest price if the person wanted to buy $500,000 of coverage. Thus, the within-firm marginal
price would not represent the price schedule a consumer faces.

18

policies sold (LIMRA 1998). We analyze data from the 1997 LIMRA Buyer’s study since it is
the most recent dataset available for purchase. The term life insurance market has undergone
significant changes in market structure during the 1990s associated with market entry and the
introduction of on-line search engines for term insurance (Brown and Goolsbee 2002). Because
the increase in market competition in the 1990s may have caused a structural change in the price
elasticity parameter, we focus our analysis on the most recent year available.7

The LIMRA data also contains information on the attributes of the life insurance contracts sold
and the basic demographic characteristics of the buyers. The data include information on the
amount of coverage purchased, the annual premiums paid, the amount of existing life insurance
coverage in force, the term lengths of the contracts, riders attached to the policies, the annual
premium, the month and year of purchase, and basic demographic information on insured
persons, including: age, sex, income, occupation, marital status, and receipt of a non-smoking
discount. Individual company identifiers were masked. Weights are provided to make the
sample representative of the policies sold at the contributing firm level.

Some of the key factors that are known to influence life insurance demand (but usually not
premiums)—like self-evaluated current health status, number of children, income and wealth—
are either completely missing, or are not available for a large number of observations in the
LIMRA data. (For example, even family income data is missing for about a third of the
observations.) We report regression results using the large LIMRA sample in which individual
observations are augmented by median household income by zip code from the 1990 US Census.
7

In separate analyses not reported here we estimate the price elasticity of demand for term insurance using the 1993
and 1995 LIMRA Buyer’s datasets, and find that there has been an increase in the price elasticity of demand during

19

Although additional socio-demographic controls are available at the zip code level from the 1990
census, we do not include these controls due to concerns about measurement error.

While using Maximum Likelihood estimation with an error components error structure will
enable us to control from biases arising from sample truncation inherent to using purchase data
to model consumer demand, we are nevertheless without information on what determines
whether someone buys any life insurance, and, specifically, on the effect of price on this choice.

Mortality Risk

The mortality risk measure used in the demand regressions is the national average annual
probability of dying during the period of coverage for all individuals with a given set of age, sex,
health status, and (in some cases) smoking characteristics. This measure was calculated using
mortality data from the 1997 U.S. Life Tables published by the National Center for Health
Statistics (see Anderson 1999, and National Center for Health Statistics 1997 & 1998). Sex-agespecific mortality data on the number of survivors at various years of age in 1997 were used to
estimate the percent of people that will die during the period of term life insurance coverage
based on the age of the insured person at the beginning and end of term insurance coverage. The
mortality risk variable included in the regressions is the natural log of this annual mortality risk
estimate, which varies across individuals. Using data on the relative risk of dying (over a oneyear period) between smokers and non-smokers across various age intervals published in Rogers
and Powell-Griner (1991), and data on smoking prevalence by age group from the Centers for

the decade of the 1990s (LIMRA 1996; LIMRA 1994).

20

Disease Control and Prevention (1998), we adjust the mortality risk for smoking status.8 The
smoking status adjustments were necessarily imperfect, so we show results with and without this
imperfect adjustment.

CompuLife Pricing Regressions

We use the CompuLife dataset to estimate industry-level pricing regressions for 1-year annually
renewable level term contracts for the median firm in the market as of January 1997. We first
define risk groups based on the age, sex, smoking and health status of the buyers. Companies
with all ratings are used in the analyses. In 1997, the CompuLife data require that we view
premium and contract offerings by state. Based on conversations with life insurers, we assume
that median premiums are unlikely to vary significantly across states (with the exception of New
York, where state withholding regulations affect premiums).9 We also expect variation in the
degree of market competition—and hence premiums—to be minimal across states (Brown and
Goolsbee 2002).

We limit our sample to 1-year annually renewable term contracts priced for 30, 40, 50, and 60year old males and females for all possible combinations of the smoking and health status
categories. Separate pricing regressions are estimated for each risk group. We priced contracts
8

The adjustment assumes that the relative death risk between smokers and non-smokers is equal to the 1 year
relative death risk published in Rogers and Powell-Griner (1991). In order to obtain the 1 year death risk measure
for smokers, we use a weighted average of the light and heavy smoker death rates published in Rogers and PowellGriner (1991). We assume that for all age groups 83 percent of smokers are light smokers and 17 percent of
smokers are heavy smokers (American Lung Association, 2002). The adjustment may introduce measurement error
into the smoking-adjusted mortality estimate since the adjustment for smoking requires that we use smoking
prevalence estimates that are aggregated by 5-year age intervals and approximations for the distribution of light and
heavy smokers in the smoking population. The key question, of course, is what different buyers perceive to be their
risk.

21

for 17 different policy sizes among firms offering life insurance contracts in California in 1997.10
The premium regression equation estimated is then:

(2)

Offered Premium=aj+PjQ +ε

where Q is the term insurance face amount for individuals in risk group j in January 1997. Then
aj is the estimated fixed cost for each risk class and Pj is the estimated marginal price. As
mentioned above, we estimate pricing equation (2) using two different sample—premium
offerings from the median firm in the market (Tables 1a and 1b), and premium offerings from all
firms in the market pooled and weighted (Tables 2a and 2b). We then interpolate fixed costs and
marginal premiums by single year of age to more accurately reflect the age pricing gradient for
each risk group.

Separate pricing regressions are estimated for each risk group. Tables 1a and 1b show the
estimated marginal premiums from the different pricing specifications we tried using the
CompuLife data.11 The pricing equation approximates the actual tariff schedule that individuals
of a given risk class face in the market for the “median” firm in the market. The R2 for most of
these pricing regressions is close to unity, which indicates that a linear pricing schedule above a
fixed cost fits the data well. Table 1b shows marginal premium estimates when we include all
premium offerings in the market.

9

Telephone conversation with Bob Barney, President of CompuLife, March 2002.
We price level term insurance policies for the following face amounts: $50 K, $100 K, $150 K, $200 K, $250 K,
$300 K, $350 K, $400 K, $500 K, $750 K, $1 million, $2 million, $3 million, $5 million, $10 million. $15 million &
$25 million.
11
The marginal price estimates are the regression estimates multiplied by 1,000, or the marginal price per $1,000 of
coverage.
10

22

Estimated marginal prices always decline with improved health status holding other risk factors
constant. Marginal prices at any age are higher for males than for females, as well as for
smokers than for non-smokers. Marginal prices also increase with age holding all other risk
factors constant. There is not a large difference between the “preferred” and “preferred-plus”
health categories. We tested whether marginal prices varied over units, and could not reject the
hypothesis of constancy.12

Tables 2a and 2b show the estimated fixed cost (or the “average premium” component of the
premium per policy) for all risk groups using the two different specifications for the CompuLife
life insurance pricing equation. These fixed cost estimates are the intercept terms of the
estimated Compulife regression equations and are used to calculate the value of the marginal
premium that varies across individuals rather than risk groups after interpolating for single year
of age. Differences in the estimated intercept term across groups reflects differences in costs
(associated with medical underwriting, etc.) inherent to selling any coverage to individuals in a
given risk category. These estimates are generally in the range of $40-$70 per contract. (By
way of illustration, a fixed component of $70 would amount to 31% of the annual premium for
$100 thousand of coverage for a non-smoking 40-year-old male.) The estimates for ages 50 and
60 vary a great deal, but relatively few new term policies are sold at this age. (A negative fixed
price would, however, imply the existence of adverse selection).

Estimation of Demand Elasticities

23

We focus our analysis on the purchase of 1-year annually renewable level term contracts, or the
“spot market” for term insurance in 1997.

Econometric Methodology

The LIMRA Buyer’s data is not a random sample. Rather sample selection occurs on the basis
of whether or not a contract is purchased. Accordingly, a truncated regression model is used to
estimate the price elasticity of demand.

The smallest contract size sold in 1997 is $2,500. We do not observe the purchase of any life
insurance contracts with a face amount less than $2,500 because smaller life insurance policies
are not sold by insurers. Data on non-purchasers for whom Qi=$0 is not observed. Hence the
selection equation for the LIMRA data, which defines the subset of the population included in
the sample, is:

(3) Si=1[$2,500 < Qi < ∞]

where Si=1 if individual i is included in the sample, and Si=0 when individual i is excluded from
the sample.

12

Cawley and Philipson (1999) also report that conversations with life insurers suggest that insurers rely upon a
linear rather than non-linear incremental pricing schedule to price term insurance contracts, and their own regression
results from this data show insignificant quadratic terms.

24

The selection rule allows us to characterize the subset of the population excluded from the
LIMRA sample. Although we cannot use the price elasticity coefficients based on a sample of
life insurance purchasers to infer the price elasticity of non-purchasers, the price elasticity of
demand conditional on having decided to purchase a life insurance contract is still of interest
because it measures the price sensitivity of purchases on the intensive margin.

In order to obtain consistent and efficient estimates of the parameters in the conditional
consumer demand equation will need to specify the conditional distribution of Qi given Xi and Si
and use maximum likelihood estimation. We assume that the conditional distribution is normal
with mean Xβ and variance σ2, where X is a matrix of control variables that enter the consumer
demand equation. The relevant estimation technique is the truncated normal regression model
that can be carried out in SAS.

Sample Definition

We limit the sample to include adults who bought level term contracts with no rider or a level
term rider on their own lives. We exclude contracts that are part of an employee benefit plan,
that are not owned by the insured person, or that contain missing data on the smoking status of
the insured. We exclude military sales and sales by home service companies.

Price Measures

25

We report regression results using three price definitions. The first price definition uses the
estimated CompuLife marginal price for the person’s risk group interpolated for single year of
age as the exogenous price measure in the consumer demand equation. This price is the fitted
coefficient Pj from equation (1) for individuals that belong to risk group j. Implicitly, the
assumption is that this “average marginal” price for the person’s risk group is independent of the
other terms (“tastes”) in that individual’s demand function. The LIMRA data do not contain
information the health characteristics of the buyers even though life insurers are known to
condition their premium offerings on health status indicators. We therefore use the mid-point
between the CompuLife regular and preferred-plus marginal and average prices for each risk
group as the relevant price measure for individuals in the LIMRA sample. We assume that the
insurer does know smoking status of the insured.

The regression also controls for the (observed) mortality rate in the person’s risk group. Thus,
over all observations, it is presumably variation in the relationship between marginal prices and
risk across risk cells that generate variation in the net cost of insurance. For example, if two cells
have the same mortality rate, but different marginal premiums, we would expect to see different
amounts of insurance demanded. The Brown-Goolsbee results on the effect of the Internet
would suggest, for example, that this price measure should be lower for Web-using younger
people.

The second price definition uses an individual-level marginal premium as the exogenous price
measure. We calculate the person specific marginal price by using the average price estimate by
risk group (interpolated by single year of age) from the CompuLife pricing regressions, and data

26

on total premium paid and face amount of life insurance coverage purchased from the LIMRA
datasets. The relevant equation is:

(4) [Premiumi-aj]/Qi=P*i

where aj is the estimated constant term in the CompuLife pricing regression for risk group j (see
equation 2). Unlike the CompuLife marginal prices, Pi* varies across individuals.

The third price definition uses a relative premium measure which varies across individuals. This
relative premium measure is the ratio of total premium paid divided by predicted CompuLife
premium. The predicted Compulife premium for each individual is:

(5) Predicted Premiumi=aj+Pj*Qi

where aj and Pj are the estimated coefficients from the CompuLife pricing equation (2)
interpolated by single year of age. We include the log of the ratio of the annual premium paid to
the predicted premium based on the CompuLife coefficient estimates as exogenous price variable
in the relative premium specification.13

Regression Specification

13

A fourth price expression would estimate the marginal price direct from the LIMRA data. The problem here is
that the price paid is endogenous in the consumer demand system. Preliminary estimates of demand equations based
on such a measure gave implausible positive price elasticities.

27

We assume that the consumer demand equation for term life insurance has the following general
form:

(6) Qi=C PβFCiψRiγZiδexp(εi)

where Qi is the face amount of term life insurance purchased, C is a constant term, P is one of the
marginal premium measures, FCi is the estimated fixed cost, Ri is the individual mortality risk
variable, and Zi are demographic controls that affect life insurance demand, including income,
age, sex and marital status. The regression equation has a log-linear form, since some of the
controls included in the Zi matrix are binary variables.

Taking logs, we estimate the following empirical demand equation using Maximum Likelihood:

(7) lnQi=φ+βlnP+ψlnFCi+γlnRi +δZi + εi

where the marginal price measure (P) is the CompuLife marginal price (Pj), the person-specific
marginal price (Pi*), or a relative price, which is the annual premium paid divided by the
predicted premium given the quantity purchased and using the fixed and marginal price
coefficients from the CompuLife regression to predict the premium. The dependent variable is
the log of the total coverage purchased.

Results

28

Tables 3 and 4 show the estimated demand regressions using the marginal premiums calculated
from the CompuLife data for the median-premium insurer in each cell. In both cases the
estimated price elasticity is approximately -0.5; the estimated risk elasticity has a positive and
statistically significant elasticity in the range from 0.16 to 0.29. The fixed cost component of the
premium is positive but not statistically significant. Other significant variables include median
income by zipcode, with an expected positive sign, female sex with an expected negative sign,
and significantly higher demand in New England relative to the Midwest. The quarterly
dummies are not statistically significant, which suggests that life insurance demand is not
seasonal.

Table 5 shows the price and risk elasticities for several other different specifications of the price
variable and of the data set used to estimate the price variable. The estimated values of the price
elasticities vary little; price elasticity generally varies between -0.41 and -0.58. The risk
elasticities tend to be higher when the all-firm estimate of marginal price is used; in some
specifications they are also in the neighborhood of 0.5. When the relative premium is used as a
measure of price, the smoking-adjusted risk elasticity is either statistically insignificant or
negative in sign. In the majority of cases, however, the risk elasticity has a point estimate which
is positive but is lower (in absolute value) than that of the premium “price” elasticity. The
elasticities tend to be approximately the same in the market-price and individual-price
specification, suggesting no endogeneity bias.

An analysis of the goodness-of-fit statistics suggests that the fit is better when risk is adjusted for
smoking for the specifications using the CompuLife or individual marginal premia. When the

29

relative premium is used, the fit is worse with smoking adjusted risk. However, the relative
premium measure itself does not provide as good a fit as do the other two price measures. In
addition, the relative premium measure is likely to be partly endogenous because it is calculated
from the actual premium paid.

To sum up: the price (or marginal) premium elasticity of demand is estimated to be in the range
of -0.31 to -0.58; this finding is robust with regard to measures of marginal price in the demand
system. The elasticity of coverage with respect to mortality risk is generally positive and
statistically significant, but ranges in value from 0.2 to 0.5. The coefficient on mortality risk is
usually smaller than the coefficient on marginal premium, suggesting that proportional loading
does not entirely determine quantity demanded. These results indicate that people do pay
attention to premiums they face and their own risk of needing benefits; the “needs” model
favored by insurance advisors is strongly rejected. However, although people do respond to
premiums and expected benefits, their response is relatively modest in magnitude.

Conclusion

These results suggest that the elasticity of demand for 1-year level term life insurance contracts
is about -0.4 to -0.5. It is more price sensitive than the insurance “needs” models would assume,
but is still only moderately responsive. Demand is usually less sensitive to risk than to premiums
although the risk term is usually positive and statistically significant.

30

If there is asymmetric information, the interpretation of this result depends on the extent and
importance of that information. If the portion of the population receiving information about
large differences in death risk probabilities is substantial, adverse selection can occur even with a
low price elasticity. However, these results are consistent with the view that life insurance
markets can remain reasonably stable even with information asymmetry on individual mortality
risk (when the variation in information is also modest, insurers are unable to observe the total
amount of insurance purchased).

Another finding is even more important for the model (but somewhat less reliable in the
empirical estimation method). For the process of adverse selection even to begin as a result of
information asymmetry, consumers must start the process by choosing substantially different
amounts of insurance when their perceived risks are altered by information. The usually lower
risk elasticity implies that the first step in the process, a response in terms of desired insurance
quantity to changes in risk with premiums held constant, may be small.

Our results suggest that life insurance purchasers engage in behavior (or, more accurately, nonbehavior) which greatly mitigates the effect of asymmetric information about individual risk
between insured and insurer in term life insurance markets. It would, of course, still be possible
for asymmetric information that secretly and substantially changed loss probabilities for a large
portion of the population to cause adverse selection. But as long as any substantial information
asymmetry is concentrated in a small population share, and as long as any large group’s
information asymmetry is small, adverse selection will not occur.

31

Whether these elasticities are “small enough” to avoid symptoms of adverse selection depends
on what we assume about the extent of information asymmetry. Chronic conditions generally
affect only about 15 percent of persons aged 45 (in the midpoint of the data), but most chronic
conditions are detectable. More plausibly, people may have some idea of how they feel
physically, but the information content of differences in this information is likely to be low.

For example, suppose 5 percent of buyers have information that suggests that their mortality rate
is three times greater than the standard (200% greater). (This is the magnitude of the impact of a
positive genetic test for the breast cancer gene on female survival (Subramanian et al, 1999).) If
they respond to this information with an elasticity of 0.4 (and other buyers respond to the
absence of information that they are high risks), the overall risk level per dollar of purchased
coverage will rise by only 8.6 percent. The subsequent reduction in insurance purchases by
lower risks would be only 3.4 percent (using the same elasticity). Moreover, as noted above the
high risks will also reduce their insurance purchases so that there may be only weak subsequent
adjustments. This is not enough of a response to provoke a death spiral or even a large reduction
in coverage.

One might suppose that the result that small amounts of special information for many or large
amounts of special information concentrated only on a few does not distort the market is close to
the Cawley and Philipson conclusion of no adverse selection. Had demand or risk elasticity been
substantially greater (even in the “small difference” or “small numbers” cases), the conventional
models could lead to a prediction of serious problems. Our results suggest that this case does not
arise. Adverse selection behavior may fail to be manifested not because sellers know as much as

32

buyers, but rather because buyers have more important things to care about than reacting to
asymmetric information in life insurance markets.

33

References

American Lung Association Best Practices and Program Services Epidemiology and Statistics
Unit, “Trends in Tobacco Use,” (June 2002), http://www2.lungusa.org/data/smoke/SMK1.pdf,
12 May 2003.

Anderson RN, “United States Life Tables, 1997,” National Vital Statistics Reports (December
13, 1999); 47(28).

Anderson RN, “United States Life Tables, 1998,” National Vital Statistics Reports (February 7,
2001); 48(18).

Babbel DF, “The Price Elasticity of Demand for Whole Life Insurance,” Journal of Finance
(March 1985); 40(1): 225-239.

Barney B, Telephone conversation with Kate H. Withers, March 2002.

Brown J, Goolsbee A, “Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive?” Journal of
Political Economy (June 2002); 100(3): 481-507.

Cardon J, Hendel I, “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence From the National
Medical Expenditure Survey,” RAND Journal of Economics (Autumn 2001); 32(3): 408-427.

34

Cawley J, Philipson T, “An Empirical Examination of Information Barriers to Trade in
Insurance,” American Economic Review (September 1999); 89(4): 827-846.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Adult and Community Health, National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, “Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System Online Prevalence Data, 1995-2001,”
http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/brfss/index.asp, May 7, 2003.

Dubin JA, “Rate Structure and Price Specification in the Demand for Electricity,” Chapter 4,
Consumer Durable Choice and the Demand for Electricity (Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier Science Publishers, 1985): 123-153.

Eisenhauer JG, Halek M, “Prudence, Risk Aversion, and the Demand for Life Insurance,”
Applied Economics Letters (April 1999); 6(4): 239-242

Ehrlich I, Becker GS, “Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-Protection,” The Journal of
Political Economy (July/August 1972); 80(4): 623-648

Gokhale J, Kotlikoff LJ, “The Adequacy of Life Insurance,” TIAA-CREF Institute Research
Dialogue (July 2002); 72.

Hausman JA, “The Econometrics of Nonlinear Budget Sets,” Econometrica (November 1985);
53(6): 1255-1282.

35

Hausman JA, Wise D, “Discontinuous Budget Constraints and Estimation: The Demand for
Housing,” Review of Economic Studies (January 1980); 47(1): 75-96.

Kunreuther H, Pauly MV, “Neglecting Disaster: Why Don’t People Insure Against Large
Losses?” Forthcoming in The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty.

LIMRA International, “The Buyer Study United States: A Market Study of New Insureds and the
Ordinary Life Insurance Purchased” (Hartford, CT: LIMRA International, Inc., 1998).

LIMRA International, “The Buyer Study United States: A Market Study of New Insureds and the
Ordinary Life Insurance Purchased” (Hartford, CT: LIMRA International, Inc., 1996).

LIMRA International, “The Buyer Study United States: A Market Study of New Insureds and the
Ordinary Life Insurance Purchased” (Hartford, CT: LIMRA International, Inc., 1994).

Nordin JA, “A Proposed Modification of Taylor’s Demand Analysis: Comment,” The Bell
Journal of Economics (Autumn 1976); 7(2): 719-21.

Rogers R, Powell-Griner E, “Life Expectancies of Cigarette Smokers and Nonsmokers in the
United States,” Social Science Medicine (1991); 32(10): 1151-1159.

36

Rothschild M, Stiglitz JE, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the
Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (November 1976); 90(4):
630-649.

Subramanian K, et al., “Estimating Adverse Selection Costs from Genetic Testing for Breast and
Ovarian Cancer: The Case of Life Insurance,” The Journal of Risk and Insurance (December
1999); 66(4): 531-550.

Taylor LD, “The Demand for Electricity: A Survey,” The Bell Journal of Economics (Spring
1975); 6(1): 74-110.

37

60

60

FEMALE

FEMALE

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Smoker

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Health Status

6.627

6.007

6.007

3.382

3.072

3.066

3.212

2.959

2.959

1.577

1.414

1.404

1.855

1.737

1.737

1.008

0.906

0.896

1.381

1.268

1.268

0.783

0.737

0.728

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

StdErr

550.640

4295.932

4295.932

504.696

446.524

391.654

441.718

1164.831

1164.831

494.087

564.699

484.742

2751.044

1291.520

1291.520

739.869

394.382

409.410

1091.681

1073.171

1073.171

803.484

614.031

544.337

tValue

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Probt

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

Sex

60

60

60

60

60

60

50

50

50

50

50

50

40

40

40

40

40

40

30

30

30

30

30

30

Age

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Smoker

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Health Status

10.893

10.299

10.299

5.228

4.642

4.584

4.551

4.296

4.296

2.150

1.906

1.878

2.280

2.240

2.240

1.116

1.027

1.023

1.655

1.548

1.548

0.903

0.818

0.816

Marginal
Premium
Per $1000
Coverage

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

StdErr

0.000

374.038

38

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Probt

363.650

363.650

356.921

385.020

925.375

372.326

902.804

902.804

1250.823

206.038

219.700

4582.768

916.849

916.849

752.636

535.878

376.194

2743.886

3068.536

3068.536

1537.827

1558.431

659.321

tValue

Note: Marginal prices are estimated for 1-year level term contracts using the median premium offered in the California market in January 1997. All data are taken from the
January 1997 CompuLife dataset. Companies with all ratings are included in the analysis. Contracts are priced without riders. Marginal price estimates shown are the
regression estimates multiplied by 1,000 – or the marginal price per $1,000 of term insurance coverage.

60

60

FEMALE

60

60

FEMALE

FEMALE

50

FEMALE

FEMALE

50

50

FEMALE

FEMALE

50

FEMALE

50

40

FEMALE

50

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

40

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

30

FEMALE

30

Age

FEMALE

Sex

Marginal
Premium
Per $1000
Coverage

Table 1a.
Marginal Premium Per $1000 Coverage from Median Firm Pricing Regression
1997 CompuLife Data. Linear Pricing Equation. Only Premium Quotations from Median Firm in Market Used in Pricing Regressions

60

60

FEMALE

FEMALE

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Health Status

6.728

5.999

5.999

3.654

3.040

3.035

3.311

2.988

2.988

1.723

1.441

1.438

1.795

1.639

1.639

0.982

0.820

0.809

1.316

1.204

1.204

0.774

0.654

0.648

Marginal
Price Per
$1000
Coverage

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

StdErr

119.230

101.441

101.441

99.242

79.153

80.137

118.854

105.631

105.600

93.570

81.581

82.191

163.357

135.600

135.600

134.079

113.914

110.958

150.519

138.737

138.737

144.227

116.291

115.185

tValue

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Probt

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

Sex

60

60

60

60

60

60

50

50

50

50

50

50

40

40

40

40

40

40

30

30

30

30

30

30

Age

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Smo
ker

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Health Status

10.791

9.725

9.725

5.582

4.639

4.584

4.739

4.271

4.271

2.311

1.927

1.901

2.336

2.130

2.130

1.167

0.959

0.946

1.608

1.470

1.470

0.895

0.752

0.743

Marginal
Price Per
$1000
Coverage

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

StdErr

125.393

102.984

102.984

103.248

83.207

81.944

122.325

99.744

99.744

93.503

81.195

80.662

148.955

121.835

121.835

118.930

106.735

103.699

161.180

146.713

146.713

154.943

132.623

128.786

tValue

Note: Marginal prices are estimated for 1-year level term contracts using all premiums offered in the California market in January 1997. All data are taken from the January
1997 CompuLife dataset. Companies with all ratings are included in the analysis. Contracts are priced without riders. Marginal price estimates shown are the regression
estimates multiplied by 1,000 – or the marginal price per $1,000 of term insurance coverage.

60

60

FEMALE

60

FEMALE

FEMALE

50

60

50

FEMALE

FEMALE

50

FEMALE

FEMALE

50

50

FEMALE

50

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

40

30

FEMALE

40

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

30

FEMALE

30

Age

FEMALE

Sex

Smo
ker

Table 1b.
Marginal Premium Per $1000 Coverage.
All Firm Premium Offerings Included in Regression Analyses. Weights Are Used. 1997 CompuLife Regressions.

39

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Probt

60

60

60

60

60

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

202.545

72.385

72.385

-7.098

2.649

-21.129

147.334

59.339

59.339

21.190

34.291

33.354

61.913

52.728

52.728

39.771

34.009

37.184

71.493

75.336

75.336

58.394

56.441

59.445

91.852

10.673

10.673

51.139

52.517

59.753

55.504

19.386

19.386

24.361

19.117

22.110

5.148

10.267

10.267

10.395

17.528

16.698

9.654

9.015

9.015

7.436

9.166

10.201

2.205

6.782

6.782

-0.139

0.050

-0.354

2.654

3.061

3.061

0.870

1.794

1.509

12.027

5.136

5.136

3.826

1.940

2.227

7.405

8.357

8.357

7.853

6.158

5.827

0.043

0.000

0.000

0.891

0.960

0.729

0.018

0.008

0.008

0.398

0.093

0.152

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.002

0.071

0.042

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

60

60

60

60

60

60

50

50

50

50

50

50

40

40

40

40

40

40

30

30

30

30

30

30

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

-176.688

-173.217

-173.217

-30.279

-17.373

37.959

78.238

33.361

33.361

48.875

-39.365

-18.384

83.007

34.920

34.920

45.216

42.406

36.678

66.781

59.945

59.945

56.469

59.446

54.645

222.287

216.166

216.166

111.796

92.028

37.806

93.283

36.323

36.323

13.118

72.787

65.235

3.797

18.649

18.649

11.320

14.633

20.750

4.603

3.850

3.850

4.483

4.006

9.442

-0.795

-0.801

-0.801

-0.271

-0.189

1.004

0.839

0.918

0.918

3.726

-0.541

-0.282

21.860

1.872

1.872

3.994

2.898

1.768

14.510

15.569

15.569

12.596

14.841

5.787

tValue

Note: Marginal prices are estimated for 1-year level term contracts using the median premium offered in the California market in January 1997. All data are taken from the
January 1997 CompuLife dataset. Companies with all ratings are included in the analysis. Contracts are priced without riders.

50

60

FEMALE

50

FEMALE

FEMALE

50

FEMALE

50

FEMALE

50

40

FEMALE

50

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

40

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

30

FEMALE

30

Age

FEMALE

Sex

Table 2a.
Fixed Cost Per Policy from Median Firm Pricing Regression
1997 CompuLife Data. Linear Pricing Equation. Only Premium Quotations from Median Firm in Market Used in Pricing Regressions (N=17)
Male
Fixed
Fixed
Smoker Health Status
Price per
StdErr
tValue Probt
Sex
Age Smoker Health Status
StdErr
Price per
Policy
Policy

40

0.439

0.435

0.435

0.790

0.853

0.331

0.415

0.373

0.373

0.002

0.597

0.782

0.000

0.081

0.081

0.001

0.011

0.097

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Probt

40

40

50

50

50

50

50

50

60

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

FEMALE

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Smo
ker

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Health Status

27.791

13.724

13.724

7.358

7.231

6.756

20.279

12.709

12.773

23.117

45.521

24.317

62.554

49.754

49.754

46.791

50.265

52.657

78.308

76.939

76.939

60.746

62.238

63.755

Estimate

430.707

451.357

451.357

281.022

293.198

289.024

212.622

215.889

215.954

140.588

134.815

133.490

83.892

92.246

92.246

55.909

54.922

55.676

66.758

66.213

66.213

40.976

42.960

42.969

StdErr

0.065

0.030

0.030

0.026

0.025

0.023

0.095

0.059

0.059

0.164

0.338

0.182

0.746

0.539

0.539

0.837

0.915

0.946

1.173

1.162

1.162

1.482

1.449

1.484

tValue

0.949

0.976

0.976

0.979

0.980

0.981

0.924

0.953

0.953

0.869

0.736

0.855

0.456

0.590

0.590

0.403

0.360

0.344

0.241

0.245

0.245

0.138

0.148

0.138

Probt

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

MALE

Sex

60

60

60

60

60

60

50

50

50

50

50

50

40

40

40

40

40

40

30

30

30

30

30

30

Age

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

Smoker

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Regular

Preferred

Preferred-Plus

Health Status

25.201

-57.568

-57.568

-7.107

-13.946

-0.929

22.842

-11.087

-11.087

13.677

4.514

14.679

59.239

46.518

46.532

46.161

51.090

54.417

67.999

59.783

59.783

57.920

60.375

62.072

Estimate

656.878

720.813

720.813

412.643

425.558

426.978

295.680

326.814

326.814

188.677

186.647

179.917

119.681

133.457

133.460

74.894

68.584

69.603

76.147

76.473

76.473

44.081

43.269

44.012

StdErr

0.038

-0.080

-0.080

-0.017

-0.033

-0.002

0.077

-0.034

-0.034

0.072

0.024

0.082

0.495

0.349

0.349

0.616

0.745

0.782

0.893

0.782

0.782

1.314

1.395

1.410

tValue

41

Note: Marginal prices are estimated for 1-year level term contracts using the all premiums offered in the California market in January 1997. All data are taken from the January
1997 CompuLife dataset. Companies with all ratings are included in the analysis. Contracts are priced without riders.

60

40

FEMALE

60

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

FEMALE

40

FEMALE

60

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

FEMALE

60

30

FEMALE

60

30

FEMALE

FEMALE

30

FEMALE

30

FEMALE

Age

FEMALE

Sex

Table 2b.
Fixed Price Per Policy Estimates.
Weights Included. All Firm Offerings Included. No Firm-Level Fixed Effects Included. CompuLife Linear Pricing Equation.

0.969

0.936

0.936

0.986

0.974

0.998

0.938

0.973

0.973

0.942

0.981

0.935

0.621

0.727

0.727

0.538

0.456

0.434

0.372

0.434

0.434

0.189

0.163

0.159

Probt

Table 3. Demand Regressions, Marginal Premium Estimated from Median Firm Data. 1-Year
Level Term Contracts in 1997.
Intercept
Log of CompuLife Marginal Premium per $1000 Coverage
Log of (Unadjusted) Death Probability
Log of Fixed Price
Log of 1990 Median Income by Zip-Code
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Married
Single
Widowed/Divorced
No Previous Coverage
Previous Coverage
Female
Male
Additional Coverage
Region: Mid-West
Region: New England
Region: South
Region: West

Estimate
7.401
-0.538
0.287
0.136
0.612
0.033
0.025
0.091
0.000
0.104
-0.237
0.000
-0.066
0.000
-0.483
0.000
0.174
-0.167
-0.085
-0.117
0.000

StdErr
0.753
0.085
0.087
0.079
0.054
0.055
0.057
0.058

DF
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429

tValue
9.823
-6.343
3.280
1.719
11.310
0.604
0.436
1.572

Probt
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.086
0.000
0.546
0.663
0.116

0.063
0.092

1429
1429

1.646
-2.593

0.100
0.010

0.045

1429

-1.464

0.143

0.045

1429

-10.756

0.000

0.240
0.066
0.065
0.066

1429
1429
1429
1429

0.725
-2.509
-1.313
-1.783

0.468
0.012
0.190
0.075

42

Variable
Intercept
Log of CompuLife Marginal Premium per $1000 Coverage
Log of annual probability of dying during period of term coverage adjusted for
relative mortality risk due to smoking over a 1 year period (never smokers vs.
weighted average of light & heavy smokers)
Log of Average Premium
Log of 1990 Median Income by Zip-Code
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Married
Single
Widowed/Divorced
No Previous Coverage
Previous Coverage
Female
Male
Additional Coverage
Region: Mid-West
Region: New England
Region: South
Region: West
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429
1429

0.108
0.061
0.054
0.055
0.057
0.058
0.063
0.092
0.045
0.053
0.241
0.067
0.065
0.066

0.193
-0.004
0.619
0.035
0.023
0.089
0.000
0.118
-0.220
0.000
-0.075
0.000
-0.484
0.000
0.171
-0.173
-0.085
-0.119
0.000

DF
1429
1429

StdErr
0.927
0.141

Estimate
7.240
-0.556

Table 4. Median Premium Regressions. 1-Year Level Term Contracts in 1997.

0.710
-2.595
-1.317
-1.810

-9.115

-1.678

1.872
-2.404

1.795
-0.065
11.403
0.632
0.403
1.538

tValue
7.811
-3.953

0.478
0.010
0.188
0.070

0.000

0.093

0.061
0.016

0.073
0.948
0.000
0.528
0.687
0.124

Probt
0.000
0.000

43

Marginal Price Variable
Using Median Firm Data
Individual Marginal
Premium
Relative Premium

Table 5
Price Elasticity Risk Elasticity
(Unadjusted)
-0.477
-0.473
-0.458
-0.434

Risk Elasticity
(Adjusted for
Smoking)

0.328
0.200
-0.020*
-0.110

Using Weighted All-Firm
Data
-0.408
0.468
-0.578
Individual Marginal
-0.405
0.495
Premium
-0.422
-0.467
0.334
Relative Premium
-0.446
All variables statistically significant unless indicated
*Not statistically significant
CompuLife Premium

0.382
0.311
0.071

44

