NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCOVERING THE RISK-RETURN RELATION IN THE STOCK MARKET
Hui Guo
Robert F. Whitelaw
Working Paper 9927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9927
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

This paper formerly circulated under the title “Risk and Return: Some New Evidence”. We thank N.R.
Prabhala for providing the implied volatility data and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, the University of Texas, Austin, Vanderbilt
University, the Australian Graduate School of Management, and the University of Queensland for helpful
comments. Financial support from the C. V. Starr Center for Applied Economics is gratefully acknowledged
by the first author. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily relect
the official positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis or the Federal Reserve System. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Hui Guo and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Uncovering the Risk-Return Relation in the Stock Market
Hui Guo and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 9927
August 2003
JEL No. G1
ABSTRACT
There is an ongoing debate in the literature about the apparent weak or negative relation between
risk (conditional variance) and return (expected returns) in the aggregate stock market. We develop
and estimate an empirical model based on the ICAPM to investigate this relation. Our primary
innovation is to model and identify empirically the two components of expected returns--the risk
component and the component due to the desire to hedge changes in investment opportunities. We
also explicitly model the effect of shocks to expected returns on ex post returns and use implied
volatility from traded options to increase estimation efficiency. As a result, the coefficient of relative
risk aversion is estimated more precisely, and we find it to be positive and reasonable in magnitude.
Although volatility risk is priced, as theory dictates, it contributes only a small amount to the timevariation in expected returns. Expected returns are driven primarily by the desire to hedge changes
in investment opportunities. It is the omission of this hedge component that is responsible for the
contradictory and counter-intuitive results in the existing literature.
Hui Guo
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, Missouri 63166
hui.gao@stls.frb.org
Robert F. Whitelaw
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 W. 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

The return on the market portfolio plays a central role in the capital asset pricing model (CAPM),
the ﬁnancial theory widely used by both academics and practitioners. However, the intertemporal
properties of stock market returns are not yet fully understood.1 In particular, there is an ongoing
debate in the literature about the relationship between stock market risk and return and the extent
to which stock market volatility moves stock prices. This paper provides new evidence on the
risk-return relation by estimating a variant of Merton’s (1973) intertemporal capital asset pricing
model (ICAPM).
In his seminal paper, Merton (1973) shows that the conditional excess market return, Et−1 rM,t −
2
rf,t , is a linear function of its conditional variance, σM,t−1
, (the risk component) and its covariance

with investment opportunities, σM F,t−1 , (the hedge component), i.e.,
Et−1 rM,t − rf,t = [

−JW W W 2
−JW F
]σM,t−1 + [
]σM F,t−1 ,
JW
JW

(1)

where J(W (t), F (t), t) is the indirect utility function with subscripts denoting partial derivatives,
W (t) is wealth, and F (t) is a vector of state variables that describe investment opportunities.2
−JW W W
JW

is a measure of relative risk aversion, which is usually assumed to be constant over time.

If people are risk averse, then this quantity should be positive.
Under certain conditions, Merton (1980) argues that the hedge component is negligible and
the conditional excess market return is proportional to its conditional variance. Since Merton’s
work, this speciﬁcation has been subject to dozens of empirical investigations, but these papers
have drawn conﬂicting conclusions on the sign of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. In general,
however, despite widely diﬀering speciﬁcations and estimation techniques, most studies ﬁnd a weak
or negative relation. Examples include French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell (1987),
Glosten, Jagannathan and Runkle (1993), Whitelaw (1994), and more recent papers, including
Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2003).
1

The expected stock market return was long considered to be constant until relatively recent work documenting

the predictability of market returns (e.g., Fama and French (1989)). It is now well understood that time-varying
expected returns are consistent with rational expectations. See Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Guo (2003) for
recent examples of this literature.
2
Strictly speaking, equation (1) is the discrete time version of Merton’s ICAPM (see Long [1974]). In addition,
the equation holds for the aggregate wealth portfolio for which we use the market portfolio as a proxy.

1

The failure to reach a deﬁnitive conclusion on the risk-return relation can be attributed to two
factors. First, neither the conditional return nor the conditional variance are directly observable;
certain restrictions must be imposed to identify these two variables. Instrumental variable (IV)
models and autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) models are the two most commonly used identiﬁcation methods. In general, empirical results are sensitive to the restrictions
imposed by these models. For example, Campbell (1987) ﬁnds that the results depend on the
choice of instrumental variables. Speciﬁcally, the nominal risk-free rate is negatively related to
the expected return and positively related to the variance, and “these two results together give
a perverse negative relationship between the conditional mean and variance for common stock”
(Campbell (1987, p.391)). In the context of ARCH models, if the conditional distribution of the
return shock is changed from normal to student-t, the positive relation found by French, Schwert
and Stambaugh (1987) disappears (see Baillie and DeGennaro (1990)).
Second, there are no theoretical restrictions on the sign of the correlation between risk and
return. Backus and Gregory (1993) show that in a Lucas exchange economy, the correlation can
be positive or negative depending on the time series properties of the pricing kernel. This result
suggests that the hedge component can be a signiﬁcant pricing factor and can have an important
eﬀect on the risk-return relation. In general, the risk-return relation can be time-varying as observed
by Whitelaw (1994). The theory, however, still requires a positive partial relationship between stock
market risk and return. The more relevant empirical issue is to disentangle the risk component
from the hedge component.
Scruggs (1998) presents some initial results on the decomposition of the expected excess market
return into risk and hedge components. Assuming that the long-term government bond return represents investment opportunities, he estimates equation (1) using a bivariate exponential GARCH
model and ﬁnds that the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is positive and statistically signiﬁcant.
However, his approach has some weaknesses. For example, he assumes that the conditional correlation between stock returns and bond returns is constant, but Ibbotson Associates (1997) provide
evidence that it actually changes sign over time in historical data. After relaxing this assumption,
Scruggs and Glabadanidis (2003) fail to replicate the earlier results. Of course, this latter result
does not imply a rejection of equation (1); rather, it challenges the assumption that bond returns
are perfectly correlated with investment opportunities.

2

In contrast, we develop an asset pricing model based on Merton’s (1973) ICAPM and Campbell and Shiller’s (1988) log-linearization method and implement estimation using instrumental
variables.3 Instead of working with the ex ante excess return, which is not directly observable,
we decompose the ex post excess return into ﬁve components: the risk component and the hedge
component, which together make up expected returns, revisions in these two components, which
measure unexpected returns due to shocks to expected returns, and a residual component reﬂecting
unexpected returns due to revisions in cash ﬂow and interest rate forecasts. We explicitly model the
volatility feedback eﬀect,4 and we also control for innovations in the hedge component. Therefore,
we explain part of the unexpected return on a contemporaneous basis and improve the eﬃciency
of the estimation and the identiﬁcation of the risk and hedge components of expected returns.
Another innovation relative to previous work is that we use non-overlapping monthly volatility
implied by S&P 100 index option prices as an instrumental variable for the conditional market
variance.5 Implied volatility is a powerful predictor of future volatility, subsuming the information
content of other predictors in some cases (see, for example, Christensen and Prabhala (1998) and
Fleming (1998)). Implied volatility is therefore an eﬃcient instrumental variable and improves the
precision of the estimation.
We get three important and interesting results from estimating the model with the implied
volatility data. First, the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is positive and precisely estimated.
For example, in our favored speciﬁcation the point estimate is 3.98 with a standard error of 1.45.
Second, we ﬁnd that expected returns are primarily driven by changes in investment opportunities,
not by changes in stock market volatility. The two together explain 5.2% of the total variation in
stock market returns, while the latter alone explains less than 1% of the variation. Moreover, the
variance of the estimated hedge component of expected returns is approximately twice as big as
that of the risk component. Third, the risk and hedge components are negatively correlated. Thus
the omitted variables problem caused by estimating equation (1) without the hedge component can
3

French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) argue that full information maximum likelihood estimators such as

GARCH are generally more sensitive to model misspeciﬁcation than instrumental variable estimators.
4
Pindyck (1984,1988), Poterba and Summers (1986), French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell and
Hentschel (1992) and Wu (2001) all emphasize the importance of the volatility feedback eﬀect in detecting the
risk-return relation.
5
The implied volatility data is constructed by Christensen and Prabhala (1998) and is kindly provided to us by
N. Prabhala.

3

cause a severe downward bias in the estimate of relative risk aversion.
One concern is that the implied volatility data only span the period November 1983 to May
1995 (139 observations). In order to check the robustness of our results, we also estimate the model
with longer samples of monthly and quarterly data, in which the conditional market variance is
estimated with lagged ﬁnancial variables. The results from this empirical exercise are also more
readily compared to those in the existing literature. Similar results are found in this longer dataset.
For the monthly data, the point estimate of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is 1.46 with a
standard error of 3.17. In spite of the longer sample, the standard error is higher due to the
imprecision associated with estimating the conditional variance rather than using implied volatility.
For the quarterly data, the estimate of relative risk aversion is 7.90 with a standard error of 3.50.
In both cases, expected returns are driven primarily by changes in investment opportunities.
These analyses allow us to explain the counter-intuitive and contradictory evidence in the
current literature. The primary issue is a classical omitted variables problem. Because the omitted
variable, the hedge component, is large and negatively correlated with the included variable, the
risk component, the coeﬃcient is severely downward biased and can even be driven negative. In
addition, the conditional variance is often measured poorly, thus generating large standard errors
and parameter estimates that can vary substantially across speciﬁcations. Finally, controlling
for the volatility feedback eﬀect, i.e., the eﬀect of the shock to the risk component on unexpected
returns, increases the eﬃcency of our estimation, sometimes substantially. Interestingly, innovations
in the hedge component do not seem to help in identifying the model and actually degrade its
performance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a log-linear model of stock
returns that decomposes ex post returns. The data are discussed in Section 3, and we also provide
an initial examination of conditional volatility. The main empirical investigation is conducted in
Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.

4

2

Theory

2.1

A Log-Linear Asset Pricing Model

In this section, we derive an asset pricing model based on Merton’s ICAPM and Campbell and
Shiller’s (1988) log-linearization method. The log-linear approximation provides both tractability
and accuracy.
As in Campbell and Shiller (1988), the continuously compounded market return rM,t+1 is deﬁned
as
rM,t+1 = log(PM,t+1 + DM,t+1 ) − log(PM,t ),

(2)

where PM,t+1 is the price at the end of period t+1 and DM,t+1 is the dividend paid out during
period t+1. Throughout this paper, we use upper case to denote the level and lower case to denote
the log. In addition, the subscript M will be suppressed for notational convenience.
Using a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion around the steady state of the log dividend price ratio
d − p , equation (2) can be rewritten as a ﬁrst-order diﬀerence equation for the stock price,
rt+1 ≈ k + ρpt+1 − pt + (1 − ρ)dt+1 ,

(3)

where
ρ =

1
,
1 + exp(d − p)

1
k = − log(ρ) − (1 − ρ) log( − 1),
ρ
and ρ is set to be 0.997 as in Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997, Chapter 7).
Solving equation (3) forward and imposing the transversality condition
lim ρj pt+j = 0

j→∞

the stock price becomes a function of future dividend ﬂows and discount rates,
∞

k
+
ρj [(1 − ρ)dt+1+j − rt+1+j ].
pt =
1 − ρ j=0

(4)

Equation (4) is simply an accounting identity, which also holds ex ante,
pt =

∞

k
+ Et
ρj [(1 − ρ)dt+1+j − rt+1+j ].
1−ρ
j=0

5

(5)

Substituting equation (5) into equation (3), we decompose the ex post stock return into two parts,
the expected return and the shocks to the return,


rt+1 = Et rt+1 − Et+1

∞


ρj rt+1+j − Et

j=1



+ Et+1

∞


∞




ρj rt+1+j 

j=1

ρj ∆dt+1+j − Et

j=0

∞




ρj ∆dt+1+j  ,

(6)

j=0

where ∆dt+1+j is dividend growth. Unexpected returns are themselves made up of two components,
revisions in future expected returns and revisions in cash ﬂow forecasts. For the excess market
return, et+1 ≡ rt+1 − rf,t+1 , where rf,t+1 is the nominal risk-free rate, equation (6) can be rewritten
as



et+1 = Et et+1 − Et+1

∞


ρj et+1+j − Et

j=1



− Et+1

∞


+ Et+1

∞




ρj et+1+j 

j=1

ρj rf,t+1+j − Et

j=1



∞


∞


ρj rf,t+1+j 

j=1

ρj ∆dt+1+j − Et

j=0



∞


(7)



ρj ∆dt+1+j  .

j=0

Merton’s ICAPM (equation (1)) provides the model for expected excess returns
Et et+1 = γσt2 + λt σM F,t ,
where

−JW W W
JW

= γ and

−JW F
JW

(8)

= λt . γ is the constant relative risk aversion coeﬃcient, and λt is a

function of the state variables and is not necessarily constant over time. Substituting equation (8)
into equation (7) and noting that Et et+1+j = Et [Et+j et+1+j ] by iterated expectations, we get
et+1 = γσt2 + λt σM F,t − ησ,t+1 − ηF,t+1 − ηf,t+1 + ηd,t+1 ,
where
ησ,t+1 = Et+1
ηF,t+1 = Et+1
ηf,t+1 = Et+1
ηd,t+1 = Et+1

∞

j=1
∞

j=1
∞

j=1
∞


2
ρj γσt+j
− Et

∞


2
ρj γσt+j
,

j=1

ρj λt+j σM F,t+j − Et

∞


ρj λt+j σM F,t+j ,

j=1

ρj rf,t+1+j − Et

∞


ρj rf,t+1+j ,

j=1
∞


ρj ∆dt+1+j − Et

j=0

j=0

6

ρj ∆dt+1+j .

(9)

The ﬁrst two terms in equation (9) capture the expected excess return. The third and fourth
terms explicitly write out the unexpected return due to shocks to the risk component and hedge
component of expected returns, respectively. The remaining terms are shocks to risk-free rate
forecasts and cash ﬂow forecasts.

2.2

Modeling the Risk and Hedge Components of Returns

The empirical implementation of equation (9) requires further speciﬁcation of the risk and hedge
components of returns. By imposing a speciﬁc time series model on these components, we can also
reduce the shocks to these components, which are written in equation (9) as inﬁnite sums, to more
manageable closed-form terms.
First, consider the risk component of expected returns and the shock to this component. For
periods during which we have implied volatility data, we assume that this variable is a reasonable
observable proxy for the conditional variance. Thus, no further speciﬁcation of the risk component
is necessary. In order to simplify the expression for the shock to the risk component, we need to
assume a time series process for the conditional variance. Poterba and Summers (1986) argue that
an AR(1) process is appropriate, and, as we will show later, an AR(1) process ﬁts the data well.
Consequently, we model the evolution of the conditional variance process as
2
= α + βσt2 + εσ,t+1 .
σt+1

(10)

ργ
εσ,t+1
1 − ρβ

(11)

This equation implies
ησ,t+1 =

(see the Appendix for details). Note that the unexpected return due to revisions to the risk component is just a simple linear function of the shock to the conditional variance. This term generates
the volatility feedback eﬀect in equation (9), i.e., returns are negatively related to contemporaneous
innovations in the conditional variance.
For the longer sample period when implied volatility data is not available, we need a model for
the conditional variance. We assume that the realized market variance, vt2 , is a linear function of
its own lag and a set of state variables, Xkt , k = 1, ...K, i.e.,
vt2

= a0 +

2
a1 vt−1

+

K

k=1

7

a2,k Xk,t−1 + ζt

(12)

(13)
Discussion of the computation of the realized variance and the choice of state variables is postponed
until Section 3.2. The ﬁtted value from the estimation is used as a proxy for the conditional market
variance,6 i.e.,
2
2
σ̂t−1
= a0 + a1 vt−1
+

K


a2,k Xk,t−1

k=1

= ω0 + ω1 Zt−1
where



(14)



2
 vt 

Zt = 

Xt



In order to calculate the innovation in the risk component we need to compute the shock to this
conditional variance, which, in turn, requires specifying a process for the state variables. Following
Campbell and Shiller (1988), among others, we assume that the state variables, Xt+1 , follow a
vector autoregressive (VAR) process with a single lag:7
Xt+1 = A0 + A1 Xt + εX,t+1 .

(15)

The joint process for the variance and the instrumental variables can be written as
Zt+1 = B0 + B1 Zt + εZ,t+1
where





 ω0 

B0 = 

A0






B1 = 



ω1
0 A1




(16)




εZ,t+1 = 



ζt
εX,t+1




Therefore
ησ,t+1 = ργω1 (I − ρB1 )−1 εZ,t+1
6

(17)

This type of speciﬁcation has a long history in the literature. For example, French, Schwert and Stambaugh

(1987) use a time series model of realized variance to model the conditional variance. Numerous papers since then
have employed predetermined ﬁnancial variables as additional predictors.
7
Extending the VAR to longer lags is conceptually straightforward, but it adds nothing to the intuition from the
model.

8

where I is a (K+1)-by-(K+1) identity matrix (see the Appendix for details). This result is essentially the multivariate analog of the result in equation (11); the innovation in the risk component
is a function of the innovation in the variables that describe the conditional variance. Again, this
term generates the well-known volatility feedback eﬀect.
There are several ways to estimate the hedge component (λt σM F,t ) in equation (9). Scruggs
(1998) uses a bivariate exponential GARCH model, in which he assumes that λt is constant and the
long-term government bond return is perfectly correlated with investment opportunities. Following
Campbell (1996), we assume that the hedge component is a linear function of the same state
variables, Xt , as used above to model the conditional variance,8 i.e.,
λt σM F,t = φ0 +

K


φ1,k Xk,t = φ0 + φ1 Xt .

(18)

k=1

Note that time-variation in λt is assumed to be captured by time-variation in the state variables;
the coeﬃcients on these state variables,φ1 , are assumed to be constant.
This formulation needs some explanation since, in the stock return predictability literature, it
is used to model total expected returns not just the component of expected returns due to hedging
demands. Moreover, we are use the same variables to model both the risk and hedge components.
The obvious danger is that we may mistakenly attribute part of the risk component to the hedge
component, i.e., we will not be able to identify the two components separately. We avoid this
problem by ensuring that our proxy for conditional volatility subsumes all the information about the
risk component that is contained in the state variables in equation (18). In the case of the implied
volatility data, this amounts to checking that the state variables have no marginal explanatory
power for future volatility after controlling for the predictive power of implied volatility. In other
words, as long as implied volatility is a suﬃciently good proxy for the risk component, the state
variables will only pick up the component of expected returns that is not related to risk, which
is, by deﬁnition, the hedge component. Evidence to this eﬀect is presented in Section 3. When
we model conditional variance as a linear function of the state variables, the process of projecting
realized variance on these variables guarantees that we have extracted all the (linear) information
8

Using the same vector of state variables is without loss of generality since the vector can always be expanded to

include all variables that are relevant for modeling either the risk or hedge components. That is, the coeﬃcient on
any particular variable may be zero in either of the equations.

9

about future volatility that they contain, and, again, the residual predictive power should be due
only to the hedge component of expected returns.
One advantage of equation (18) is that it allows us to calculate the revision term for the
hedge component, ηF,t+1 in equation (9), directly as in Campbell and Shiller (1988), Campbell
(1991) and Campbell and Ammer (1993). By controlling for this component of returns, we can
potentially increase the eﬃciency with of the estimation and the precision with which we estimate
the coeﬃcients. Speciﬁcally,
ηF,t+1 = ρφ1 (I − ρA1 )−1 εX,t+1 ,

(19)

where I is a K-by-K identity matrix (see the Appendix for details). As for the risk component,
innovations to the hedge component are a relatively simple function of the shocks to the state
variables.
After substituting equations (18), (19), and either (11) or (17), into equation (9), we obtain the
two models that are estimated in this paper:
ργ
εσ,t+1 − ρφ1 (I − ρA1 )−1 εX,t+1 − ηf,t+1 + ηd,t+1
1 − ρβ
= γσt2 + [φ0 + φ1 Xt ] − ργω1 (I − ρB1 )−1 εZ,t+1 − ρφ1 (I − ρA1 )−1 εX,t+1

et+1 = γσt2 + [φ0 + φ1 Xt ] −
et+1

−ηf,t+1 + ηd,t+1 .

(20)

(21)

They diﬀer only by the proxies for conditional variance and the corresponding shocks to the risk
component of expected returns. Both equations (20) and (21) captures the six components of
excess market returns: expected returns due to the risk and hedge components, unexpected returns
due to shocks to these components of expected returns, and shocks to cash ﬂow and risk-free rate
forecasts. The risk and risk revision terms are linear functions of the lagged conditional variance
and the contemporaneous shock to the conditional variance, respectively. The hedge and hedge
revision terms are written in terms of the lagged state variables and the shocks to the process that
governs these variables, respectively. The shocks to the cash ﬂow and risk-free rate forecasts are not
written out explicitly, and they form the regression residual in the speciﬁcation that we estimate.

10

3

Data Description

The models are estimated with two sets of data. The ﬁrst dataset utilizes the volatility implied by
S&P 100 index (OEX) option prices as a proxy for the conditional market variance. The second
dataset adopts commonly used ﬁnancial variables as instruments to estimate the conditional market
variance.

3.1

Implied Volatility Data

The implied volatility data were constructed by Christensen and Prabhala (1998). They compute
non-overlapping monthly implied volatility data for the S&P 100 index spanning the period November 1983 to May 1995, for a total of 139 observations. It is important to note that the S&P 100
index option contract expires on the third Saturday of each month. Christensen and Prabhala
compute implied volatility based on a contract that expires in twenty-four days. The sampling
month is thus diﬀerent from the calendar month; moreover, some trading days are not included in
any contract. For example, the implied volatility for October 1987 is calculated using the option
price on September 23, 1987 for the option that expires on October 17, 1987. For November 1987,
it is based on the option price on October 28, 1987 for the option that expires on November 21,
1987. Thus, trading days between October 17, 1987, and October 28, 1987, including the October
19, 1987 stock market crash, are not included in any contract. We will return to this point later.
The monthly excess market return and variance are constructed from daily excess market returns. We use daily value-weighted market returns (VWRET) from CRSP as daily market returns.
The daily risk-free rate data are not directly available. Following Nelson (1991) and others, we
assume that the risk-free rate is constant within each month and calculate the daily risk-free rate
by dividing the monthly short-term government bill rate from Ibbotson Associates (1997) by the
number of trading days in the month. The daily excess market return is the diﬀerence between the
daily risk-free rate and the daily market return.
As in Christensen and Prabhala (1998), the realized monthly market variance is deﬁned as
vt2 =

τt


(et,k − et )2 ,

(22)

k=1

where τt is the number of days to expiration of the option contract in month t, et,k is the daily

11

excess market return and et is the mean return over the month, i.e., et =

1
τt

τt

9
k=1 et,k .

The

monthly excess market return is the sum of daily excess market returns,
et =

τt


et,k .

(23)

k=1

Both the realized and implied variances of the S&P 100 index returns are larger than the realized
market variance of the CRSP value-weighted portfolio because the S&P 100 is not a well-diversiﬁed
portfolio. In our sample, the means of monthly realized and implied variances of the S&P 100 return
are 0.0022 and 0.0020, respectively. The realized market variance of the value-weighted portfolio
has a mean of 0.0014. Consequently, we scale the implied variance by 14/22, which equates the
average realized variances of the two series. This rescaling has no eﬀect on the statistical signiﬁcance
or explanatory power of the models estimated subsequently, since the implied variance enters the
equations linearly. The point of the rescaling is simply to preserve the economic interpretation of
the coeﬃcient as the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. Without rescaling, the higher variance of
the S&P 100 would reduce this coeﬃcient by exactly 14/22.
As mentioned above, the October 19, 1987 market crash and the following days are not included
in any sampling month and the market variance returns to a normal level very quickly; thus, the
crash has a small impact on the realized market variance in our sample.10 However, the implied
market variance does jump after the market crash, although it also returns to a normal level very
quickly.
The hedge component is estimated using two instrumental variables:11 (1) the consumptionwealth ratio (CAY) (see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)), and (2) the stochastically detrended risk-free
9

Adjusting the variance for the realized mean daily return has no appreciable aﬀect on the results. In other words,

realized variance could also be computed as the sum of squared returns as is done in some of the literature.
10
There may be other reasons to exclude the October 19, 1987 market crash from the sample. Schwert (1990b)
shows it is unusual in many ways, and Seyhun (1990) argues that it is not explained by the fundamentals. It is not
predicted by the option data used in this paper. We will return to this point in discussions of the monthly data.
11
An earlier version of the paper used a somewhat diﬀerent set of four instrumental variables: (1) the yield spread
between Baa-rated and Aaa-rated bonds, (2) the yield spread between 6-month commercial paper and 3-month
Treasury bills, (3) the stochastically detrended risk-free rate, and (4) the dividend yield. The results are qualitatively
similar, and the new speciﬁcation is more parsimonious and better reﬂects the evolution of the literature on return
predictability.

12

rate (RREL). The latter variable is deﬁned as
RRELt = rf,t −

12
1 
rf,t−k .
12 k=1

(24)

The risk-free rate is taken from Ibbotson Associates (1997), and the consumption-wealth ratio is
computed and supplied by Martin Lettau.12
It is well known that we can predict stock market volatility with variables such as the nominal risk-free rate, the consumption-wealth ratio and lagged realized variance (see, for example,
Campbell (1987), French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2003)), and
we consider the same ﬁnancial variables as used for estimating the hedge component.13 To test
the information content of implied volatility, we regress the realized variance on its own lag, the
instrumental variables and the scaled implied variance, Vt2 , i.e.,
vt2 = a0 +

2


2
2
a1,k Xk,t−1 + a2 vt−1
+ a3 Vt−1
+ ζt .

(25)

k=1

If implied volatility is eﬃcient, all the other variables should enter equation (25) insigniﬁcantly. We
estimate equation (25), and restricted versions thereof, with GMM, and the parameter estimates
and heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in Table 1.
We ﬁrst exclude implied volatility in order to verify the predictive power of the other variables
in our sample period. Both the consumption-wealth ratio and lagged variance enter signiﬁcantly,
with the signs of the coeﬃcients consistent with the existing literature, and the explanatory power
is substantial, with an R2 close to 40%. The risk-free rate does not have any marginal explanatory
power, but this may be speciﬁc to our sample period. When the implied variance is added to the
speciﬁcation, it is highly signiﬁcant. Past variance and the consumption-wealth ratio are no longer
signiﬁcant at the 5% level,14 and the R2 increases to almost 50%. Consequently, we conclude that
implied volatility is an eﬃcient instrumental variable for future stock market variance, and, as such,
12
13

See his web site, http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/ mlettau/, for details.
Other variables such as the commercial paper–Treasury spread have a small amount of marginal predictive power

over and above CAY and RREL in our sample. However, the results are invariant to including these additional
variables and we restrict the set of variables for parsimony.
14
CAY does have some marginal explanatory power; it is signiﬁcant at the 10% level. Note that throughout the
paper signiﬁcance levels are based on two-sided tests. To the extent that one-sided tests are appropriate in some
cases, the relevant signiﬁcance level is half of that reported.

13

it may well improve the estimation eﬃciency of the model. Of equal importance, this result implies
that we will be able to separately identify the two components of expected returns. Speciﬁcally, the
instrumental variables used for the hedge component will pick up little if any of the risk component
because they have limited marginal explanatory power for future variance, after controlling for the
predictive power of implied volatility.
In Table 1, we also report estimates from a regression of realized variance on the scaled implied
volatility alone. If scaled implied volatility is a conditionally unbiased predictor of future variance,
then the intercept in this regression should be equal to zero and the coeﬃcient on implied volatility
should be equal to one. However, if implied volatility is measured with some error (e.g., due to the
failure of the Black-Scholes model or because the S&P 100 diﬀers in an economically signiﬁcant
way from the value-weighted CRSP index), then the coeﬃcient will be biased downwards and the
intercept should be positive, even if the measurement error is mean zero. While the estimated
coeﬃcient is positive, it is signiﬁcantly less than one, and the intercept is signiﬁcantly positive,
although it is small. Thus, while implied volatility may be informationally eﬃcient relative to other
variables it is not conditionally unbiased. As a result, it is likely that the coeﬃcient on this variable
will have a small downward bias in the later estimation of the model. Of some interest, there is a
noticeable drop in the R2 , from 49% to 41%, when the other three variables are dropped. However,
including these additional variables in the model for conditional variance has no meaningful eﬀect
on the later estimation of the full model; therefore, for ease of exposition we ignore them.

3.2

Instrumental Variables Estimation of the Conditional Variance

The model is also estimated with postwar monthly data, spanning the period January 1959 to
December 2000. The monthly variance of stock market returns is again computed from daily
return data as in equation (22). In this case, however, we use calendar months. We use the daily
market return data constructed by Schwert (1990a) before July 1962 and the daily value-weighted
market return from CRSP thereafter. The risk-free rate is also from CRSP.
We assume that the conditional market variance is a linear function of its own lags and the
same state variables: CAY and RREL. Including two lags, we estimate the regression
vt2 = a0 +

2


2
a1,i vt−i
+

i=1

2

k=1

14

a2,k Xk,t−1 + ζt .

(26)

Realized stock market variance shoots up to 0.0507 in October 1987 and returns to a more normal
level soon thereafter. The crash has a confounding eﬀect on the estimation of equation (26), which
is reported in Table 2. Although only one lag of the market variance is statistically signiﬁcant
in both pre-crash (1/59-9/87) and post-crash (1/88-12/00) sub-samples (the ﬁrst two regressions
reported in Table 2, respectively), the second lag of market variance is also statistically signiﬁcant
in the full sample (the third regression). Not surprisingly, the R2 of this third regression is also
much lower (7% versus 29%and 42% in the subsamples), and the sum of the coeﬃcients on the
lagged variance terms is also much lower (0.27 versus 0.57 and 0.46). Basically, including the crash
signiﬁcantly degrades the predictive power of the regression over all the other months because this
one observation dominates the sample in a OLS context. To reduce the impact of the October
1987 market crash, we arbitrarily set the realized stock market variance of October 1987 to 0.0094
basis points, the second largest realization in our sample.15 The corresponding results are shown
in the fourth regression in Table 2. The coeﬃcients and explanatory power look very similar across
the subperiods and the full sample after this adjustment. The second lag of realized variance is
statistically signiﬁcant (at the 5% level) in the full sample. Nevertheless, this second lag adds
little to the explanatory power, as demonstrated by the ﬁfth regression, which excludes this term.
The R2 drops only 1%, from 33% to 32%. Of some interest, the consumption-wealth ratio is a
signiﬁcant predictor of future variance in all the regressions, entering with a negative coeﬃcient.
Consequently, our ﬁnal speciﬁcation for the conditional variance has the two state variables and a
single lag of the realized variance, where the October 1987 variance is adjusted as described above.
Finally, we also use the same set two instrumental variables to model the hedge component
of expected returns. Again, these variables should not pick up any of the risk component. The
best linear combination is already included in the risk proxy, so they should have no marginal
explanatory power for conditional volatility.
15

A similar result could be achieved by dropping this observation from the sample.

15

4

Empirical Results

4.1

Econometric Strategy

For the sample for which we have implied volatility data, we simultaneously estimate equations (10),
(15) and (20) using GMM, substituting the scaled implied variance for the conditional variance:
2
= α + βVt2 + εV,t+1
Vt+1

(27)

Xt+1 = A0 + A1 Xt + εX,t+1
et+1 = γVt2 + [φ0 + φ1 Xt ] −

(28)
ργ
εV,t+1 − ρφ1 (I − ρA1 )−1 εX,t+1 +
1 − ρβ

t+1 .

(29)

For equations (27) and (28), we use the standard OLS moment conditions. The only subtlety is
in formulating the moment conditions for equation (29). Note that theory does not imply that
the terms εV,t+1 and εX,t+1 are orthogonal to the contemporaneous regression error

t+1 ;

therefore,

these variables should not be used as instruments. Using a constant, Vt2 and Xt = {CAYt , RRELt }
as instruments is suﬃcient to identify the free parameters. The two shocks are the ﬁtted residuals
from the ﬁrst two equations, the parameters β and A1 also come from these equations, and ρ is
set to 0.997 (see Section 2). What then is the value of including these two terms at all? First, by
reducing the amount of unexplained variation, they should improve the eﬃciency of the estimation
and the accuracy with which the parameters of interest can be estimated. Second, these terms also
depend on the parameters, and thus imposing the theoretical restrictions implied by the model also
helps to pin down these parameters.
In order to understand what is driving our results relative to the existing literature and to
understand the gains from imposing the additional restrictions on the revision terms, we also
estimate restricted versions of the model that exclude various terms in equation (29). Speciﬁcally,
we consider the following 5 cases:
1:

et+1 = φ0 + γVt2 +

2:

et+1 = φ0 + γVt2 −

3:

et+1

4:

et+1 = γVt2 + [φ0 + φ1 Xt ] +

5:

et+1 = γVt2 + [φ0 + φ1 Xt ] −

(30)

t+1

ργ
εV,t+1 +
1 − ρβ
= φ0 + φ1 Xt + t+1

16

(31)

t+1

(32)
(33)

t+1

ργ
εV,t+1 +
1 − ρβ

t+1

(34)

Model 6 is the full model in equation (29). In each case, we use the set of instruments corresponding
to the independent variables in the GMM estimation, i.e., one or more instruments from the set
[Vt2 , 1, Xt = {CAYt , RRELt }]. For example, in Model 1, there two parameters to be estimated (φ0 ,
γ) and we use two instruments (Vt2 and a constant). Model 2 is similar, except that the inclusion
of the revision term should help to identify γ. In Model 3 we use a constant and the variables CAY
and RREL as instruments, and the remaining models use the full set of instruments. Thus, all the
models are exactly identiﬁed.
For the longer sample period, for which we do not have implied volatility data, we replace
equation (27) with (26) with a single lag in order to estimate the conditional variance. The ﬁtted
value from this equation is used instead of the scaled implied variance in equation (29) and the
revision to the risk term is deﬁned in the corresponding way. The resulting system of equations is
2
+
vt2 = c + a1 vt−1

2


bj Xj,t−1 + ζt

(35)

j=1

Xt+1 = A0 + A1 Xt + εX,t+1

(36)

et+1 = γ σ̂t2 + [φ0 + φ1 Xt ] − ργω1 (I − ρB1 )−1 εZ,t+1 − ρφ1 (I − ρA1 )−1 εX,t+1 +

t+1 ,

(37)

where ω1 , B1 and εZ,t+1 are deﬁned in equations (14)-(16). Again all the equations are estimated
simultaneously using GMM and restricted versions of equation (37) are also estimated as in models
1-5 above.

4.2

Implied Volatility Data

Table 3 reports results from the estimation of equations (27)-(29) using monthly data for the
December 1983 to April 1995 period. The results for the conditional variance process, estimated
using the implied volatility data, are shown in Panel A. The AR(1) coeﬃcient is positive and
signiﬁcant, as expected, although the estimated persistence, and hence the R2 , are not very large.
Panel B shows the parameter estimates for the VAR(1) process for the state variables that are used
to model the hedge component. Both the consumption-wealth ratio and the relative T-bill rate are
quite persistent, but neither variable shows much predictive power for its counterpart.
The results from the estimation of the model itself are reported in Panel C. Recall that we
estimate six diﬀerent speciﬁcations–ﬁve restricted models given in equations (30)-(34) and the full
speciﬁcation given in equation (29). Model 1 is the standard risk-return model estimated in much
17

of the literature, i.e., a regression of returns on a measure of the conditional variance. However, in
contrast to many existing results, we ﬁnd a coeﬃcient that is positive, albeit signiﬁcant at only the
10% level, and reasonable in magnitude.16 If the hedge component is unimportant, the coeﬃcient
value of 2.2 represents an estimate of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion of the representative
agent; although, this estimate may be biased downwards slightly due to measurement error in
the conditional variance, evidence of which is presented in Section 3.1. The absence of a hedge
component also implies that the constant in the regression should be zero–a hypothesis that is
rejected at the 10% signiﬁcance level. Moreover, the R2 of less than 1% is very small. Model 2
attempts to reﬁne the speciﬁcation by controlling for the eﬀect of shocks to the risk component
on unexpected returns, i.e., the volatility feedback eﬀect. Adding this term leaves the parameters
estimates essentially unchanged. Nevertheless, the estimation does provide corroborating evidence
in that the R2 jumps to 7.6%. In other words, shocks to the risk component explain 10 times more
of the variation in returns than variation in the risk component of expected returns itself.
These initial results suggest two conclusions. First, sample period issues aside, improving the
quality of the proxy for conditional variance, in our case using implied volatility, seems to help
in recovering the theoretically justiﬁed positive risk-return relation. Ghysels, Santa-Clara and
Valkanov (2003) present evidence consistent with this conclusion using functions of daily squared
returns data to form a better measure of conditional variance. Second, while there is some evidence
of a positive risk-return relation, statistical power is weak, and the model can be rejected. Thus,
controlling for the hedge component of expected returns may be important.
Model 3 estimates the standard return predictability regression from the literature using our
two state variables. In our case, however, we interpret this regression as an estimation of the
hedge component of expected returns without controlling for the risk component. The signs of the
coeﬃcients, positive on the consumption-wealth ratio and negative on the relative T-bill rate, are
consistent with the results in the literature, as is the R2 of just over 3%. However, perhaps due
to the short sample period, neither variable is individually signiﬁcant. Nevertheless, the predictive
16

The standard errors are computed via GMM and are asymptotic. Given the sample size, there is some question

as to whether asymptotic standard errors are appropriate. This question is impossible to answer deﬁnitively, but
we also compute small sample standard errors using a block bootstrap methodology. The resulting standard errors
on the state variables are actually slightly lower than those reported in Table 3, but the standard errors on γ are
somewhat higher, e.g., 2.5 versus 1.5 in model 4.

18

power is still substantially greater than that found for the risk component in model 1.
Under the ICAPM, both models 1 and 3 are misspeciﬁed since theoretically both the risk and
hedge components should enter the model for expected returns. Model 4 combines these two terms,
and the results are extremely positive. First and foremost, estimated risk aversion is now 4.4 and
it is signiﬁcant at the 1% level. The risk-return relation is extremely statistically signiﬁcant and
of a reasonable magnitude. The reversal of the weak and/or negative results in the literature is
dramatic, and the explanation is clear. Model 1, and more generally similar speciﬁcations in the
literature, suﬀer from a classical omitted variables problem, i.e., they do not control for the hedge
component of expected returns. The eﬀect of an omitted variable on the estimated coeﬃcient of the
included variable depends on the covariance of this variable with the included variable. In this case,
if the covariance is negative, i.e., the risk and hedge components are negatively correlated, then
the coeﬃcient on conditional variance when this term is included alone, will be biased downwards.
Second, including the risk component also helps in identifying the hedge component; the coeﬃcient
on the consumption-wealth ratio is now more signiﬁcant. Third, the joint explanatory power of
the two components exceeds the sum of the individual explained variations from the separate
regressions; the R2 increases to 5.2%. Finally, the results give us added conﬁdence that we are
correctly identifying the risk and hedge components. The hedge component is positively related to
CAY, while the variance, if anything, is negatively related to CAY (see Table 1).
Can our identiﬁcation of these components be improved by controlling for the eﬀects of shocks
to expected returns on contemporaneous unexpected returns? This question is addressed by models
5 and 6. In model 5, we add the shock to the risk component of expected returns. The results are
not dramatically diﬀerent from those of model 4, but a couple of observations are worth making.
First, including the shock to the conditional variance can eﬀect both the estimate of relative risk
aversion and the hedge component. In this case, γ drops from 4.4 to 4.0, and the coeﬃcients on both
the state variables are closer to zero. Second, controlling for some of the variation of unexpected
returns can increase the eﬃcency of the estimation. In this case, the R2 increases from 5.0% to
11.5%, and the standard errors on the coeﬃcients drop by between 3% and 18%.
Finally, model 6 also includes the shock to the hedge component in the regression, with some
surprising results. First, the estimate of risk aversion rises substantially to 5.9, but the standard
error is also substantially larger, and the coeﬃcient is not signiﬁcant. In fact, the standard errors

19

increases for all the coeﬃcients, although most dramatically for γ. Second, the R2 actually declines
with the addition of this term; the shock to the hedge component causes a deterioration in the
performance of the model. There are a number of possible explanations for these unexpected
results. They could be indicative of the fact that the apparent predictive power of the state
variables is spurious. If these variables do not have true predictive ability for expected returns then
shocks to these variables will not explain unexpected returns either. However, this explanation is
contradicted by the fact that inclusion of the state variables helps in identifying the risk component
of expected returns in models 4 and 5. If their predictive power is spurious, this identiﬁcation eﬀect
should not occur. A more likely explanation, perhaps, is that the model suﬀers from some form of
misspeciﬁcation. If the VAR(1) speciﬁcation for the state variables is inadequate or the functional
form of the hedge component is not linear in the state variables, estimation error in the shock to the
hedge component could cause the reported results. A complete analysis of this issue is beyond the
scope of the current paper; however, these intriguing results certainly warrant further investigation.
In order to better illustrate the omitted variables problem and to gain some economic understanding of the results, we construct the ﬁtted risk and hedge components of expected returns using
model 5. The two series are plotted in Figure 1 along with the NBER business cycle peaks and
troughs (shaded bars represent recessions, i.e., the period between the peak of the cycle and the
subsequent trough). Clearly, the hedge component is much more variable than the risk component
of expected returns, with a sample variance that is almost twice as large. Moreover, much of the
variance of the risk component is attributable to the spike in implied volatility following the crash
in October 1987. The two series are negatively correlated, with a sample correlation of -0.33; thus,
omitting the hedge component causes the coeﬃcient on the risk component to be biased downwards.
The magnitude of this bias depends on the covariance between the hedge component and the included variable (i.e., the conditional variance) relative to the variance of the included variable times
its true coeﬃcient (i.e., the true coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion). In this sample, the covariance
is -3.64 while the product of the estimated value of γ (from model 5) times the variance of the
implied variance is 8.25. The bias is not suﬃcient to reverse the sign of the estimated coeﬃcient
in models 1 and 2, but it is substantial.
From an economic standpoint, the hedge component appears to exhibit some countercyclical
variation (i.e., it increases over the course of recessions), but there is only a single recession in the

20

sample so this interpretation is extremely casual. The risk component exhibits little or no apparent
business cycle patterns, although, as noted above, variation in this series is dominated by the crash
and the subsequent increase in implied volatility. Of some interest, the hedge component is negative
for substantial periods of time. There is no theoretical restriction on the sign of this component of
expected returns, but it does imply that at these times the stock market serves as a hedge against
adverse shifts in investment opportunities.

4.3

Instrumental Variables Estimation

The results of Section 4.2 go a long way in resurrecting the positive risk-return relation, but the
analysis suﬀers from two problems: (i) the sample period is short, and (ii) it relies on implied
volatility data that are not available in all periods or across all markets. Consequently, we now
turn to an analysis that constructs conditional variance estimates from ex post variance computed
using daily returns and conditioning variables that include lagged realized variance and our two
state variables, the consumption wealth ratio and the relative T-bill rate.
Table 4 reports results for the estimation of the system in equations (35)-(37) using monthly data
over the period February 1959 to December 2000. The estimation of the variance process is reported
in Panel A, which is identical to the ﬁfth regression of Table 2. Recall that realized variance in
October 1987 is adjusted downwards as discussed in Section 3.2. Other than the substantial degree
of explained variation, the key result is that the conditional variance is negatively and signiﬁcantly
related to the consumption-wealth ratio. Panel B reports the estimation of the VAR(1) on the two
state variables. The results are comparable, although not identical, to those estimated over the
shorter sample period in Table 3. Again, both variables exhibit strong persistence and cross-variable
predictability is limited.
Panel C reports the major results of interest, i.e., the estimates from the 6 models in Section
4.1 and also estimated using the implied volatility data in Section 4.2. Models 1 and 2 contain
only the risk component (the conditional variance) plus, in the latter case, the innovation in this
component of expected returns. In the longer sample, the eﬀects of the omitted variable, i.e., the
hedge component, and measurement issues in the conditional variance are clear. The coeﬃcient
on the conditional variance is negative and the standard error is large. The negative coeﬃcient is
consistent with previous studies that have documented a negative risk-return relation over similar

21

sample periods (e.g., Whitelaw (1994)). The fact that the standard error is more than twice that in
the shorter sample period (which uses implied volatility) is testament to the value of ﬁnding better
proxies for the conditional variance.
When both components are estimated together, as in model 4, the anomalous negative coeﬃcient
on the conditional variance disappears. The estimate for γ is positive and reasonable in magnitude,
but the standard error is still high. Moreover, the estimated risk component of expected returns
is small; the R2 of 4.4% in model 4 is no higher than that of model 3 which excludes the risk
component. In contrast, the hedge component appears to be identiﬁed well, with the coeﬃcients
on both state variables signiﬁcant at the 1% level. It is interesting to note that the hedge component,
in contrast to the conditional variance, is positively related to the consumption-wealth ratio. Thus,
we get the negative covariance between the hedge and risk components that exacerbates the omitted
variable problem in models 1 and 2 and also aids in separate identiﬁcation of the two components
of expected returns.
Adding shocks to expected returns in models 5 and 6 has similar eﬀects as documented for the
shorter sample period in Table 3. Speciﬁcally, the shock to the risk component increases estimation
eﬃciency and has a small eﬀect on the estimated parameter values. Again, however, the innovation
in the hedge component causes a deterioration in the results, at least with regard to the explanatory
power of the model.
Figure 2 plots the ﬁtted risk and hedge components (from model 5) over the longer sample
period, with the NBER business cycle peaks and troughs marked as in Figure 1. Several observations are in order. First, as in Figure 1, the hedge component is more variable than the risk
component of expected returns. In this case, however, the variances diﬀer by a factor of approximately 55. This diﬀerence is partly attributable to the fact that we have adjusted the realized
variance in October 1987 down as described in Section 3.2.17 Other factors include the dependence
of conditional variance on the state variables, in addition to lagged realized variance, and the lower
estimate of γ. Second, the correlation between the risk and hedge components of -0.27 is similar to
that documented in Section 4.2. In this case, however, the relevant covariance of -3.11 exceeds γ
17

The crash of October 1987, with its dramatic eﬀect on both realized and implied volatilities, will inevitably have

a disproportionate inﬂuence on the estimated risk component of expected returns. Nevertheless, our main results
seem to be robust to the treatment of this unusual episode.

22

times the variance of the conditional variance, which equals 1.55; thus, the omitted variables bias
drives the estimate of relative risk aversion negative in models 1 and 2.
From an economic standpoint, the countercyclical variation in the hedge component is now
clear. The hedge component reaches its lowest values at business cycle peaks and its highest
values at business cycle troughs. This result is not terribly surprising given the dependence of the
hedge component on the consumption-wealth ratio, which is known to be a business cycle variable.
Nevertheless, our decomposition allows us to give this variation a clear interpretation as variation
in the ability of the stock market to hedge shifts in investment opportunities. Speciﬁcally, stocks
appear to provide this hedge at the peak of the cycle, but not at the trough, when investors require
compensation for holding an asset that covaries positively with investment opportunities. As before,
the hedge component can take on a negative value for extended periods.
There are two important conclusions to be drawn from an analysis of the results in Tables
3 and 4. First, correcting for the ommission of the hedge component in the model of expected
returns restores the positive partial risk-return relation that has been so diﬃcult to ﬁnd in the
literature. This omitted variables problem is especially severe because the hedge component is
negatively correlated with the risk component of expected returns and is much more volatile.
Second, superior proxies for conditional variance, such as implied volatility from option prices, also
make identiﬁcation of this relation much easier.
To complete the analysis we perform two ﬁnal robustness checks. First, the results in Tables
3 and 4 are not directly comparable since they cover diﬀerent sample periods. We reestimate the
models in Table 4 using the sample period in Table 3 and report the results in Table 5. Second, the
results should hold at all horizons, not just one month. Moreover, the predictive ability of variables
such as the consumption-wealth ratio for returns tends to increase at longer horizons (Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001)). Therefore, we reestimate the models in Table 4 using quarterly data over the
sample period 1952Q3-2002Q3 and report the results in Table 6.
The Table 5 results conﬁrm those of Table 4. Of course, Panel B is identical to that in Table
3, as is model 3. Of primary interest, the estimate of γ is negative over the shorter sample period
when only the risk component is included, and the sign is reversed when controlling for the hedge
component. Again, the estimate of relative risk aversion is reasonable in magnitude but statistically
insigniﬁcant at conventional levels. As before, the innovation in the hedge component does not

23

improve the ﬁt of the model. In other words, the qualitative nature of the results in Table 4
are preserved in the subsample covered by the implied volatility data in Table 3. Thus, we have
conﬁdence that the evidence in Table 3 is not sample speciﬁc.
The results at the quarterly horizon, reported in Table 6, also conﬁrm those discussed earlier.
The variance process in Panel A and the process for the state variables in Panel B exhibit the same
features. More important, models 1 and 2 show that the standard risk-return regression generates
a negative coeﬃcient, as it does at the monthly frequency. However, models 3-6 do look somewhat
diﬀerent. First, the R2 of the hedge component is higher (12.1% in model 3), with the majority of
the additional explanatory power coming from an increase in the coeﬃcient on the consumptionwealth ratio (from 0.46 in Table 4 to 1.77 in Table 6). Second, and more important, putting the risk
and hedge components together, as in model 4, has a dramatic eﬀect on both terms. That is, the
eﬀect of omitting either term is even more dramatic than in the monthly data. γ increases to 14.3,
the coeﬃcient on CAY more than doubles, and the R2 climbs to 17.6%. The ability of the state
variables in the hedge component to help identify the risk component is further evidence that their
predictive power is not spurious. Third, the inclusion of the innovation of the risk component has a
much larger eﬀect. Moving from model 4 to model 5 results in γ dropping to a more economically
reasonable value of 7.9, and the standard errors falling by about 40% on the variables of interest.
Thus, controlling for innovations in expected returns and the resulting eﬀect on unexpected returns
can have an important impact on the inference drawn from the estimation. Finally, as before,
adding the innovation in the hedge component appears to degrade estimation eﬃciency.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we estimate a variant of Merton’s (1973) intertemporal capital asset pricing model,
and we ﬁnd a positive relationship between stock market risk and return. The estimated coeﬃcient
of relative risk aversion is reasonable in magnitude (between 1.5 and 7.9 depending on the sample
period and frequency); therefore, the power utility function appears to describe the data fairly
well. The conﬂicting results found in previous studies are due, in large part, to the fact that they
do not adequately distinguish the risk component of expected returns from the hedge component.
Speciﬁcally, omitting the hedge component from the estimation causes a large downward bias in

24

the estimate of relative risk aversion due to the negative correlation between these series.
Although stock market volatility is positively priced, in most cases it only explains a small
fraction of return variation. Expected returns are driven primarily by changes in the ability of
the stock market to hedge shifts in investment opportunities. Most existing economic theories can
explain neither why the investment opportunity set moves so dramatically nor the macroeconomic
forces behind this variation. Some recent research tries to ﬁll this gap. For example, Campbell
and Cochrane (1999) address changing investment opportunities in a habit formation model. In
their model, when consumption approaches the habit level, the agent becomes extremely risk averse
and demands a large expected return. Guo (2003) studies an inﬁnite horizon heterogeneous agent
model in which only one type of agent holds stocks. If there are borrowing constraints and idiosyncratic labor income shocks, shareholders require a large equity premium when their borrowing
constraints are close to binding. The investment opportunities are therefore determined by shareholders’ liquidity conditions.18 In contrast, Whitelaw (2000) generates large changes in investment
opportunities by modeling the underlying economy as a two-regime process. Because regimes are
persistent, regime shifts represent large movements in investment opportunities with corresponding
changes in required returns.
The focus of this paper is on understanding risk and expected returns at the market level in
a time series context; however, a signiﬁcant piece of the empirical asset pricing literature focuses
on the cross-section of expected returns across individual securities or portfolios. Interestingly, the
importance of hedging changes in the investment opportunity set at the aggregate level is also likely
to have strong implications in the cross-section. In particular, if volatility is not the primary source
of priced risk at the market level, then the dynamic CAPM will not hold and market betas will not
be the correct proxies for expected returns in the cross-section. Clearly, this issue warrants further
investigation from both an empirical and theoretical standpoint.

18

Aiyagari and Gertler (1998) and Allen and Gale (1994) emphasize the liquidity eﬀect on stock market volatility.

25

Appendix
Derivation of Equation (11)

The revision of the risk component is deﬁned as:
ησ,t+1 = Et+1

∞


2
ρj γσt+j
− Et

j=1

∞


2
ρj γσt+j
.

j=1

The model for the conditional variance from equation (10) is
2
= α + βσt2 + εσ,t+1 .
σt+1

This equation implies that
2
] = α
Et [σt+j

1 − βj
1−β

+ β j σt2 .

Thus,
ησ,t+1 =
=
=

∞

j=1
∞

j=1
∞


2
2
ρj γ(Et+1 [σt+j
] − Et [σt+j
])

ρj γ α

1 − β j−1
1−β

2
+ β j−1 σt+1
−α

2
ρj γβ j−1 (σt+1
− α − σt2 )

j=1

=

ργ
εσ,t+1 ,
1 − ρβ

which is equation (11).

Derivation of Equation (17)

The estimated conditional market variance (equation (14)) is
σ̂t2 = ω0 + ω1 Zt
where the state variables follow the process
Zt+1 = B0 + B1 Zt + εZ,t+1
26

1 − βj
1−β

− β j σt2

as in equation (16). From the derivation of equation (11) above, the risk component can be written
as
ησ,t+1 =
=
=

∞

j=1
∞

j=1
∞


2
2
ρj γ(Et+1 [σt+j
] − Et [σt+j
])

ρj γ[Et+1 (ω0 + ω1 Zt+j ) − Et (ω0 + ω1 Zt+j )]
ρj γω1 [Et+1 Zt+j − Et Zt+j ].

j=1

The process for the state variables implies
= (I − B1j )(I − B1 )−1 B0 + B1j Zt

Et Zt+j

Therefore
ησ,t+1 =
=

∞

j=1
∞


ρj γω1 [(I − B1j−1 )(I − B1 )−1 B0 + B1j−1 Zt+1 − (I − B1j )(I − B1 )−1 B0 − B1j Zt ]
ρj γω1 B1j−1 [Zt+1 − B1 Zt − B0 ]

j=1

= ργω1 (I − ρB1 )−1 εZ,t+1
which is equation (17).
Derivation of Equation (19)

The revision of the hedge component is deﬁned as
ηF,t+1 = Et+1

∞


ρj λt+j σM F,t+j − Et

j=1

∞


ρj λt+j σM F,t+j .

j=1

From equation (18)
λt σM F,t = φ0 + φ1 Xt .
Thus,
ηF,t+1 =
=

∞

j=1
∞


ρj [Et+1 (φ0 + φ1 Xt+j ) − Et (φ0 + φ1 Xt+j )]
ρj φ1 [Et+1 Xt+j − Et Xt+j ]

j=1

27

The process for the state variables is
Xt+1 = A0 + A1 Xt + εX,t+1 .
(as in equation (15)), which implies
Et Xt+j

= (I − Aj1 )(I − A1 )−1 A0 + Aj1 Xt

Therefore
ηF,t+1 =
=

∞

j=1
∞


j−1
j
j
−1
−1
ρj φ1 [(I − Aj−1
1 )(I − A1 ) A0 + A1 Xt+1 − (I − A1 )(I − A1 ) A0 − A1 Xt ]

ρj φ1 Aj−1
1 [Xt+1 − A1 Xt − A0 ]

j=1

= ρφ1 (I − ρA1 )−1 εX,t+1
which is equation (19).

28

References
[1] Aiyagari, S., and M. Gertler, 1998, Overreaction of asset prices in general equilibrium, C.V.
Starr Center Working Paper, 98-25, New York University.
[2] Allen, F., and D. Gale, 1994, Limited market participation and volatility of asset prices,
American Economic Review, 84, 933-955.
[3] Backus, D., and A. Gregory, 1993, Theoretical relation between risk premiums and conditional
variances, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 11, 177-185.
[4] Baillie, R., and R. DeGennaro, 1990, Stock returns and volatility, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 25, 203-214.
[5] Campbell, J., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics,
18, 373-399.
[6] Campbell, J., 1991, A variance decomposition for stock returns, Economic Journal, 101, 157179.
[7] Campbell, J., 1996, Understanding risk and return, Journal of Political Economy, 104, 298-345.
[8] Campbell, J., and J. Ammer, 1993, What moves the stock and bond markets? A variance
decomposition for long-term asset returns, Journal of Finance, 48, 3-37.
[9] Campbell, J., and J. Cochrane, 1999, Force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of
aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy, 107, 205-251.
[10] Campbell, J., and L. Hentschel, 1992, No news is good news, Journal of Financial Economics,
31, 281-318.
[11] Campbell, J., A. Lo and C. MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of Financial Markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[12] Campbell, J., and R. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195-227.

29

[13] Christensen, B., and N. Prabhala, 1998, The relation between implied and realized volatility,
Journal of Financial Economics, 50, 125-150.
[14] Fama, E., and K. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds,
Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 23-49.
[15] Fleming, J., 1998, The quality of market volatility forecasts implied by S&P 100 index option
prices, Journal of Empirical Finance, 5, 317-345.
[16] French, K., G. Schwert, and R. Stambaugh, 1987, Expected stock returns and volatility, Journal of Financial Economics, 19, 3-30.
[17] Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov, 2003, There is a risk-return tradeoﬀ after all,
working paper, UCLA.
[18] Glosten, L., R. Jagannathan, and D. Runkle, 1993, On the relation between the expected value
and the variance of the nominal excess return on stocks, Journal of Finance, 48, 1779-1801.
[19] Goyal, A., and P. Santa-Clara, 2003, Idiosyncratic risk matters!, Journal of Finance, 58, 9751007.
[20] Guo, H., 2003, Limited stock market participation and asset prices in a dynamic economy,
working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
[21] Ibbotson Associates, 1997, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation 1997 Yearbook, Ibbotson Associates, Chicago, Illinois.
[22] Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth and expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815-849.
[23] Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson, 2003, Measuring and modeling variation in the risk-return
tradeoﬀ, working paper, New York University.
[24] Long, J., 1974, Stock prices, inﬂation and the term structure of interest rates, Journal of
Financial Economics, 1, 131-170.
[25] Merton, R., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica, 41, 867-887.
30

[26] Merton, R., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory investigation, Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 323-361.
[27] Nelson, D., 1991, Conditional heteroscedasticity in asset returns: A new approach, Econometrica, 59, 347-370.
[28] Pindyck, R., 1984, Risk, inﬂation, and the stock market, American Economic Review, 74,
335-351.
[29] Pindyck, R, 1988, Risk aversion and determinants of stock market behavior, Review of Economics and Statistics, 70, 183-190.
[30] Poterba, J., and L. Summers, 1986, The persistence of volatility and stock market ﬂuctuations,
American Economic Review, 76, 1142-1151.
[31] Schwert, W., 1990a, Indexes of United States stock prices from 1802 to 1987, Journal of
Business, 63, 399-426.
[32] Schwert, W., 1990b, Stock volatility and the crash of ’87, Review of Financial Studies, 3,
77-102.
[33] Scruggs, J., 1998, Resolving the puzzling intertemporal relation between the market risk premium and conditional market variance: A two-factor approach, Journal of Finance, 53, 575603.
[34] Scruggs, J., and P. Glabadanidis, 2003, Risk premia and the dynamic covariance between stock
and bond returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 295-316.
[35] Seyhun, N., 1990, Overreaction or fundamentals: Some lessons from insiders’ response to the
market crash of 1987, Journal of Finance, 45, 1363-1388.
[36] Whitelaw, R., 1994, Time variations and covariations in the expectation and volatility of stock
market returns, Journal of Finance, 49, 515-541.
[37] Whitelaw, R., 2000, Stock market risk and return: An equilibrium approach, Review of Financial Studies, 13, 521-547.

31

[38] Wu, G., 2001, The determinants of asymmetric volatility, Review of Financial Studies, 14,
837-859.

32

vt2
vt2
vt2

Const.
0.012**
(0.005)
0.006*
(0.004)
0.036***a
(0.011)

CAYt−1
-0.028**
(0.012)
-0.015*
(0.009)

RRELt−1
0.126
(0.129)
-0.036
(0.074)

2
vt−1
0.530***
(0.190)
0.296
(0.217)

Vt2

R2
0.371

0.533***
(0.095)
0.772***
(0.114)

0.492
0.410

Table 1: The Eﬃciency of Implied Volatility
We estimate equation (25) over the period from December 1983 to May 1995. Heteroscedasticity
consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. Coeﬃcients that are signiﬁcant at the 1%,
5% and 10% levels are marked by ***, ** and *, respectively. a –the constant has been scaled by a
factor of 100 for presentation purposes.

33

Subperiod
1/59-9/87

vt2

1/88-12/00

vt2

1/59-12/00

vt2

1/59-12/00a

vt2

1/59-12/00a

vt2

Const.
0.003**
(0.001)
0.015***
(0.004)
0.012***
(0.004)
0.006***
(0.002)
0.006***
(0.002)

CAYt−1
-0.007*
(0.004)
-0.037***
(0.010)
-0.028**
(0.011)
-0.015***
(0.004)
-0.015***
(0.004)

RRELt−1
-0.031
(0.052)
0.125
(0.145)
-0.029
(0.057)
-0.022
(0.048)
-0.032
(0.050)

2
vt−1
0.487***
(0.076)
0.410***
(0.116)
0.167**
(0.082)
0.476***
(0.064)
0.540***
(0.057)

2
vt−2
0.085
(0.072)
0.046
(0.107)
0.105**
(0.046)
0.118**
(0.057)

R2
0.287
0.414
0.070
0.334
0.324

Table 2: Variance Predictability Regressions
We estimate equation (26) for various subsamples. Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors
are reported in parentheses. Coeﬃcients that are signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels are
marked by ***, ** and *, respectively. In the regression labeled a , the market variance of October
1987 is adjusted as discussed in Section 3.2.

34

Panel A: The Conditional Variance Process
2
Vt+1

Vt2
0.403***
(0.145)

Const.
0.001***
(0.000)

R2
0.163

Panel B: The Process for the State Variables
CAYt+1
RRELt+1

Const.
0.117***
(0.033)
-0.002
(0.002)

CAYt
0.700***
(0.084)
0.005
(0.005)

RRELt
1.240*
(0.639)
0.845***
(0.056)

R2
0.504
0.726

Panel C: The Model
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Model 6

Const.
0.006*
(0.003)
0.006*
(0.003)
-0.188
(0.123)
-0.257*
(0.131)
-0.203*
(0.108)
-0.210*
(0.113)

γ
2.228*
(1.270)
2.228*
(1.270)

4.402***
(1.539)
3.984***
(1.454)
5.916
(3.866)

CAY

RREL

R2
0.006
0.076

0.504
(0.313)
0.668**
(0.330)
0.530*
(0.274)
0.542*
(0.284)

-4.429
(3.827)
-5.244
(3.763)
-4.911
(3.651)
-5.145
(4.022)

0.031
0.052
0.115
0.096

Table 3: Estimation Results–Implied Volatility Data
For Panel A we estimate the AR(1) conditional variance process in equation (27) with the implied
volatility data. For Panel B we estimate the VAR(1) process for the state variables in equation
(28). For Panel C we estimate the model in equation (29) and various restricted versions thereof
(see Section 4.1). In each case, the equations are estimated jointly via GMM over the period
from December 1983 to April 1995. Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in
parentheses. Coeﬃcients that are signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels are marked by ***, **
and *, respectively.

35

Panel A: The Variance Process
Const.
0.006***
(0.002)

2
vt+1

CAYt
-0.015***
(0.004)

vt2
0.540***
(0.057)

RRELt
-0.032
(0.050)

R2
0.324

Panel B: The Process for the State Variables
CAYt+1
RRELt+1

Const.
0.047***
(0.009)
0.002***
(0.001)

CAYt
0.877***
(0.022)
-0.004**
(0.002)

RRELt
0.239
(0.340)
0.807***
(0.055)

R2
0.766
0.670

Panel C: The Model
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Model 6

Const.
0.007*
(0.004)
0.007*
(0.004)
-0.169***
(0.050)
-0.185***
(0.062)
-0.184***
(0.059)
-0.225***
(0.069)

γ
-1.344
(3.269)
-1.228
(2.980)

1.623
(3.513)
1.462
(3.167)
5.750
(3.940)

CAY

RREL

R2
0.001
0.030

0.460***
(0.130)
0.496***
(0.155)
0.492***
(0.151)
0.587***
(0.173)

-5.516***
(2.065)
-5.415**
(2.089)
-5.425***
(2.085)
-5.159**
(2.027)

0.044
0.044
0.069
0.005

Table 4: Estimation Results–Instrumental Variables
For Panel A we estimate the conditional variance process in equation (35). For Panel B we estimate
the VAR(1) process for the state variables in equation (36). For Panel C we estimate the model in
equation (37) and various restricted versions thereof (see Section 4.1). In each case, the equations
are estimated jointly via GMM over the period from February 1959 to December 2000 (503 observations). Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. Coeﬃcients
that are signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels are marked by ***, ** and *, respectively.

36

Panel A: The Variance Process
2
vt+1

Const.
0.012**
(0.005)

CAYt
-0.029**
(0.012)

vt2
0.530***
(0.190)

RRELt
0.123
(0.129)

R2
0.370

Panel B: The Process for the State Variables
CAYt+1
RRELt+1

Const.
0.117***
(0.033)
-0.002
(0.002)

CAYt
0.700***
(0.084)
0.005
(0.005)

RRELt
1.240*
(0.639)
0.845***
(0.056)

R2
0.504
0.726

Panel C: The Model
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Model 6

Const.
0.009**
(0.004)
0.009*
(0.004)
-0.188
(0.123)
-0.254
(0.155)
-0.242*
(0.144)
-0.277
(0.177)

γ
-0.463
(2.730)
-0.401
(2.350)

3.613
(3.438)
2.951
(2.769)
4.837
(4.250)

CAY

RREL

R2
0.000
0.011

0.504
(0.313)
0.663*
(0.389)
0.634*
(0.364)
0.717
(0.443)

-4.429
(3.827)
-4.344
(3.783)
-4.359
(3.783)
-4.315
(3.804)

0.031
0.037
0.048
0.041

Table 5: Estimation Results–Instrumental Variables, 12/83-4/95 Subsample
For Panel A we estimate the conditional variance process in equation (35). For Panel B we estimate
the VAR(1) process for the state variables in equation (36). For Panel C we estimate the model in
equation (37) and various restricted versions thereof (see Section 4.1). In each case, the equations
are estimated jointly via GMM over the period from December 1983 to April 1995 (137 observations). Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. Coeﬃcients that
are signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels are marked by ***, ** and *, respectively.

37

Panel A: The Variance Process
Const.
0.003***
(0.000)

2
vt+1

CAYt
-0.092***
(0.026)

RRELt
-0.041
(0.075)

vt2
0.401***
(0.083)

R2
0.307

Panel B: The Process for the State Variables
CAYt+1
RRELt+1

Const.
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.000)

CAYt
0.836***
(0.041)
-0.008
(0.010)

RRELt
0.141
(0.219)
0.716***
(0.081)

R2
0.692
0.520

Panel C: The Model
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Model 6

Const.
0.027**
(0.013)
0.025**
(0.011)
0.017***
(0.006)
-0.044*
(0.025)
-0.017
(0.015)
-0.099**
(0.043)

γ
-2.553
(3.438)
-1.972
(2.692)

14.346**
(5.773)
7.897**
(3.504)
27.466***
(10.194)

CAY

RREL

R2
0.005
0.053

1.772***
(0.460)
3.809***
(0.968)
2.893***
(0.615)
5.671***
(1.586)

-5.422**
(2.128)
-3.747
(2.596)
-4.500*
(2.397)
-2.216
(3.250)

0.121
0.176
0.190
0.145

Table 6: Estimation Results–Instrumental Variables, Quarterly Data
For Panel A we estimate the conditional variance process in equation (35). For Panel B we estimate
the VAR(1) process for the state variables in equation (36). For Panel C we estimate various versions
of the model given in equations (30)-(34) and the full speciﬁcation in equation (37). In each case,
the equations are estimated jointly via GMM over the period 1952Q3-2002Q3 (201 observations).
Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. Coeﬃcients that are
signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels are marked by ***, ** and *, respectively.

38

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02
Jan-84

Jan-87

Jan-90

Jan-93

Figure 1: The Components of Expected Returns—Implied Volatility Data
The risk (dashed line) and hedge (solid line) components of expected returns for the period 12/83 to 4/95,
using the implied volatility data. The estimation results are reported in Table 3, Panel C, Model 5.
Recessions are marked as shaded bars.

39

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04
Jan59

Jan64

Jan69

Jan74

Jan79

Jan84

Jan89

Jan94

Jan99

Figure 2: The Components of Expected Returns—Instrumental Variables
The risk (dashed line) and hedge (solid line) components of expected returns for the period 2/59 to 12/00,
using instrumental variables to estimate the conditional variance. The estimation results are reported in
Table 4, Panel C, Model 5. Recessions are marked as shaded bars.

40

