                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TOUGH POLICIES, INCREDIBLE POLICIES?

                                             Alejandro Neut
                                             Andrés Veasco

                                          Working Paper 9932
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9932


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




Velasco aknowledges the financial support of the National Science Foundation and the Harvard Institute for
International Development. We are grateful to Richard Cooper, Rafael di Tella, Eduardo Engel, John
Geanakoplos, Galina Hale, Ricardo Hausmann, Elhanan Helpman, Robert Lawrence, Marc Melitz, Dani
Rodrik and seminar participants at Harvard and Yale for comments and suggestions. Usual disclaimers apply.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Alejandro Neut and Andrés Velasco. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Tough Policies, Incredible Policies?
Alejandro Neut and Andrés Velasco
NBER Working Paper No. 9932
August 2003
JEL No. E0, F0

                                           ABSTRACT

We revisit the question of what determines the credibility of macroeconomic policies – here, of

promises to repay public debt. Almost all thinking on the issue has focused on governments’

strategic decision to default (or erode the value of outstanding debt via inflation/devaluation). But

sometimes governments default not because they want to, but because they cannot avoid it: adverse

shocks leave them no option. We build a model in which default/devaluation can occur deliberately

(for strategic reasons) or unavoidably. If such unavoidable fiscal crises a) have pecuniary costs and

b) occur with possible probability, much conventional wisdom on the determinantes of credibility

need no longer hold. For instance, appointing a conservative policymaker or denominating public

debt in foreign currency may reduce, not increase, credibility.


Alejandro Neut
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
aneut@mit.edu

Andres Velasco
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
andres_velasco@harvard.edu
1       Introduction
Credibility is the mother of good policy, or so claims much recent work
in macroeconomics and international finance. If a government borrows in
foreign currency, it has to show a credible commitment to repay. If it borrows
in its own currency, it has to show a credible commitment not to devalue or
inflate away the real value of the debt.
     But ex post, a well-meaning government may find it optimal to partially
default in order to raise spending or reduce the distortions caused by high
tax rates. Understanding this temptation, lenders may charge exorbitant
risk premia or refuse to extend credit altogether. This is arguably a key
problem faced by emerging market economies in Latin America, Asia and
Eastern Europe. And with external credit scarce and expensive, the tough
job of investing and growing becomes harder still.
     How to deal with this so-called time inconsistency problem?1 The most
common approach involves invisible handcuffs: tie the hands of the policy
maker to prevent him from acting opportunistically. Monetary examples
include rules that punish central bank officials for high inflation, delegation of
policy to an anti-inflation conservative, currency boards that peg the value of
the currency and make discretionary monetary policy almost impossible and,
if all else fails, the adoption of a foreign currency such as the dollar. Handcuffs
to eliminate sovereign risk in international lending are arguably harder to
design and apply, but they do exist. IMF conditionality and international
fines and sanctions on defaulting nations are meant to do precisely that job.
     If eliminating opportunistic behavior is the name of the game, the tighter
the handcuffs or the bigger the punishment, presumably the less likely the
policymaker will misbehave. In the models of Barro and Gordon (1983), Ro-
goff (1985) and Fischer and Summers (1989), among many others, tougher or
more rigid policies lead to lower expectations of inflation/devaluation/default.
This does not mean, of course, that the most rigid policy is necessarily
welfare-maximizing, since in an uncertain economic environment there is a
trade-off between the credibility and flexibility of policies. But it does mean
that, the greater the temptation to act opportunistically, the stronger is the
case for erring on the side of maximizing credibility, even if it means severely
limiting flexibility. This is the main theoretical justification for super-rigid
    1
    The concept dates back to the seminal work of Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo
(1979).



                                          2
systems like the currency board in force in Argentina in 1991-2001.
    In this paper we argue that this approach to credibility is incomplete and
therefore flawed. Two realistic features are missing from almost all work on
the subject. The first is that sometimes governments devalue/default not
because they want to, but because they have to. If expenditure is unexpect-
edly high (war calling for high defense expenditures, recession causing an
increase in unemployment compensation payments) and tax revenues cannot
be increased accordingly (either because of political constraints or because
the economy is at the top of its Laffer curve), then default may be inevitable
even for a non-opportunistic government.
    A second crucial point is that the costs of misbehavior are pecuniary and
involve more that a utility loss for the policymaker, as much of the literature
assumes. Once Argentina abandoned its currency board in 2002, there was
surely loss of face for the country vis a vis the rest of the world and much
discomfort for policymakers, both present and past. But the currency board
was so hard to leave behind precisely because its abandonment involved other
very large pecuniary costs: the breaking or rewriting of contracts, massive
redistributions of wealth between some borrowers and lenders, the paralysis
of the financial system for months and, soon thereafter, a mega recession
that decimated government revenue.
    Putting these two factors together leads to a new and different view of
the relationship between policy rules and credibility. Consider the following
setup, which is a much simplified version of the model we study below. The
government has debt outstanding, a share θ of which is indexed while a share
1 − θ is nominal and can be defaulted on via devaluation or inflation. What
remains must be financed via conventional taxes. Government spending is
stochastic. The policy rule in force allows for devaluations up to x percent,
but calls for paying a pecuniary cost c if devaluation is ever above x. The
amount c is paid by the government out of fiscal resources. The smaller is x
or the larger is c, the tougher the policy. Social welfare is decreasing in the
rates of devaluation and conventional taxation.
    In low-spending states of the world, there is no crisis: the government
meets its obligations through tax collection and a devaluation below x. But
in high-spending states the economy is in a fiscal crisis: after raising all
possible taxes, the government is forced to devalue more than x and incur
additional costs equal to c. Notice that since this cost worsens the fiscal
balance, the devaluation required to restore fiscal equilibrium after the crisis
is increasing in c.

                                       3
Such an economy behaves very differently than standard theory suggests:

• Expected devaluation (with the expectation computed across crisis and
  non-crisis states) can be decreasing in x. This is because the lower is
  x the more often crises occur, since large devaluations cannot be used
  to respond to shocks without violating the rule. And the more often
  crises occur, the more often c is paid. If one thinks of conservatives as
  choosing a lower x (as we do below), then appointing a more conserva-
  tive policymaker can raise expectations of devaluation. This is exactly
  the opposite of what Barro and Gordon (1983), Rogoff (1985), Fischer
  and Summers (1989) and others found.

• As long as expected devaluation is decreasing in x, there is no trade-off
  between credibility and flexibility of policy. On the contrary, making
  the policy more flexible by raising x also enhances credibility. In fact,
  in the range in which expected devaluation is decreasing in x, expected
  social welfare is maximized by choosing the highest x in that range.

• If again we think of policymaker preferences determining the chosen
  x, it is not necessarily the case that social welfare is maximized by
  choosing a policymaker who is more conservative (devaluation-averse)
  than society as a whole, as Rogoff (1985) argued. In fact, the welfare-
  maximizing policymaker may well be more liberal than society as a
  whole.

• Expected devaluation can be increasing in θ, the share of dollarized
  (indexed) debt in total public debt. This is because in an uncertain
  environment fiscal crises occur with positive probability, and the higher
  is the share of dollarized debt the larger is the devaluation required to
  restore fiscal solvency in crisis situations. This result is exactly the
  opposite of Calvo (1988) and Calvo and Guidotti (1990) and of much
  conventional wisdom, which argue for dollarizing or indexing debt as a
  way to enhance credibility.

• As long as expected devaluation is increasing in θ, there is no trade-off
  between credibility and flexibility of policy. On the contrary, making
  the policy more flexible by reducing θ also enhances credibility. In fact,
  in the range in which expected devaluation is increasing in θ, expected
  social welfare is maximized by choosing the lowest θ in that range.

                                   4
   • A higher cost c can cause self-fulfilling devaluation crises. Two equi-
     libria with distinct expected rates of devaluation and expected social
     loss (which can be Pareto-ranked) obtain if c is above a certain level.
     The intuition is that expecting high devaluation raises interest rates
     and raises the fiscal burden, lowering the threshold between crisis and
     non-crisis states. This in turn increases the probability that the high
     cost c will be paid and a large devaluation will occur. This result is in
     contrast to the results in Obstfeld (1997) and Velasco (1996), where a
     sufficiently high cost of devaluing ensures low and unique expectations
     of devaluation.

   • If the high cost c is needed to induce the policymakers to behave more
     conservatively than they would if left to their own devices –as in the
     case of IMF conditionality, for instance– then a tougher (higher c) IMF
     program may cause multiple equilibria with distinct expected devalu-
     ation and welfare levels. If the economy lands in the bad equilibrium,
     then the IMF program may achieve the opposite of what it aimed to.

    There is a long and distinguished literature that studies the time incon-
sistency of fiscal and monetary policies, beginning with the classic papers by
Kydland and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978) and Lucas and Stokey (1983).
Persson, Persson and Svensson (1987) extend the Lucas and Stokey result
to a monetary economy, while Chang (1998) characterizes time-consistent
equilibria in the Calvo model. Calvo and Guidotti (1990) and Bohn (1990)
study the optimal composition of government debt (between indexed and
non-indexed securities) in the context of a flexibility-credibility trade-off. A
recent analysis of the relationship between monetary regimes, sovereign risk
and default is in Uribe (2002). But none of these papers considers the role of
crises, defined above as random events that force the policymaker to deviate
from her chosen policy rule.
    Drazen and Masson (1994) make a point that is related to ours: if eco-
nomic outcomes are persistent, then following tough policies in the short run
may reduce the credibility of vows to follow tough policies in the future.
Consider what happens if, other things equal, higher unemployment today
means higher unemployment tomorrow. Then if a tough policy raises un-
employment today (and therefore tomorrow), the cost of being tough again
tomorrow goes up, and so does the likelihood that the policymaker will re-
nege on its promises and choose not to act tough. It is in this sense that too

                                       5
tough a policy can be counterproductive.2 A related issue, stressed by Flood
(1983) and Blanchard (1985), is that very tough policymakers can end up
being removed from office and replaced by “softer” policymakers.
    Analogous arguments can also be found in the corporate finance litera-
ture. An example is Bolton and Scharfstein (1996), who study the incentives
to avoid default in a setup in which sometimes default is beyond a manager’s
control. The optimal contract has to trade-off the benefits of large default
penalties (they deter strategic default) with the costs (such penalties may
have to be paid if default happens in equilibrium even if the manager did
not want to default). There are also similarities with poison pill strategies to
prevent hostile takeovers: too poisonous a pill may lower the expected value
of the firm.
    Our paper also has antecedents in the financial crises literature. Self-
fulfilling debt and currency crises –involving multiple equilibria– are studied
by Calvo (1988), Alesina, Prati and Tabellini (1990), Cole and Kehoe (1996),
Velasco (1996) and Obstfeld (1997) among many others. But in all those pa-
pers giving the government the power to precommit –or imposing sufficiently
severe punishments to ensure discretionary policy mimics which would be
chosen under commitment– is sufficient to rule out multiplicity. The oppo-
site is true in this paper.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 sets up
the basic model, while sections 3 presents an example of equilibria under
a uniform distribution of shocks. Section 4 analyzes the consequences of
two policy alternatives (appointing conservative policymakers and indexing
debt) under the simplifying assumptions of a constant and exogenous cost
of misbehavior. Section 5 endogenizes this cost and analyzes policy options,
while 6 concludes.
   2
     Note that in Drazen and Masson (1994), the only kind of deviation is opportunistic: if
things get sufficiently bad policymakers optimally choose to devalue. There are no crises
which force the policymaker to devalue, as can happen in this paper. There are technical
differences as well. Drazen and Masson work with a signaling model in which the public
is uncertain about the policymaker’s type. In our model there is full information about
everything.




                                            6
2       The model
The government budget constraint is

                  θb + (1 − θ) b (1 + δ e ) + g + z = τ + (1 − θ)bδ                     (1)

where b = inherited public debt coming due, g = exogenous net expenditure,
τ = policy-determined tax revenue, and z = random fiscal shock, all denomi-
nated in terms of the economy’s single tradeable good.3 The variable δ is the
actual devaluation/default rate applied by the government, while δ e is the
expected devaluation rate, which translates into the risk premium charged
on the debt. Hence, on the LHS of (1)is the total fiscal burden, while the on
RHS are total fiscal resources, which include tax revenue and proceeds from
devaluation/default.
    The budget shock may have to do with random fluctuations in expen-
ditures (war, natural disasters calling for higher transfer payments, reces-
sions requiring higher unemployment compensation) or random fluctuations
in revenues (commodity price shocks affecting the profits of state enterprises,
recessions causing lower value-added tax receipts). Assume that z has a p.d.f.
f (z) with mean zero, upper bound z̄ and lower bound z.
    The parameter θ, which lies between 0 and 1, indicates how much of the
total debt is denominated in foreign currency or indexed, while a fraction 1−θ
is denominated in domestic currency (or subjected to a possible default). If
all debt is in domestic currency, for instance, θ = 0, and a devaluation
surprise of (δ e − δ) yields b (δ e − δ) net revenue (in units of output) for the
government. If all debt is in foreign currency or indexed, by contrast, so that
θ = 1, a devaluation surprise yields no real net revenue. If outright default
and not devaluation is involved, a low θ indicates that the fines and legal fees
associated with unexpected default are small, so that a given rate of surprise
default yields a relatively large amount of revenue. The opposite is true if
θ is high. If the actual devaluation/default rate is fully anticipated, so that
δ e = δ, then government still has to pay all inherited public debt b. From
now we will speak of devaluation only, but the reader should keep in mind
our result can also be interpreted in terms of outright default. We will refer
to δ e as expected devaluation or the devaluation premium, but under the
    3
    If this good has a price of one in foreign currency and the law of one price holds, then
the domestic price level equals the nominal exchange rate, and inflation and devaluation
become identical. Below we speak of devaluation, but all results can be reinterpreted in
terms of inflation.


                                             7
alternative interpretation it would be the country risk premium. The larger
δ e , the lower the credibility of policies.
      We make two key assumptions, on which much of our story hangs:

       1 Upper bound on tax revenue: τ ≤ τ̄ . This limit can arise because of
         political constraints on further tax collection or because the economy
         finds itself at the top of the Laffer curve. If the government ever hits
         this constraint, it enters a fiscal crisis. In that case, it has no option
         but to devalue or default.

       2 Cost of crises: a fiscal crisis increases the government’s liabilities by
         an amount c ≥ 0. In the next two sections we treat c as exogenous,
         but endogenize it later. One interpretation is that this c includes all
         those other liabilities that are easily and cheaply postponed or “rolled
         over” under normal circumstances, but not so under a fiscal crisis.
         An alternative is that the IMF or some external monitoring agency
         refuses to roll over short-term credits if the government violates fiscal
         conditionality. Or the surprise devaluation that comes with a fiscal
         crisis could cause losses in the domestic private sector (especially in
         local banks), which are soon transferred to the government because of
         political pressures or concerns over the health of the payments system.

    To avoid considering uninteresting sub-cases, we make the following ad-
ditional assumptions about the size of τ̄ :

       3 No crises on average: τ̄ > g + b. This means that regular taxes are
         enough to pay for regular expenditure and service debt if no surprise
         takes place (δ e = δ) and if the fiscal shock is no larger than it is on
         average.4

       4 Default always staves bankruptcy: τ̄ > g + θb + z̄ + c. This means
         that defaulting on all debt that can be defaulted allows government to
         finance its other expenditures, even if the fiscal shock is as adverse as
         can be.

  Finally, we specify the preferences of local residents and of the govern-
ment. Locals have the loss function
   4
    If, conversely, τ̄ < g + b, the fisc would be bankrupt in an expected value sense, even
without crises.


                                            8
                                αs         1 − αs 2
                          Ls =     (δb)2 +       τ                         (2)
                                 2            2
where 0 < αs < 1. Quite naturally, loss is increasing in both devaluation
and taxes. Note that devaluation is costly even if debt is owed to foreigners,
because of standard cost-of-inflation (or devaluation) arguments, or because
of the other distortions/costs a default might bring. The government has
a loss function that is identical to (2) except that the weight α it places
on devaluation need not equal αs . A higher αs implies a more conservative
government.
    The policy problem then boils down to minimizing (2) subject to the
budget constraint, the upper bound on tax collection, and to private sector
devaluation expectations. The timing of actions is as follows. The stock of
debt b and the share 1 − θ of nominal debt are predetermined. Expectations
are formed at the beginning of the period, before uncertainty is realized.
Then the shock hits. After observing the shock, the policymaker chooses her
preferred δ and τ . Notice that because he moves after expectations are set
and cannot commit to a course of action, the policymaker’s optimal plan will
suffer from the adverse consequences of time inconsistency: more devaluation
and higher social loss than under commitment. It is this problem that policies
such as appointing a conservative central banker or dollarizing debt attempt
to solve.


3    Computing equilibrium
Computing the policymaker’s preferred strategy is simple. If not against
the maximum tax constraint (τ < τ̄ ), he chooses tax and devaluation rates
according to


                       x = (1 − λ) (b + xe + g + z)                       (3)
                       τ = λ (b + xe + g + z)                             (4)

where x ≡ (1−θ)δb is actual revenue raised by devaluation and xe ≡ (1−θ)δ e b
                                                                 α
is expected revenue raised by devaluation. Notice that λ ≡ (1−α)(1−θ) 2 +α < 1

is increasing in θ and in α. These rules nest some intuitive and common
examples. For instance, if α = 1 (devaluation default very costly for the


                                      9
policymaker) or if θ = 1 (debt totally dollarized or indexed), the policy
involves no devaluation whatsoever.
    From now on we refer to (3) and (4) as the policy rules. Deviating from
these rules will prompt a punishment or cost c. As discussed above, the idea
is that both local residents and foreign creditors know (3) and (4) and can
observe if they are being followed. If they are not, all kinds of undesirable
economic consequences occur, which have a cost c for the government.
    Define z ∗ as the realization of expenditure such that taxes are at their
maximum level:
                            τ̄ = λ (b + xe + g + z ∗ )                    (5)
This level z ∗ is a trigger or threshold. If − (b + xe + g) ≤ z ≤ z ∗ , then the
fiscal situation is strong and policy rules (4) and (3) determine τ and x.5
    But if the shock is larger and z > z ∗ , then the economy is in a fiscal crisis
and τ = τ̄ . In this case, the government cannot abide by (3) and (4) above.
Actual devaluation is given by
                                   x = b + xe + g + c + z − τ̄ ,                            (6)
where now c must be paid out of government resources.
    Figure 1 shows x as a function of the shock z. The figure depicts two
distinct regions. From now on we label the range − (b + xe + g) ≤ z ≤ z ∗ as
the no crisis region and the range z > z ∗ as the crisis region. Denote the
probability of the former as pnc and the probability of the later as pc .6
    Rational expectations dictate that
              Z    z∗                                         Z    z̄
         e                                           e
E(x|x ) =                      (1 − λ) (b+g+z+x )f (z)dz+               (b+g+z+xe +c−τ̄ )f (z)dz,
                  −(b+g+xe )                                      z∗
                                                                                            (7)
                               ∗
where the threshold z is given by
                                                             τ̄
                                    z ∗ = −(b + g + xe ) +                                  (8)
                                                             λ
       Using Leibnitz’s rule one can calculate
                        ∂E(x|xe )
                             e
                                  = (1 − λ) pnc + pc + cf (z ∗ ) > 0,                       (9)
                          ∂x
   5
     Note that z < −(b + xe + g) implies that the total fiscal burden is b + xe + g + z. If
z < − (b + xe + g), there is no need to default on debt or to raise any taxes.
   6
     Note these probabilities need not add up to one, since there can be a portion of
the support of the distribution in which the shock is so favorable that both taxes and
devaluation are zero.


                                                10
so that E(x|xe ) is increasing in xe . The second derivative of E(x|xe ) is

            ∂ 2 E(x|xe )
                         = (1 − λ)f [−(b + g + xe )] + λf (z ∗ ) − cf 0 (z ∗ ).   (10)
               ∂(xe )2
From now on we assume that f 0 (z) ≤ 0 (which is satisfied for many com-
monly used distributions: uniform and Poisson are two examples). With
this assumption, E(x|xe ) is convex in xe as long as z ∗ ≥ z. As xe grows,
eventually z ∗ < z; in that range, E(x|xe ) is a straight line with slope equal
to one (in other words, in that range E(x|xe ) = b + g + xe + c − τ̄ ).
    Finally, expectations are formed rationally. Equilibrium expected deval-
uation (xeeq ) is given by
                                xeeq = E(x|xeeq )                          (11)
There are three possible cases:

      • Case 1: One equilibrium, as depicted in Figure 2.1. In this case, 0 <
        ∂E(x|xe )
          ∂xe
                  ≤ 1 at the equilibrium xe . Therefore, shifting up the E(x|xe )
        curve (for instance by raising b or g) results in a larger xeeq . This case
        holds if and only if c < τ̄ − b − g (recall the quantity on the RHS is
        positive by assumption). In words, c has to be relatively small.

      • Case 2: No equilibrium, as depicted in Figure 2.2. This is the case of
        a very large c.

      • Case 3: Two equilibria, as depicted in Figure 2.3. In this case, 0 <
        ∂E(x|xe )                                             e)

           ∂xe
                  ≤ 1 at the low equilibrium xeeq1 and ∂E(x|x
                                                         ∂xe
                                                                 > 1 at the high
                       e
        equilibrium xeq2 . This case requires a larger c than in case 1 but a
        smaller one than in case 2. Shifting up the E(x|xe ) curve results in a
        larger xeeq1 and a smaller xeeq2 .

    An important implication of this is that a sufficiently large c can cause
multiple equilibria, possibly shifting the economy from Case 1 to Case 2.
The intuition is that starting from a position of equilibrium, expecting higher
devaluation raises the fiscal burden, lowering the threshold between crisis and
non-crisis states. This in turn increases the probability that the high cost c
will be paid and a large devaluation will occur, thereby making the initial
increase in expected devaluation self-validating.7
  7
      This cannot happen if c = 0 because of the following. In non crisis states, x =



                                            11
    If a second equilibrium exists and bad “animal spirits” can cause a shift
to it, self-fulfilling pessimism could cause crises.8 . An announcement on
the part of external creditors, for instance, that they would not reschedule
loans coming due if the government devalues, could be enough to trigger
an equilibrium shift and the very devaluation the creditors were presumably
trying to avoid.
    For future use, note that expected social loss is
                                                  !2
                  αs Z z ∗
                                        Ã
                                   1−λ
       E (L) =                                [b + g + xe + z]2 f (z) dz
                  2 −(b+g+xe ) 1 − θ
                    αs Z z̄    1
                 +                    [b + g + xe + z + c − τ̄ ]2 f (z) dz
                     2 z∗ (1 − θ)2
                    1 − αs Z z ∗
                 +                       λ2 [b + g + xe + z]2 f (z) dz
                       2    −(b+g+xe )
                    1 − αs Z z̄ 2
                 +              τ̄ f (z) dz,                                            (12)
                       2    z∗

which we write more compactly as

                                E (L) = Λ (λ, θ, z ∗ , xe , c)                          (13)
Recall z ∗ and xe are also functions of λ. Expected loss depends on what share
of the fiscal burden is financed by devaluation in non-crisis states, what the
threshold is between crisis and non-crisis states, and what the expectation of
devaluation is across all states.


4      Equilibria: an example
To gain more insight into the sources of multiplicity of equilibria, consider
the following example. Suppose the distribution of z is uniform, with lower
bound −z̄ and upper bound z̄. Country-risk equation (7) then implies
(1−λ) (b + g + xe + z), so that a given increase in xe yields a less than one-for-one increase
in x. In crisis states x = b + g + xe + z − τ̄ , so that x increases one-for-one with xe . The
rational expectation of x is the weighted average of these two cases, with the weights given
by the relevant probabilities. But whatever the weights, the increase is always less than
one-for-one, so an exogenous rise in xe can never be self-validating.
   8
     This is a static model, so we cannot say much about the stability properties of both
equilibria. Arguably the lower or good equilibrium is stable under tatonment and the
higher or bad one is not. But tatonment is surely not the only expectations-adjustment
mechanism.


                                             12
               h         ³          ´                    i                ³                ´
               1 1 2       λτ̄                      λτ̄ 2                              τ̄
                   ∆ + 1−λ
              2z̄ 2 z
                                 +c      ∆z +   2(1−λ)    2        if ∆z ∈ 0, 2z̄ −   1−λ
    xe =     1−λ 2
                                              ³             ´              ³                    ´
               4z̄
                   ∆z + (λ + 2z̄c )∆z    +       τ̄
                                             λ 1−λ − z̄            if ∆z ∈ 2z̄ −    τ̄
                                                                                   1−λ
                                                                                       , 2z̄
                                                                              (14)
where ∆z ≡ z̄ + z ∗ is the length of the interval in which no fiscal crises occur.
At the same time, trigger equation (5) becomes
                                                ∗                τ̄
                              xeeq = −(b + g + zeq )+               .                               (15)
                                                                1−λ
    These equations are depicted in Figure 3. It is easy to prove that the func-
tion labeled DR (for expected devaluation revenue) is positive, decreasing,
convex, continuous and differentiable in the interval (0, 2z̄). These proper-
ties imply that a unique equilibrium exists as long as that DR crosses the
vertical axis above the function labeled TR (for trigger ). This last condition
is equivalent to τ̄ > b + g + c. This confirms for this example our earlier
finding that uniqueness requires that the cost c be sufficiently small.9


5       The effects of policy
Policies affecting λ, c, b, g or τ̄ result in shifts of E(x|xe ) and equilibrium
expected devaluation and expected social loss. Next we examine the effects of
some of these policies. In this section we assume away the issue of multiplicity
of equilibria and focus on cases in which uniqueness obtains.

5.1     A conservative policymaker à la Rogoff
A conservative policymaker has a high α and therefore suffers big utility losses
from devaluation. Plausibly, α > αs , so that he suffers more from devaluation
    9
    In this particularly simple case, the endogenous variables have closed-form solutions.
                                       −1
If TR cuts DR to the left of τ (1 − λ) (this requires 4(1 − λ)(τ̄ − c − b − g) < z̄ − 2c),
we have:
                               1 ³       p                              ´
                  ∗
                 zeq = −z̄ +         c + c2 + 4(1 − λ)(τ̄ − c − b − g)z̄ .            (16)
                             1−λ
                                                              −1
Alternatively, if TR cuts DR to the right of τ (1 − λ) , the solution is:
                  µ                                                                          ¶
             1
                                    q
                                                     2
 ∗
zeq = −z̄+          λτ̄ + (1 − λ)c − (λτ̄ + (1 − λ)c) − 4z̄(1 − λ)2 (b + g + τ̄ + c) − λτ̄ 2
           1−λ
With these results, expected devaluation can be computed using 15 in the text.


                                                13
than does the population at large. What are the effects of delegating policy
to someone with such preferences?
    Notice that the conventional model is a special case of our model: the
case in which τ̄ is sufficiently large, so that there are no fiscal crises. In that
case policy rule (3) holds in all states. Taking expectations on both sides of
that expression, using the definitions of λ and of xe , and rearranging we have
that:
                                                  ¶Ã           !
                                     1−α               b+g
                                       µ
                          e
                         δ = (1 − θ)                       ,                    (17)
                                      α                 b
so that δ e is unambiguously decreasing in α. A more conservative policy-
maker is associated with lower expected devaluation. The intuition is obvi-
ous: the more the policymaker dislikes devaluation, the less of it he engineers
in equilibrium.
    Matters are very different when crises are positive. Recall that λ is in-
creasing in α and that xe = (1 − θ)δ e b. Therefore, for a given θ, the change
in δ e with respect to α is proportional to the change in xe with respect to λ:

                              dδ e   dxe        1 − θ λ2
                                           Ã               !
                                   =                                            (18)
                              dα     dλ           b α2
                                 dxe
In what follows we focus on      dλ
                                       for simplicity. From equation (7) we can
compute

         ∂E(x|xe )                                                    τ̄
                   = −E [(b + g + z + xe ) | nocrisis] pnc + cf (z ∗ ) 2        (19)
           ∂λ                                                         λ
For small values of c this derivative is negative, and we have the standard
case: a conservative central banker delivers lower expected devaluation.10
But the opposite case is also possible. If c is large enough, the derivative
is positive. That means that an increase in α, with the consequent increase
in λ, shifts up E(x|xe ) and therefore increases xe . The appointment of a
more conservative policy-maker will reduce expected devaluation if c is small
enough, but increase it otherwise.
    The intuition is as follows. Comparing two economies under different
policy regimes, one with a conservative policy maker (high α) and another
  10
    Note the term b + g + z + xe is always non-negative by construction, since we are
integrating over the interval where − (b + g + xe ) ≤ z ≤ z ∗ .



                                           14
with a lax policymaker (low α), we see three possible outcomes depending
on the realization of z:

   • If the shock z is small enough, neither economy is in a fiscal crisis. In
     this case, the economy with the more conservative policymaker has less
     devaluation.

   • If the shock z is large enough, both economies are in a fiscal crisis. In
     this case, both economies have the same amount of devaluation.

   • If the shock is of intermediate size, then the economy with the lax
     policymaker is not in crisis, but that with the conservative policymaker
     is. In this case, the latter economy has higher expected devaluation if
     c is large.

    In computing expectations, agents average across these three possible
situations. With sufficiently large costs c, the relatively high devaluation
suffered by conservative policymakers when in the third situation more than
offsets the relatively low devaluation they enjoy when in the first situation,
so that “on average” conservatives engineer more devaluation, and this is
rationally anticipated by the public. This line of reasoning also makes clear
why, if c = 0, conservatives always deliver lower expected devaluation.
                                                              e)
    This can also be seen by writing the condition for ∂E(x|x
                                                          ∂λ
                                                                 > 0 (equation
(19)) as
                                                                ∂z ∗
               E [(b + g + z + xe ) | nocrisis] pnc < −cf (z ∗ )              (20)
                                                                ∂λ
using the fact that, for a given xe , ∂z     = − λτ̄2 . The LHS is the marginal
                                          ∗
                                        ∂λ
reduction in expected devaluation when λ increases and no crisis takes place.
It is positive, for more conservative (higher λ) policymakers default less when
there is no crisis. The RHS is the marginal increase in expected costs (fi-
nanced via devaluation) associated to a marginally more conservative govern-
ment. It is also a positive number, since ∂z
                                             ∗
                                            ∂λ
                                               < 0 . In words, more conservative
policymakers are in crisis more often. If the latter effect exceeds the former,
then a more conservative policy maker delivers higher expected devaluation.
     The upper panels in figures 4 and 5 illustrate both possible cases. Again
we use a uniform distribution with support [−z̄, z̄]. In 4 we depict a case with
relatively high τ̄ and c = 0. This means that, for a given z̄ (recall the standard
deviation of the shock is proportional to z̄), crises do not happen often,

                                        15
and when they do they involve zero costs. As the figure shows, expected
devaluation is always decreasing in α.
    The example in Figure 5 has the same parameters as Figure 4, except for
a lower maximum tax revenue τ̄ and a large c. For low α’s the traditional
result holds and a more conservative policymaker delivers lower expected
devaluation. But for α’s larger than 0.41 the opposite happens and a more
conservative policy maker delivers higher expected devaluation.
    What about the consequences for welfare? Recall Rogoff showed that, in
the presence of time inconsistency, the policymaker that delivers the highest
social welfare is one who has more conservative preferences than society as
a whole. That celebrated result need not hold here. We can compute the
effects of policy on welfare using (13) above. Denote by Λy (.) the partial
derivative of Λ with respect to y. Some tedious computations reveal that
                1 − αs           αs       1 − αg
                         ·   µ            ¶µ        ¶¸
                                                     h                i
                                                         2
         Λλ =           1−                         E   τ   | nocrisis   pnc (21)
                  λ            1 − αs       αg
so that Λλ = 0 when αg = αs , as it must be since the chosen λ is, for a
given xe , the optimum for both the government and for society. Clearly Λλ
is negative (positive) if α is smaller (larger) than αs .
    One can also show that
                            1 − αs                   c2
                                      Ã                  !
                                          1−λ
                 Λz ∗   =−                    τ̄ c +    f (z ∗ ) ≤ 0,          (22)
                           (1 − θ)2        λ         2

so that expected loss is decreasing in the threshold z ∗ whenever the cost c is
positive. Intuitively, as z ∗ rises and the economy spends less time in crises,
the cost has to be paid less often, and this reduces expected loss.
    Finally, it is easy to check that Λxe > 0 everywhere: higher expected
devaluation raises the fiscal burden and therefore expected loss.
    With this information in hand we can now say something about the effect
of policymaker preferences on social welfare. Note that

                  dE (L)                ∂z ∗                 dxe
                           = Λλ + Λz ∗       + (Λxe − Λz∗ )      ,              (23)
                     dλ                 ∂λ                   dλ
                                   ∂z ∗
where we have used the fact that ∂x   e = −1. The first term on the RHS of this

expression is positive for α ≥ α . So is the second term, since ∂z     = − λτ̄2 < 0.
                                                                     ∗
                                s
                                                                   ∂λ
In the third term, the expression in parentheses is always positive, so the sign
                                             e
of the third term depends on whether dx    dλ
                                               is positive or negative.


                                            16
                                                                               dE(L)
    To make progress consider a special point along (23), and evaluate          dλ
in the neighborhood of α = αs . We then have
                                   ∂z ∗ ¯¯
                        ¯                 ¯                            ¯
                dE (L) ¯¯                                      dxe ¯¯
                        ¯  = Λ z ∗       ¯  + (Λ x e − Λ z ∗ )      ¯   ,       (24)
                  dλ ¯α=αs         ∂λ ¯α=αs                    dλ ¯α=αs
Note that the celebrated Rogoff result  ¯ is a special case that holds when c = 0.
                                       e¯
In that situation, Λz∗ = 0 and dx    dλ α=αs
                                        ¯      < 0, so the RHS of (24) is unam-
biguously negative. Social loss falls as the policymaker becomes marginally
more conservative than society as a whole. This situation is illustrated in
the lower panel of Figure 4, where we have assumed αs = 0.5, and where the
socially optimal level of α is equal to 0.65.                         ¯
                                                                     e¯
     If c > 0, on the other hand, we have two subcases. If dx      dλ α=αs
                                                                      ¯     < 0, so
that the conventional link between expected devaluation and policymaker
preferences obtains, the RHS has an ambiguous sign. It pays off to be more
conservative than society
                       ¯     if and only if the cost c is small (so that Λz∗ is close
                   dxe ¯
to zero) while − dλ ¯ s is large (a more conservative policymaker sharply
                         α=α
reduces expected devaluation).               ¯
                                            e¯
     The other subcase obtains when dx    dλ α=αs
                                             ¯     > 0, so that we have the non-
conventional result that greater liberalism causes expected devaluation to
fall. In that case, the RHS of (24) is unambiguously positive. The social
optimum involves a policymaker who is more liberal than society as a whole.
This case is illustrated in the lower panel of Figure 5, where we again assumed
αs = 0.5, and where the socially optimal level of α is equal to 0.41.

5.2        Dollarization and indexation
We saw above that one interpretation of the parameter θ is the share of debt
that is denominated in foreign currency or indexed (for instance to the price
level). A common policy is to increase θ , so that a devaluation/inflation
surprise yields little real revenue. Understanding this, the logic goes, govern-
ments will devalue/inflate less in equilibrium.11 The currently fashionable
policy of “dollarization,” for instance (applied in Ecuador and El Salvador
and hotly discussed in Argentina) consists in this context of driving θ all the
way to one.
    What effects does this policy have? Note first that the standard model
without crises –for instance Fischer and Summers (1989)– would yield a
  11
       See for instance Calvo (1988) and Fischer and Summers (1989).


                                              17
monotonically decreasing relationship between expected devaluation and the
share θ of dollarized debt. The intuition is that since as θ rises devaluation
becomes less productive (it yields less revenue for the same devaluation rate),
it is used less in equilibrium. That happens here if the maximum tax τ̄ is
never binding, so that there are no crises and policy rule (3) holds in all
states. As we saw in the previous subsection (see equation (17)), in that case
δ e is unambiguously decreasing in θ, so that a higher share of dollarized debt
means less expected devaluation.
     Here matters are again different because of the possibility of crises. We
                                                         xe
know that θ affects xe only through λ and that δ e = (1−θ)b . This implies that

                        dδ e 1 − θ                 dxe λ
                                               Ã           !
                                      1−λ
                                e
                                   =2                          + 1,               (25)
                        dθ δ          1−α          dλ xe
where we used the fact that
                              dλ 1 − θ    1−λ
                                       =2     > 0.                                (26)
                              dθ λ        1−α
    Hence, greater dollarization reduces devaluation expectations if and only
if the elasticity of xe with respect to λ is smaller than 21 1−α
                                                             1−λ
                                                                 . This means that
                            dxe
even if c is zero, so that dλ is unambiguously negative, greater dollarization
will decrease expected revenues from devaluation but may increase expected
devaluation.
    The intuition is that now changing θ not only alters λ, and therefore the
share of government obligations that is financed via default. Changing θ also
changes the stock of debt that can be defaulted on, so that for every dollar
of revenue the government hopes to get from default, higher dollarization
(raising θ) requires a higher default rate.
    In a crisis the default rate is not for the policymaker to choose, but given
by revenue needs. It follows that, for a given amount of required revenue,
the default rate in crises is higher the larger is the share θ of nominal debt.
In addition, a larger θ means that the threshold z ∗ falls, so that the economy
is in crises more often. Either or both of these effects can offset the standard
Fischer-Summers type of result, causing expected devaluation to rise as the
share of dollarized debt increases. An example of this can be seen in the top
panel of Figure 6, where the schedule has an upward-sloping portion.12
  12
    Note however that if c = 0 changing the threshold has no impact on δ e , so that in
Figure 6 the upward-sloping portion comes exclusively from the first effect.


                                          18
    What about the welfare implications of dollarization/indexation of liabil-
ities? The expression in (13) can now be totally differentiated to yield

                                ∂z ∗                dxe
                         (                                           )
            dE (L)                                                       dλ
                   = Λλ + Λ z ∗      + (Λxe − Λz∗ )                         + Λθ      (27)
              dθ                ∂λ                  dλ                   dθ
                         ³         ´³         ´
                             1−λ
where recall dλ
             dθ
                = 2          1−α
                                         λ
                                        1−θ
                                                  > 0. The last term in (27) can be easily
computed from (12):
                                    αs
                                   Λθ =  E (δb)2 > 0                         (28)
                                   1−θ
    It follows that the welfare analysis of indexation/dollarization is the same
as the welfare analysis of policymaker conservatism, but with a twist. There
is now an additional effect: for a given λ, decreasing θ (indexing/dollarizing
more) always increases social loss, since it is the attempted devaluation (δb)
not its actual yield (θδb) that enters social loss.
    Other things equal, then, trying to lower expected devaluation and in-
crease welfare via greater indexation-dollarization is a trickier business than
doing so via a more conservative policymaker. Consider for simplicity the
case in which α = αs (in that case, as we saw above, Λλ = 0).

                   ∂z ∗
        ¯
                                           dxe                        αs
                 (                                        )
dE (L) ¯¯                                           2λ(1 − λ)
           = Λ z ∗      + (Λ x e − Λ z ∗ )                       +        E (δb)2 ,
                                                 (1 − θ)(1 − α) 1 − θ
        ¯
  dθ ¯α=αs         ∂λ                      dλ
                                                                              (29)
Therefore, whenever expected devaluation is increasing in λ and therefore in
θ, expected social loss is increasing in θ. In other words, in the range of θ
             e
for which ∂x
           ∂λ
               is positive, it pays off to have as little indexation-dollarization
as possible.
    Notice that if c = 0, so that there is no cost of crises, this last expression
becomes
                     ¯
            dE (L) ¯¯          ∂xe 2λ(1 − λ)      αs
                       = Λ x e                  +      E (δb)2 .                      (30)
                               ∂λ (1 − θ)(1 − α) 1 − θ
                    ¯
              dθ ¯α=αs

We know the first term on the RHS is in this case negative, and the second
term on the RHS is always positive. It follows the net effect can have either
sign, and greater indexation/dollarization can be bad for welfare even if crises
are costless. This case is depicted in the lower panel of Figure 6, in which
expected social loss is decreasing in θ until this share hits 0.48, and increases
thereafter.

                                                    19
6      Endogenizing the cost of default
So far we have treated the cost c of a crisis as exogenous. But it can easily
be endogenized by appealing to incentive effects.
    It is not always feasible to find a tough central banker or finance minister
who has a strong dislike of devaluation or default. That person may not exist,
or he may be inevitably changed once in power. An external agency, such as
the IMF, may attempt to commit the government to a low devaluation rate
by imposing a penalty for c for deviations.
    Suppose that the IMF wants to induce the government to follow a given
policy rule, characterized by a given α (call it αf ) and its associated λ (call
it λf ). If the government ever deviates from this policy, then it must pay the
cost c. Naturally, the IMF will wish to impose the smallest c that ensures
the rule is followed as long as possible.13 The appendix shows that for each
chosen λf there is a c∗ equal to
                                           ³     ´
                                 c∗ = τ̄ ω λf , λ ,                                 (31)
          ³     ´
where ω λf , λ > 0 is a function of λf and λ. As long as the cost of
deviating is no smaller than c∗ , the government will always attempt
                                                                  ³      ´to stick
to the policy dictated by the IMF. From the definition of ω λf , λ in the
appendix it follows that this function is increasing in λf if and only if λf > λ.
Hence, if the IMF wants to raise λf above λ, it must also increase c∗ .
    What is the effect of a higher λf on expectations of devaluation? Consider
the total derivative of E(x|xe ) with respect to λf , which is now


 dE(x|xe )   ∂E(x|xe ) ∂E(x|xe ) ∂c∗
           =          +                                                             (32)
   dλf         ∂λf       ∂c∗ ∂λf
                                                                       τ̄
              = −E [(b + g + z + xe ) | nocrisis] pnc + c∗ f (z ∗ )        + pc τ̄ ωλf ,
                                                                      λf 2
The sign of this derivative depends on λf itself. A more ambitious target (a
higher αf , meaning a higher λf ) may cause expectations of default to fall or
rise. Evaluating (32) in the extremes (λf = λ and λf = 0) one obtains
  13
   By as long as possible we mean that if it hits the maximum-tax constraint, the gov-
ernment will have to deviate from the IMF-imposed policy even if it does not want to.
The cost c∗ below is constructed to reflect this. For details, see the appendix.



                                         20
               ¯
 dE(x|xe ) ¯¯
      f
            ¯       = −E [(b + g + z + xe ) | nocrisis] pnc                          (33)
   dλ       ¯
              λf =λ
           ¯
dE(x|xe ) ¯¯
                    = −E [(b + g + z + xe ) | nocrisis] pnc + τ̄ [c∗ f (z ∗ ) + pc ] .(34)
  dλf ¯λf =0
           ¯


The right hand side of (33) is always negative; imposing a tighter policy
starting from λf = λ reduces E(x|xe ). This is because the required marginal
increase in c∗ , starting from λf = λ, is zero. But a ‘zero tolerance’ policy
of λf = 1 can backfire: the RHS of (34) may be positive, in which case a
decrease in λf is required to reduce expectations of devaluation. An example
appears in the top panel of Figure 7, where expected devaluation first falls
and then rises as αf (and therefore λf ) increases.
    What are the implications for welfare? Should the IMF force the lo-
cal policymaker to act more conservatively than the policymaker naturally
would? We can use the same technique as in earlier sections, calculating

             dE (L)                  ∂z ∗                    ∂xe        ∂c
                     = Λ λ f + Λ z ∗      + (Λ x e − Λ z ∗ )     + Λ c            (35)
              dλf                    ∂λf                     ∂λf       ∂λf
where it is easy to check from (12) that
                               αs
                           Λc =   E (x | crisis) pc > 0                   (36)
                               θ2
    Focus first on the case with α = αs , so that the government has the same
preferences as society. Given that the marginal increase in the cost needed
to implement a slightly higher λ is zero, (35) becomes
                                     ¯
                            dE (L) ¯¯              ∂xe
                                           = Λ x e     ,                          (37)
                             dλf ¯αf =α=αs         ∂λf
                                    ¯

                        ∂x   e
which is negative since ∂λ f < 0 for c = 0. Therefore, having the IMF induce

a policy that is more conservative than both society and the government
is optimal. That is, if α = αs , the best αf is αf > α. The intuition is
that raising the policymakers α to αf > α has marginal benefits and costs.
The marginal benefit is that in non-crisis situations, a more conservative
policymaker ameliorates the time inconsistency problem.14 The marginal cost
  14
     And starting from αs = αg , making the policy maker marginally more conservative
increases welfare, as Rogoff proved, since the gain from enhanced credibility more than
offsets the loss from less flexibility in responding to shocks.


                                          21
is that in crisis situations a cost c has to be paid, and the more conservative
the policymaker is, the more often crises happen. But starting at α f = α
this marginal cost is zero, since the marginal increase in c required to make
that αf sustainable is zero.15 This case appears in the lower panel of Figure
7.
    If the government is naturally more liberal than society, so that α < α s ,
then we have
                                         ∂z ∗
                           ¯
                 dE (L) ¯¯                                       ∂xe        ∂c
                                 = Λ z ∗      + (Λ x e − Λ z ∗ )     + Λ c     ,   (38)
                  dλf ¯αf =αs >α         ∂λf                     ∂λf       ∂λf
                         ¯


  which may be positive or negative, since the sum of the first two terms, as
we know, is of ambiguous sign, and Λc > 0. That is, having the IMF induce
a policy that is more conservative than society could be welfare decreasing
if the government is sufficiently liberal, so that the c needed to sustain the
IMF policy is large.
    What is the connection between how tough an IMF program is and
uniqueness of equilibria? It turns out that a sufficiently tough or ambitious
program –that is, one with a high αf – can cause multiple equilibria. The
intuition is that forcing a government to behave much more conservatively
than it would if left to its own devices calls for a large cost c. And, as we saw
in sections 2 and 3 above, a large enough c can generate multiple equilibria.
As in those sections, the intuition is that expectations of high devaluation
raise the fiscal burden, shifting the threshold between crisis and non crisis
states. A large c is then paid with higher probability, worsening the ex-
pected fiscal burden and potentially rendering the pessimistic expectations
self-confirming.
    This result stands in contrast with those of Obstfeld (1997). In that
paper, escape clauses with exogenous costs can involve self-fulfilling attacks
on fixed exchange rates if those costs are sufficiently small. In Obstfeld’s
paper escape costs are non-pecuniary and affect the policymaker’s utility
only. The higher the cost, the less willing is the policymaker to validate high
devaluation expectations. Here escape costs are pecuniary and they affect
the government’s budget constraint. This is precisely why these high costs
allow pessimistic expectations to be self-validating.
    An example of this phenomenon appears in Figure 8. As αf (and there-
fore λf ) increase expected devaluation falls, but for very high αf (very con-
                               ¯
 15              ∂ω (λf ,λg ) ¯
      That is,       ∂λf
                              ¯
                              ¯             = 0.
                                   λf =λg


                                                   22
servative IMF programs) the equilibrium is no longer unique. There is an
alternative outcome that yields higher expected devaluation and expected
social loss. In that range, which equilibrium obtains depends exclusively on
animal spirits. By being more ambitious, the IMF may end up increasing
the very expected devaluation it was attempting to reduce.


7      Conclusions
Do tougher policies deliver higher credibility, lower expectations of devalua-
tion and default, and possibly higher welfare? Conventional wisdom typically
says yes. The model in this paper suggests otherwise. In an uncertain en-
vironment in which fiscal crises are both possible and costly, tough policies
such as greater policymaker conservatism and rising dollarization/indexation
of government debt can easily backfire, causing higher expected devaluation
and lower welfare.
    This does not mean that any toughening of policies is counterproductive.
On the contrary, we have shown that the relationship between expected de-
valuation and expected social loss, on the one hand, and the toughness of
policies, on the other, can be non-monotonic and quite sensitive to changes
in underlying parameters. But our results do suggest that toughness beyond
a certain point may be welfare reducing, and that this threshold may be dif-
ferent from what conventional theory suggests. For instance, the well-known
result that it is welfare-improving to appoint a conservative policy-maker
need not hold here.
    Not all tough policies are created equal. The paper also suggests that
indexing or dollarizing debt may be particularly tricky. Appointing a con-
servative policymaker may cause crises to occur more often, but has no im-
plications for the ability of the government to default/devalue as needed in
times of crisis. That is why conservatism may be welfare-improving if the
fiscal costs of crisis are small, as we show in sections 4 and 5. Dollarization
of debts, on the other hand, or measures such as facilitating the imposition
of sanctions or penalties on defaulting nations, reduce the revenue collected
by governments for every possible devaluation rate. This means that, other
things equal, default rates are higher at times of crisis, and expected deval-
uation and expected social loss may well be higher.16
  16
     Fischer and Summers (1989) make a related point, arguing that what they term poli-
cies of inflation protection, may be welfare improving when inflation is imperfectly con-


                                           23
    We have developed the argument in terms of a fiscal problem, but the
same logic could be applied more broadly. For instance, it could be applied to
the inflation-unemployment trade-off for which the idea of time inconsistency
was originally developed. If the expectations-augmented Phillips curve is
subject to shocks and if there is a politically-dictated upper bound to the
rate of unemployment (as their arguably is in the real world), then a very
similar story applies. Often-advocated policies, such as indexing wages to
insulate them from inflation, thereby making inflation surprises useless in
terms of employment, could also have counter-productive effects.




trolled by the policymaker.


                                     24
A       Appendix
For any given λf , if there is no fiscal crisis the instantaneous loss is

          1 − αg
                          ¶ "Ã        !                  #
                                 1 − λ ³ f ´2 ³
           µ                                          ´2
     Lf =                               λ    + 1 − λf      (b + g + z + xe )2                       (39)
             2                     λ

But if against the maximum tax constraint, the government                                 has to deviate
from the IMF policy even if it does not want to. This means                               that the worst
realization of z for which (39)
                             ³ is relevant
                                    ´        turn out to be z ∗ ,                         which is given
here by (b + g + z ∗ + xe ) = 1 − λf τ̄ . In that case (39) can                           be written as
                                                                              !2 
                                                                       λf
                                                   Ã          !Ã
                      1−α     1−λ
                            µ             ¶
                 Lf =       1+                                                    τ̄ 2             (40)
                       2        λ                                    1 − λf

By contrast, if the government deviates from the IMF prescription and ap-
plies its preferred rule λ, the resulting loss is
                     1−α
                            µ             ¶
                 L =  g
                         (1 − λ) (b + g + z + xe + c)2 ,                                            (41)
                      2
which evaluated at the same z ∗ as above equals
                                      ¶Ã                  !
                    1−α                          1−λ
                           µ                                h      ³         ´ i2
                  g                                                        f
                L =                                           τ̄ +   1 − λ    c .                   (42)
                     2                         (1 − λf )2

The government will not deviate for any z ≤ z ∗ as long as (39) is no larger
than (41), implying
                                          Ã            !
                                              ψ−1                ³         ´
                                 c ≥ τ̄                    ≡ τ̄ ω λf , λ                            (43)
                                              1 − λf
where                                 s
                                              (λf )2 (1 − λf )2
                                 ψ≡                 +           ≥1
                                                λ      1−λ
Equation (43) defines the lowest feasible c, which we call c∗ . Note that if
λf = λ, ψ = 1, so deviation is never preferred (given that c is non-negative).
It ³is straightforward
          ´            to show that, given the definition of ψ, the function
ω λ , λ is decreasing in λf if and only if λf < λ.
      f




                                                     25
References
 [1] Alesina, A., Prati, A. and G. Tabellini, “Public Confidence and Debt
     Management: A Model and a Case Study of Italy,” in Public Debt Man-
     agement: Theory and History, R. Dornbusch and M. Draghi, eds. Cam-
     bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

 [2] Barro, R. and D. Gordon, “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model
     of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 91, 1983, pp. 589-
     610.

 [3] Blanchard, O. “Credibility, Disinflation and Gradualism,” Economic
     Letters 17, 1985, 211-217.

 [4] Bohn, H. “Tax Smoothing with Financial Instruments,” American Eco-
     nomic Review 80, 1990, pp. 1217-1230.

 [5] Bolton, Patrick and David S. Scharfstein, “Optimal Debt Structure and
     the Number of Creditors”, Journal of Political Economy, 104(1), Febru-
     ary 1996, pp. 1-25.

 [6] Calvo, G. “On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary
     Economy,” Econometrica 46, 1978, pp. 1411-1428.

 [7] Calvo, G., “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,”
     American Economic Review 78, 1988, pp. 647-661.

 [8] Calvo, G. and P. Guidotti, “Indexation and Maturity of Government
     Bonds: An Exploratory Model,” in Public Debt Management: Theory
     and History, R. Dornbusch and M. Draghi, eds. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1990.

 [9] Chang, R. “Credible Monetary Policy in an Infinite Horizon Model:
     Recursive Approaches,” Journal of Economic Theory 81, 1998, pp. 431-
     461.

[10] Drazen, A. and P. Masson, “Credibility of Policies Versus Credibility of
     Policymakers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 1994, pp. 735-754.

[11] Fischer, S. and L. Summers, “Should Governments Learn to Live with
     Inflation?” American Economic Review 79, 1989, pp. 382-388.

                                     26
[12] Flood, R. “Comment on Buiter and Miller,” in J. Frenkel (ed.), Ex-
     change Rates and International Macroeconomics, Chicago: University
     of Chicago Press, 1983, pp. 359-365.

[13] Flood, R. and P. Isard, “Monetary Policy Strategies,” IMF Staff Papers
     36, 1989, pp. 612-632.

[14] Kydland, F. and E. Prescott, “Rules rather than Discretion: The Incon-
     sistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy 85, 1977, pp.
     473-90.

[15] Lohman, S., “The Optimal Degree of Committment: Credibility and
     Flexibility,” American Economic Review 82, 1992, pp. 273-286.

[16] Obstfeld, M., “Destabilizing Effects of Exchange Rate Escape Clauses,”
     Journal of International Economics 43, 1997, pp. 61-77.

[17] Persson, M., Persson, T. and L. Svensson, “Time Consistency of Fiscal
     and Monetary Policy,” Econometrica 55, 1987, pp. 1419-1431.

[18] Rogoff, K., “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate
     Monetary Target,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 1985, pp. 1169-
     1190.

[19] Svensson, L., “Optimal Inflation Targets, Conservative Central Bankers
     and Linear Inflation Contracts,” American Economic Review 87, 1997,
     pp. 98-114.

[20] Uribe, M., “A Fiscal Theory of Sovereign Risk,” NBER Working Paper
     9221, September 2002.

[21] Velasco, A., “Fixed Exchange Rates: Credibility, Flexibility and Multi-
     plicity,” European Economic Review 40, 1996, pp. 1023-1035.

[22] Walsh, C., “Optimal Bankers for Central Bankers,” American Economic
     Review 85, 1995, pp. 150-167.




                                    27
                                 No Crisis    Crisis
          x




(1−λ)τ̄
   λ
          +c




     (1−λ)τ̄
        λ




                                                  τ̄
              −(b + xe + g)     −(b + xe + g) +   λ
                                                       2z̄    z

                     Figure 1: Crisis and no-crisis regions
                                                       τ̄ − b − g − c

E(x | xe )
       (1−λ)
c−z+     λ τ̄




                        45o
                xeeq             −(b + g + z) +   τ̄
                                                  λ     xe
                              Figure 2.1

E(x | xe )




                                                        xe
                              Figure 2.2

E(x | xe )




                xeeq1          xeeq2                    xe
                              Figure 2.3




                          Figure 2: Equilibria
              xe


                 τ̄
−(b + g + z) +   λ


         (1−λ)
  c−z+     λ
               τ̄



                                                  DR
              xeeq

                                                   TR


                      0                    zeq                     ∆z

                      Figure 3: Equilibrium with uniform distribution
       0.7

       0.6

       0.5

       0.4
δe




       0.3

       0.2

       0.1

        0
        0.1     0.2       0.3       0.4       0.5       0.6      0.7       0.8       0.9      1
                                                    α


       12

       10

        8
E(L)




        6

        4

        2
        0.1     0.2       0.3       0.4       0.5       0.6      0.7       0.8       0.9      1
                                                    α

              Figure 4: Equilibrium country risk and expected social loss with costs c = 0.
              (z̄ = 10, θ = 1, b = 10, τ̄ = 10, g = −10, c = 0)
     0.55

        0.5

     0.45

        0.4
δe




     0.35

        0.3

     0.25

        0.2
          0.1      0.2       0.3       0.4       0.5       0.6       0.7      0.8       0.9     1
                                                       α


        12

        10

         8
 E(L)




         6

         4

         2
         0.1       0.2       0.3       0.4       0.5       0.6       0.7      0.8       0.9     1
                                                       α

                Figure 5: Equilibrium country risk and expected social loss with costs c = 4.
                (z̄ = 10, θ = 1, b = 10, τ̄ = 5, g = −10, c = 4)
        0.4


     0.35


        0.3
δe




     0.25


        0.2
              0     0.1      0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9    1
                                                         θ


        40

        35

        30
 E(L)




        25

        20

        15
              0     0.1      0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9    1
                                                         θ

                  Figure 6: Equilibrium country risk and expected social loss with costs c = 0.
                  (z̄ = 8, α = .5, b = 16, τ̄ = 10, g = −10, c = 0)
     0.26

     0.24

     0.22
δe




        0.2

     0.18

     0.16
        0.5      0.55     0.6     0.65     0.7     0.75     0.8     0.85      0.9     0.95   1
                                                    αf


        10

         9

         8
 E(L)




         7

         6

         5

         4
         0.5     0.55     0.6     0.65     0.7     0.75     0.8     0.85      0.9     0.95   1
                                                    αf

               Figure 7: Equilibrium country risk and expected social loss with endogenous
               costs. (z̄ = 8, θ = 1, b = 12, τ̄ = 5, g = −10, α = 0.5)
     0.35

        0.3

     0.25

        0.2
δe




     0.15

        0.1

     0.05

         0
         0.5     0.55     0.6     0.65     0.7     0.75     0.8     0.85      0.9     0.95   1
                                                    αf


        10

         9

         8

         7
 E(L)




         6

         5

         4

         3
         0.5     0.55     0.6     0.65     0.7     0.75     0.8     0.85      0.9     0.95   1
                                                    αf

               Figure 8: Equilibrium country risk and expected social loss with endogenous
               costs. (z̄ = 1.5, θ = 1, b = 12, τ̄ = 5, g = −8.5, α = 0.5)
