                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 BECOMING OLDEST-OLD:
                           EVIDENCE FROM HISTORICAL U.S. DATA

                                              Dora L. Costa
                                              Joanna Lahey

                                          Working Paper 9933
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9933


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




Prepared for 2003 IUSSP seminar on “Increasing Longevity: Causes, Consequences, and Prospects.” We
thank participants at the NBER Aging Summer Institute for comments. Dora Costa gratefully acknowledges
the support of NIH grants R01 AG19637 and P01 AG10120, of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and
of the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College pursuant to a grant from the United States Social
Security Administration funded as part of the Retirement Research Consortium. The opinions and conclusions
are solely those of the authors and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policy of the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, the Social Security Administration, or
any agency of the federal government, or the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Dora L. Costa and Joanna Lahey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Becoming Oldest-Old: Evidence from Historical U.S. Data
Dora L. Costa and Joanna Lahey
NBER Working Paper No. 9933
August 2003
JEL No. I12, J11, N30

                                            ABSTRACT

We argue that the environment determines life span, using historical data to show that such

indicators of environmental insults in early childhood and young adulthood as quarter of birth,

residence, occupation, wealth, and the incidence of specific infectious diseases affected older age

mortality. Consistent with improvements in early life factors, we find that the effect of quarter of

birth on older age mortality has diminished over the twentieth century and that the declining impact

of quarter of birth explains 16 to 17 percent of the difference in ten year mortality rates of

Americans age 60-79 in 1900 and in 1960-1980. We estimate that at least one-fifth of the increase

between 1900 and 1999 in the probability of a 65 year old surviving to age 85 may be attributable

to early life conditions. We also present suggestive evidence on the mortality trajectory of the oldest

old in the first half of the twentieth century that implies that the shape of the mortality trajectory,

though not its level, has remained constant.

Dora L. Costa
MIT
Department of Economics
E52-274C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
costa@mit.edu

Joanna Lahey
MIT
Department of Economics
E52
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
jlahey@mit.edu
           The twentieth century has witnessed remarkable declines in older age mortality in

Western Europe, Japan, and the United States (Robine and Vaupel 2002; Kannisto 1996; Vaupel

1997; Wilmoth et al. 2000). The first documented 111 year old died in 1932 and the first verified

122 year old died in 1997 (Vaupel 1997). Not only has the maximum age of death increased,

but the number of people living beyond 100 has increased as well, calling into question whether

the upper limit to the length of human life postulated by Fries (1980) is anywhere in sight and

whether such an upper limit even exists (Vaupel and Jeune 1995; Wilmoth and Lundström 1996).

In the United States life expectancy in 1900 at age 65 for both sexes combined was less than 12

years and only 13 percent of all 65 year olds could expect to reach age 85 and join the ranks of

the oldest old. By century’s end life expectancy at age 65 had risen to almost 17 years and 42

percent of all 65 year olds could expect to live until age 85. This increase in life expectancy was

extremely slow at first, rising by only half a year during the first three decades of the twentieth

century. Since 1930 the increase in life expectancy at age 65 has accelerated to 2 years between

1930 and 1960 and then to 3 years between 1960 and 1999.1

           What accounts for the twentieth century increase in life expectancy and in the proportion

of the older population who have become oldest-old? Scientists account for change by genetic

evolution, postulating that mutations with bad effects at late ages have bad effects at young

ages thus weeding out late-age failures (e.g. Charlesworth 2001). In contrast, demographers

and economists have pointed to the environment. Robine (2003; 2001) argues that contrary to

most scientists’ assumptions, the environment, not genetics, determines life span with genetics

accounting for individual variation in life spans. Empirically we observe that as individuals

age mortality rates increase at a roughly constant rate until around age 109 and then plateau or

even decline (Thatcher et al. 1998; Vaupel et al. 1998). Robine (2003) hypothesizes that while


   1
      See the Berkeley Mortality Database and the Human Mortality DataBase, http://www.demog.berkeley.edu. All
life expectancies are period life expectancies.


                                                      1
the shape of the mortality trajectory may be a biological constant, its level, the rate of increase

in mortality rates, and perhaps even the age at which the plateau is reached, is determined by

the environment. Fogel and Costa (1997) and Fogel (1994) have argued that the unprecedented

degree of control that humans have gained over their environment in the last 300 years has led to

changes in human physiology that have lengthened life and improved health. Just over the last

100 years major environmental changes in the developed world include the virtual elimination of

the infectious diseases that ravaged childhood, the dramatic expansion of the supply of calories

and of micro-nutrients, the control of chronic disease conditions through new drugs and surgeries,

increased knowledge (though not always application) of good health and dietary habits, and

reduced exposure to physical hazards, including environmental pollutants and poisons, both in

the home and in the workplace.

          If the environment determines life span then such environmental insults as infectious

disease, poor nutrition, low socio-economic status, or occupational hazards have a permanent

scarring effect, leading to death at later ages by leaving survivors with permanent damage to their

hearts, lungs, or other organs as in the case of rheumatic fever or tuberculosis. However, it is not

clear a priori that environmental insults necessarily reduce longevity. Individuals who are more

frequently exposed to disease may acquire full or partial immunities to such diseases as typhoid or

influenza. If only the healthiest survive insults, then selection may lead to a negative relationship

between insults and later mortality. Although a large body of research has found evidence that

environmental insults, including those in utero and early childhood, affect older age health and

longevity (Costa 2003b; Doblhammer and Vaupel 2001; Preston, Hill, and Drevenstedt 1998;

Manton, Stallard, and Corder 1997; Costa 2000b; Elo and Preston 1992; Barker 1992, 1994;

cf. Christensen et al. 1995; Kannisto, Christensen, and Vaupel 1997; Kannisto 1994), much of

this research can be criticized on the grounds that an observed positive relationship between

insults and later death may result from correlation between insults and an omitted variable such


                                                 2
as life-long poverty (Paneth and Susser 1995).

          This paper reviews the literature on causes of lengthening life, emphasizing what

scholars have learned from studying past populations, and uses historical data to assess the

impact of environmental insults in early childhood and at later ages on the mortality of men

and women in their sixties and seventies, focusing primarily on the effects of insults related

to nutrition and infectious disease. Although we do not present new evidence on the roles

of improvements in medical care, changes in health or dietary habits, and reduced exposure to

environmental pollutants and poisons in the twentieth century mortality decline, we briefly discuss

these factors. We present new evidence on the effects of immigration on historical United States

mortality patterns. Manton and Vaupel (1995) suggest that because immigrants are healthier,

recent increases in life expectancy in the United States could arise from immigration. All of

our analyses emphasize the predictors of survival to become oldest-old, a rare achievement for

most of our ancestors. Although the high mortality rates of historic populations do not allow us

to investigate the predictors of survivorship among the oldest-old, we present some suggestive

evidence on the trajectory of mortality among the oldest-old Union Army veterans.

          The paper first reviews the types of historical data that are available. The next two

sections discuss the impact of insults in early childhood and in later life, respectively, on older age

mortality. The indicators of environmental stress that we focus on are quarter of birth, residence,

socioeconomic status, and the incidence of specific infectious diseases. The fourth section

examines the mortality experience of immigrants relative to the native-born in both the nineteenth

and the twentieth century. The fifth section evaluates the likely magnitude of environmental insults

on older age mortality. The sixth section discusses anthropometric indicators of environmental

stress, because these have been widely used in the literature. The seventh section discusses

alternative explanations for the mortality decline at older ages. The eighth section presents our

evidence on the mortality trajectory of the oldest-old. We then summarize our results and conclude


                                                  3
with some thoughts on future trends in life expectancy at older ages.



1    Historical Data

Historical data are useful for establishing long-term mortality trends and for investigating the

determinants of mortality under very different environmental conditions. Past populations were

exposed to a wide variety of infectious diseases which varied greatly depending upon size of

city of residence. They faced greater nutritional stress both because of their greater poverty and

because their intake of vitamins and nutrients was determined by the local agricultural cycle. In

addition, they faced high occupational risks and had medical care that was ineffective at best, thus

allowing us to examine the effects of untreated infectious disease on later mortality.

          Much of the initial work with historical data used aggregate data (e.g. Preston and Van

de Walle 1978; Condran and Cheney 1982) and these are still valuable in understanding mortality

trends at older ages (e.g. Wilmoth and Horiuchi 1999). However, a disadvantage of aggregate data

is that it is very hard to identify the effects of environmental stress on mortality and even harder

to distinguish the effects of different types of stresses. Demographers and economic historians

have therefore turned to individual-level data.

          Individual-level data has consisted of either cross-sectional data with retrospective

mortality information or longitudinal data. Cross-sectional data with retrospective mortality

information includes the 1900 and 1910 micro-census data with its questions on number of

children ever born and number of children surviving used by Preston and Haines (1991) to study

the predictors of child mortality. It also includes the 1850 and 1860 census mortality schedules

linked to the 1850 and 1860 census population schedules used by Ferrie (2003).

          Group level longitudinal data can be created from such individual-level data as the

census micro samples. For example, Lleras-Muney (2002) used the 1960-1980 micro census


                                                  4
samples to examine the causal effect of education on 10 year mortality, creating cells based upon

sex/cohort and state of birth and instrumenting for education with the compulsory school laws

that were in effect between 1915-1939. A potential drawback to creating group level artificial

cohorts is that for the variables of interest the cell sizes may be too small.

           The individual-level longitudinal datasets that have been created have varied widely in

the number of years of life that they cover. Steckel (1988) linked households across the 1850

and 1860 censuses to study the mortality of women and children. Preston, Hill, and Drevenstedt

(1998) linked African-Americans who survived until age 85 to either their 1900 or 1910 household

and used these censuses to draw a control sample. Perhaps the most ambitious linkage project of

all has been the creation of the dataset, The Aging of Union Army Veterans, available for download

from http://www.cpe.uchicago.edu. These data, collected by a team of researchers led by Robert

Fogel, cover the life histories of men born between 1820 and 1850, and who reached age 65

between 1885 and 1915. The sample is based upon 35,570 white males who were mustered into

the Union Army during 1861-1865. Socioeconomic and biomedical histories of the recruits from

childhood to death were created by linking together information from different sources, including

military records, pension records, reports from examining surgeons, and the 1850, 1860, 1900,

and 1910 censuses.

           The new results in this paper are based upon both group-level longitudinal data created

from the public use micro census samples and upon individual-level longitudinal data from the

Union Army data.2


   2
     The results presented here for the Union Army data differ from those in Costa (2003b) because a larger sample
size is used and because the effects of additional variables such as quarter of birth and family income are examined.




                                                         5
2    Insults in Early Childhood

There is a large body of literature stressing the connection between intrauterine and infant growth

and premature morbidity and mortality at ages above 50. The diseases that are most closely linked

to anthropological markers of maternal and intrauterine deprivation are hypertension, coronary

heart disease, cerebral hemorrhage, and type II diabetes (Barker 1992, 1996; Eriksson et al.

2000). Much of the evidence comes from studies carried out by Barker and his collegues in

Britain, but there is also evidence from Sweden, Finland, and India (Hyppönen et al. 2001; Leon

et al. 1998; Forsén et al. 1999; Stein et al. 1996). These studies have been criticized for not

adequately adjusting for such confounding factors as middle-age variations in nutrition and life

style and for reflecting the impact of random error (Huxley, Neil, and Collins 2002; Paneth and

Susser 1995; Scrimshaw 1997). Other studies have found no evidence that intrauterine growth

retardation affects later mortality. Christensen et al. (1995) compare twins and singletons and

find no mortality differentials except among women age 60-84, among whom twin mortality

was higher. Almond, Chay, and Lee (2002) find no evidence that the lighter birth weight twin

suffers increased mortality after one year. But, twinning may well be a different process from

intrauterine growth retardation. Kannisto, Christensen, and Vaupel (1997) find no evidence of

increased mortality in later life for cohorts born during famine compared to cohorts born 5 years

before and 5 years after the famine, but variation across cohorts may not be enough to identify

the effects of famine if nutritional stress in childhood and of the mother also has an effect on

mortality. Steckel (1989) documents that although American slave children experienced such

severe deprivation that by four and half years of age they were only at the 0.2 height centile,

below the level of the poorest populations of developing countries, they experienced remarkable

catch-up growth when they reached field hand age and large quantities of meat were introduced

into their diets. By adulthood slaves were only slightly shorter than whites and their mortality



                                                6
rates at ages 20-24 were comparable to those of whites, suggesting to us that while slaves’

early childhood did leave a scarring effect, rapid improvements in conditions during adolescence

minimized the scar’s impact.

          Some of the strongest evidence for the impact of early life environmental factors on

older age mortality comes from studies of the effect of month of birth (Doblhammer and Vaupel

2001; Doblhammer 1999; Gavrilov and Gavrilov 1999). Doblhammer and Vaupel (2001) find that

in Austria and Denmark fifty year olds born in the fourth quarter live longer than those born in the

second quarter whereas in Austalia the pattern among the native-born is shifted by half a year but

among the British-born it is similar to that observed in Austria and Denmark. Kanjanapipatkul

(2002) finds that Union Army veterans born in the second quarter experienced shorter life-spans

than Union Army veterans born in the fourth quarter. (In contrast, Huntington (1938) found that

in a sample of genealogies individuals born in February or March lived longer than those born in

July or August.) Doblhammer and Vaupel (2001) reject the hypotheses that season of birth is an

indicator of social status or of age and hypothesize that month of birth has an effect on older age

mortality through birth weight, pointing out that in Austria during the crisis years of 1916-1922

children born in the fall had higher birth weights than those born in other seasons (Ward 1993:

22).

          Additional evidence for the impact of early life environmental factors on older age

mortality comes from historical studies of the impact of place of birth. Preston, Hill, and

Drevenstedt (1998) find that among African-Americans farm background was a strong predictor

of survival to age 85. Costa (2003) finds that enlisting in a large city (a proxy for growing up in

a large city) had a large negative effect on survival among Union Army veterans who lived until

age 50 even controlling for size of current city of residence. There is, however, also evidence that

under the extreme disease conditions of Union Army camp life growing up in a large city relative

to an isolated rural area had a beneficial mortality effect, because men from isolated areas lacked


                                                 7
immunities to the diseases that ravaged Union Army camps (Lee 2003).

              In the United States both quarter and region of birth predict ten year mortality rates of

60-79 year-olds in 1960-1980 (see Table 1). Controlling for age group, sex, and cohort, the ten

year mortality rate of men and women born in the Midwest and West was lower by 0.01 and 0.05,

respectively, than that of their counterparts born in the Northeast. The ten year mortality rate of

men and women born in the second quarter was higher by 0.03 than that of their counterparts

born in the fourth quarter, an 8 percent increase in the mean ten year mortality rate of 0.36, and

the effect was strongly statistically significant.3

              Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the importance of season and of place of birth on the survival

probabilities of Union Army veterans who were age 60-74 in 1900. Adjusting for age, veterans

born in the second quarter had lower survival probabilities than those born during the second

quarter. Those born during the first and third quarters also had higher survival probabilities

than those born during the second quarter (not shown). Veterans who enlisted in a city whose

population was above 50,000 in 1860 (the largest 16 cities in the country), faced an elevated

mortality risk relative to those who enlisted in smaller cities. Even though food was plentiful and

may have been more varied than in rural areas, rising population density and poor sanitation made

the largest cities in the country particularly lethal. Life expectancy at birth in the largest Northern

cities was only 24. Because city of enlistment was a good indicator of city of birth (Costa 2003b),

city of enlistment provides a good indication of environmental stress both at birth and in early

childhood.

              Data on birth weight from Johns Hopkins Hospital provide suggestive evidence that

those born during the spring (March-May) fared worse than those born at other times of the year

(see Figure 3). Controlling for prematurity, the sex and race of the child, cohort, and mother’s


   3
       We did not find differences in the effect of quarter of birth by region.



                                                              8
demographic characteristics, babies born in the spring weighed 81 grams less than those born

in the summer. For full-term births the difference was 73 grams controlling for gestational age.

When season of birth was defined by quarter, then babies born during the second quarter (April-

June) were significantly more likely to be born prematurely than babies born in other quarters,

controlling for sex and race of the child, cohort, and mother’s demographic characteristics (Costa

2003a). Low birth weights and high prematurity rates in the spring may be related to maternal

vitamin levels. A study of a rural North Carolina mill town begun in 1939 found that in the spring

vitamin levels were at their lowest point (Beardsley 1989: 204).

           Although season of birth and therefore arguably birth weight has a statistically significant

effect on old age mortality, it is not clear that in the United States declines in older age mortality

can be directly linked to improvements in characteristics at birth. In the United States, birth

weights have remained roughly constant over the twentieth century (Costa 2003a, 1998) and even

the population of Philadelphia Almshouse in the mid-nineteenth century had high birth weights

by modern standards (Goldin and Margo 1989).4 Birth weights in the past may have compared

favorably with those today because many low birth weight babies who were stillborn in the past

would have survived with modern obstretical knowledge and a modern disease environment.

Including stillbirths in average birth weight implies that average birth weight increased slightly

over the twentieth century (Costa 2003a). The constancy in live birth weights over the twentieth

century suggests either that better measures of the intrauterine environment are needed or that

explanations for improvements in health at older ages may need to focus on changes in the disease

environment, changes that affected all age groups but that were particularly important in the first

five years of life.


   4
     European birth weights were low compared to those of the white United States population (Ward 1993),
suggesting that improvements in the intrauterine environment may explain a greater proportion of the European
increase in life expectancy at older ages.



                                                     9
3    Insults in Later Life

Infectious diseases that were common in the past included typhoid, rheumatic fever, respiratory

infections such as bronchitis and pneumonia, malaria, measles, tuberculosis, and gastrointestinal

ailments, including cholera and diarrhea. These were not just diseases of childhood and their

recurrence might have compounded any initial scarring effects. The medical and epidemiological

literature provides many examples of the possible links between these infectious diseases and

chronic conditions (see Costa 2000 for more details). Rheumatic fever can damage heart valves.

Measles and typhoid fever affect cardiac functioning. Infections that have been implicated

in atherosclerosis include helicobacter pylori, a bacterium that causes gastritis and stomach

ulcers, and chlamydia pneumonia, a bacterium that causes acute upper and lower respiratory

tract infections. Individuals at risk of later susceptibility to pneumonia, chronic obstructive lung

disease, and tuberculosis include those who have had prior upper respiratory tract infections and

tuberculosis.

          Costa (2000,2003) examined the morbidity and mortality experience at older ages of

Union Army veterans who had experienced the common infectious diseases while in the army

camps. She found that acute respiratory infections while in the army increased the probability of

chronic respiratory problems and arrhythmias at older ages; measles, the probability of chronic

respiratory problems and of valvular heart disease; typhoid fever, of valvular heart disease and

irregular pulse; tuberculosis, of chronic respiratory problems; rheumatic fever or post-rheumatic

arthopathies of valvular heart disease, arrhythmias, congestive heart failure, joint problems,

and back problems; diarrhea, of arteriosclerosis; and malaria, of joint problems. But, none of

these army camp infectious diseases were statistically significant predictors of all-cause mortality.

Some conditions did predict mortality by cause. For example, respiratory infection predicted death

from respiratory disease, diarrhea predicted death from gastrointestinal and stomach ailments,



                                                 10
and rheumatic fever predicted death from myocarditis. Men who had been prisoners of war and

therefore had probably suffered gastrointestinal ailments during their imprisonment, were more

likely to die from stomach ailments. Because a large fraction of deaths among Union Army

veterans were from infectious, respiratory, and diarrheal disease, it may be difficult to detect the

effects of early life and young adult events on all cause mortality because such current events as

recent exposure to infectious and parasitic disease may have been more important.

          Occupational hazards may also have scarring effects on older age mortality and mor-

bidity. Lung diseases and respiratory symptoms resulting from occupational exposure to dust,

fumes, or gases include asthma, chronic bronchitis, chronic air flow limitation, and turberculosis.

Workers in mining, steel foundries, tool grinding, glassmaking, metal casting, and stone polishing

are particularly prone to occupational lung disease. Farmers are also affected because they inhale

organic dust from moldy plant materials and from animal waste, hair, and feathers. Occupational

stress is also an important determinant of musculoskeletal capacity. Among Union Army veter-

ans, those in a manual occupation (including farming), disproportionately suffered from arthritis

and from back problems at older ages. Veterans who had worked in occupations where they were

exposed to dust and fumes were more likely to suffer respiratory ailments at older ages (Costa

2000). Although laborers were significantly more likely to die of heart disease than farmers,

occupation had no effect on the all cause mortality of Union Army veterans (Costa 2003b). Note

that in data on more recent populations, occupational differences in all-cause mortality are more

pronounced. The most common causes of death may now be those where socioeconomic status

has the largest impact. Alternatively, the relationship between socioeconomic status and mortality

may have changed. Both United States and British studies from the 1930s and 1940s found a

positive correlation between high socioeconomic status and risk of coronary heart disease in men,

but studies from 1940 to 1960 found a negative correlation (Manton et al. 1997).

          Evidence for the impact of income on mortality in historical United States populations


                                                11
is mixed. Wealth conveyed no systematic advantage for survival of women and children in

households matched in the 1850 and 1860 censuses (Steckel 1998). Preston and Haines (1991)

used the questions on number of children ever born and number of children still living in the

1900 census to report that place of residence and race were the most important correlates of child

survival in the late nineteenth century, much more important than father’s occupation. Preston

and Ewbank (1990) find that infant mortality differentials by social class increased from 1900

to 1930, perhaps because the germ theory of disease first spread to the more educated classes.

However, even before knowledge of the germ theory of disease, income enabled individuals to

buy lower room congestion, housing in an area of a city with better sanitation, better food, and

less work away from home for the pregnant mother. Within U.S. cities there was a steep gradient

between infant mortality and family income (e.g. see Rochester 1923). Chapin (1924) reported

that in Providence, Rhode Island in 1865 the annual crude death rate for taxpayers was 11 per

thousand, while the corresponding rate for non-taxpayers was 25 per thousand. Ferrie (2003)

linked households in 1850 and 1860 to one year mortality rates as reported in the 1850 and 1860

censuses of mortality and found a wealth gradient in rural areas of the United States. Those with

greater personal wealth were less likely to die from any cause and were less likely to die from

consumption, a disease associated with crowding and poor housing. They were not more likely to

die of cholera, a disease spread through contaminated water supplies because they did not know

how to protect themselves from cholera.

         Figures 4 and 5 illustrate the impact of personal property wealth in 1860 and of occu-

pation at enlistment on the age adjusted survival probabilities of Union Army veterans age 60-74

in 1900. Those of higher socioeconomic status were favored in survival. These measures of

socioeconomic status will be strongly correlated with the socioeconomic status of the household

veterans grew up in as children (if they had not yet formed their own households then wealth

is parental family wealth) and will also be correlated with socioeconomic status later in life.


                                               12
Although we cannot adjust for wealth later in the life-cycle, when we adjust for occupational

class at older ages we find that occupation at enlistment still has an effect on older age mortality.

          The graphs of survival probabilities over time of Union Army veterans show that the

effects of such environmental factors as quarter of birth, city of enlistment, wealth, and occupation

diminish with age. They also suggest that at very late ages, survival probabilities no longer fall

as steeply as at younger ages.



4    Immigration

Recent increases in life expectancy in the United States may arise from increased migration.

Manton and Vaupel (1995) suggest that immigrants are healthier than the people who did not

choose to immigrate, and probably have healthier children as a result. Nineteenth century

migration, however, may have been harmful to health. European soldiers were long aware that

strange “climates” could have fatal effects (Curtin 1989). Large cities, and particularly their

immigrant wards, were the sources of many epidemics. Sánchez (2003) used the longitudinal

residential information in the Union Army records to trace the effects of internal migration on

life expectancy. He found that migrants were more likely to die of infectious disease than non-

migrants and that although mortality rates were higher among migrants to urban areas than among

migrants to rural areas, even migrants to rural areas faced an elevated mortality risk compared to

non-migrants.

          Table 2 shows that the impact of foreign-birth on the ten year mortality rate of white

60-79 year olds differs by cohort. There was no statistically significant difference in mortality

rates at older ages between immigrants and the native-born among cohorts born 1830-1859. But,

among cohorts born 1870-1899, the foreign-born faced a higher mortality risk at older ages and

among cohorts born 1900-1929 the foreign born faced a lower mortality risk at older ages than the


                                                 13
native-born. When we examined birth place of origin we found that for the 1830-59 and 1870-99

cohorts the Irish faced higher mortality risk than the Germans or the English and that this risk

was much higher for the earlier Irish cohort (which had greater life-long poverty and which was

born during the Potato Famine) than the later one. For the 1900-29 cohort those born in Mexico

and, to a lesser extent, those born in Mediterranean countries faced a lower mortality risk perhaps

because immigration from these countries was temporary and those in need of family support

returned home.



5    Accounting for Mortality Improvements

Regression analysis allows us to assess the relative importance of different types of environmental

stress over the life cycle among Union Army veterans age 60-74 in 1900. We model the probability

of survival to age 85 by means of a probit equation,


                           Prob(I = 1) = Prob( < X  ) = Φ(X  )
                                                         0           0
                                                                                                  (1)


where I   =   1 if the veteran survived until age 85, Φ() is a standard normal cumulative distribution

function, and    X   is a vector of control variables. The effect of a unit change in one of the

independent variables on the probability of having a given chronic condition is given by the

partial derivative of the probit function P with respect to that independent variable. We model

the number of years lived after 1900 by means of a hazard model, in which our estimated hazard

(t) is

                                     (t) = exp(X  )0 (t) 
                                                    0
                                                                                                  (2)




                                                  14
where X is the vector of control variables and O (t) is the baseline hazard which we assume to

be Gompertz, O (t)       =   exp(t).5 The hazard ratios that we report indicate whether a one unit

change in an independent variable gives an increase/decrease in the odds of an event. For the

sample of men for whom cause of death is known, we estimate separate independent competing

risk models for five specific causes of death, treating other causes of death as censored. The five

specific causes of death that we examine are death from heart disease (excluding stroke), death

from stroke, death from infectious diseases (including tuberculosis), death from both chronic and

acute respiratory ailments such as pneumonia, influenza, and acute bronchitis, and death from

stomach ailments such as gastritis/duodentitis and ulcers. Our estimated hazard, i (t), for one of

our five models (i), is


                                         i(ti) = exp(X  )i0(t) 
                                                            0
                                                                                                                    (3)


where X is the vector of control variables and iO (t) is the baseline hazard which we assume to

be Gompertz.

            The primary control variables used in the analysis are season of birth (four quarters);

size of city of enlistment (50,000 and over, 25,000-50,000, 2500-25,000, and less than 2500); a

dummy equal to one if the household’s total personal property wealth in 1860 was greater than

$250; occupation at enlistment and occupation circa 1900, using last known occupation for the

retired (farmer, professional, manager or proprietor, clerical service, craft, operative, service, and

laborer); prisoner of war status; and infectious disease experienced while in the service (diar-


   5
      A Gompertz model is favored over an exponential, Weibull, or log-logistic model by the Aikaike information
criterion, but using these other models yields very similar conclusions. Using the Gompertz model, but not the other
models, we find evidence for individual level heterogeneity suggesting that after a while individual hazards begin to
fall. However, the estimated heterogeneity parameter is quantitatively small and the parameter estimates remain very
similar, perhaps because relatively few individuals survive to ages where individual hazards begin to fall. (As we
discuss later, the hazard does not fall until after age 99, when only 1 percent of the sample was alive.) For simplicity
we therefore present the Gompertz models.


                                                          15
rhea, respiratory, measles, tuberculosis, rheumatism/rheumatic fever, malaria, typhoid, stomach

ailments, and syphilis). Additional control variables include age in 1900, indicators of missing

information, a dummy indicating whether the veteran was ever wounded in the war, size of city

of residence in 1900, and marital status in 1900.

            Being born in the second relative to the fourth quarter decreased the probability of

survival to age 85 by 0.04, a decline of 23 percent relative to the predicted sample survival

probability of 0.17.6 Enlisting in a large rather than a small city had a larger effect on the

probability of survival to age 85, lowering the probability of survival to age 85 by 0.06. Relative

to men who were farmers at enlistment, men who were laborers had a survival probability that

was lower by 0.05. Occupation circa 1900 and wartime service had no effect on the probability

of surviving until age 85. Although enlisting in a large city had the largest effects on mortality,

relatively few men enlisted in large city. If no one had enlisted in a large city the predicted

probability of survival would have been 0.18. In contrast if no one had been born in the second

quarter the predicted probability of survival would have been 0.19. If everyone had been a farmer

at enlistment the predicted probability of survival would have been 0.19 and if everyone had been

a professional the predicted probability would have been 0.21.

            The all-cause mortality hazard model also emphasizes the importance of size of city

of enlistment. Enlisting in a large city increased the odds of dying by 1.24. Being born in both

the second and third quarter relative to the fourth quarter increased the odds of dying by 1.10.

Non-farmers faced an elevated mortality risk. Although being an operative at enlistment rather

than a farmer increased the odds of dying by 2.02, a large standard error means that the effect


   6
     The probability of survival in this sample this sample is higher than that from a 1900 life table for the death
registration states. In the 1900 life table men age 65 (the mean age in the Union Army sample) had only a 13 percent
chance of surviving to age 85 and a life expectancy of 11.4 years. In contrast life expectancy among Union Army
veterans was 12.6. Mortality rates life table for the death registration states probably overstate the national average
because the death registration states were disproportionately the urban, Northeastern states in which mortality was
higher.


                                                         16
was not statistically significant. Those with high personal property wealth faced a lower odds

of death. Using the hazard model specification, the largest effects on mortality come from high

personal property wealth. If everyone had had high personal property wealth then the predicted

median number of years lived after 1900 would have been 12.8, rather than 12.3. If everyone had

been a farmer, the predicted median number of years would have been 12.6 and if everyone had

been a professional the predicted median number of years would have been 12.4. If no one had

been born in the second quarter the predicted median number of years lived would have been 12.5

and if no one had enlisted in a large city the predicted median number of years lived would have

been 12.4.

         Examining mortality by cause of death allows us to evaluate the pathways by which

our measures of environmental stress affected mortality. Tables 4 and 5 show the impact of

variables that had an effect on mortality from one of the five specific causes. Men born in

the third relative to the fourth quarter were more likely to die of heart disease. Men born in

either of the first three quarters were more likely to die of stroke than men born in the fourth

quarter, with the highest probability of death for those born in the second quarter. Quarter

of birth did not have a statistically significant impact on death from infectious, respiratory, or

stomach ailments. A manual non-farming occupation at enlistment relative to being a farmer

or a professional increased the probability of death from heart disease or stroke, but not from

infectious, respiratory, or stomach ailments. Rheumatic fever while in the service increased the

probability of death of death from heart disease, tuberculosis while in the service increased the

probability of death from infectious disease, respiratory ailments while in the service increased

the probability of death from respiratory disease, and diarrhea and measles while in the service

and having been a prisoner of war increased the probability of death from stomach ailments. Size

of city of enlistment had no effect on mortality by cause. None of the explanatory variables had

any effect on deaths from violence.


                                               17
            A comparison of the effect of quarter of birth on the ten year mortality rates of 60-79

year old Union Army veterans and Americans in 1960-1980 shows that the effect of quarter of

birth has lessened (see Table 6). Being born in either the second or third rather than the fourth

quarter increased Union Army veterans’ probability of dying by 0.04, a 9 percent increase in the

mean ten year mortality rate of 0.45. In contrast, in 1960-1980 being born in the second rather

than the fourth quarter increased the mean ten year mortality rate of 0.36 by 0.03, an 8 percent

increase, and being born in the third rather than the fourth quarter increased the ten year mortality

rate by 0.01, a 4 percent increase. The declining impact of being born in the summer, a time

when the disease burden from water-borne diseases was especially high, suggests improvements

in either the intrauterine or the early infancy environment.7

            The declining impact of season of birth accounts for roughly 16 to 17 percent of the

0.087 difference in the ten year mortality rates of Union Army veterans and of Americans in 1960-

1980. Differences in the seasonality of births in the two samples are negligible.8 Assuming that

ten year mortality rates in the Union Army sample and the recent sample can be written as linear

functions of quarter of birth using the coefficients in Table 6, the difference in ten year mortality

rates due to changes in the coefficients on birth weights can be written as q 1UA(q1 UA ; q1 R) +

q2UA(q2 UA ; q2 R) + q3UA(q3 UA ; q3 R) using the recent function and as q1R(q1 UA ;
q1 R) + q2R(q2 UA ; q2 R) + q3R(q3 UA ; q3 R) using the Union Army function, where q1, q2,
and q 3 indicate the first, second, and third quarters and where the subscripts UA and R indicate

the Union Army sample and the recent sample, respectively. These respective sums yield 0.014

and 0.015, which represents 16 and 17 percent of the difference in ten year mortality rates. The


   7
    Kanjanapipatkul (2002) finds that in recent United States data the seasonal pattern differs from that observed at
Johns Hopkins and that since the 1960s seasonal fluctations in birth weight have diminished.
    8
      The fractions born in the first, second, third, and fourth quarters were 0.261, 0.252, 0.241, and 0.245, respectively,
in the Union Army sample. The respective fractions for Americans in 1960-1980 were 0.266, 0.232, 0.257, and
0.245.


                                                            18
difference in ten year mortality rates due to changes in season of birth is virtually zero.

           Rising wealth, an improving disease environment, declining occupational risks, and a

more favorable intrauterine environment may explain at least one-fifth of the increase between

1900 and 1999 in the proportion of the population living to age 85 and of the increase in life

expectancy at age 65. Between 1900 and 1999, the probability that a 65 year old man (the mean

age in the Union Army sample) would survive to age 85 rose from 13 to 35 percent and life

expectancy at age 65 rose from 11.4 to 13.5 years.9 Had all men in the Union Army sample

had a very favorable experience, here proxied as the same mortality experience as men who were

farmers at enlistment, who grew up in a small city, who were born in the fourth quarter, and

who had high personal property wealth, their predicted probability of living until age 85 would

have been 0.22 and their predicted median number of years lived would have been 13.5 years.

By modern standards this is not a very favorable experience, but over three-quarters of Union

Army veterans fared much worse in terms of mortality. The increase of 0.05 in the predicted

probability of living to age 85 and the increase of 1.2 years in predicted median number of years

lived represents roughly one-fifth of the observed increase in the period life tables. Much of

the increase in survival probabilities, however, cannot be explained by our regression models,

perhaps because many risks are not observed, but also because, as noted for quarter of birth, the

relationship between risk factors and mortality has changed.



6       Anthropometric Measures

Anthropometric measures provide useful proxies for environmental stress. Heights have been

widely used as proxies for the environmental stress faced by past populations because they


    9
      See the Berkeley Mortality Database and the Human Mortality DataBase, http://www.demog.berkeley.edu. All
life expectancies are period life expectancies.


                                                     19
were commonly recorded by the military for identification purposes. Additional anthropometric

measures that have been used include Body Mass Index (BMI) and measures of central body fat.

Poor net nutritional status during the growing years (including the fetal stage) leads to a shorter

population and poor current net nutritional status to a lighter population. Low birth weight for

gestational age babies not only grow up to be shorter, but they may also grow up to have greater

abdominal fat deposits, controlling for body mass (Paz et al. 1993; Lagerström et al. 1994).

           Height, weight, and fat patterning are predictors of subsequent morbidity and mortality.

Costa (1993) and Costa and Steckel (1997) found that the relationship between height and BMI

and subsequent mortality was similar among a sample of Union Army veterans and among modern

Norwegians males. All-cause mortality first declines with height to reach a minimum at heights

close to 185cm and then starts to rise.10 All-cause mortality risk first declines at low weights as

BMI increases, stays relatively flat over BMI levels from the low to high twenties, then starts to

rise again, but less steeply than at very low BMIs. In recent data low BMIs are associated with

respiratory disease and high BMIs with heart disease. Height appears to be inversely related to

heart and respiratory disease and positively related to the hormonal cancers (Barker 1992). It

is also related to stroke (McCarron et al. 2001). Abdominal fat distribution is associated with

antecedents of cardiovascular disease such as hypertension, non-insulin dependent diabetes, high

plasma concentrations of atherogenic lipids, and low concentrations of high density lipoprotein

cholesterol (Ohlson et al. 1985; Blair et al. 1984; Folsom et al. 1989). A 23-year follow-up study

of WWII soldiers measured prior to discharge in 1946-47 shows that a standard deviation increase

in waist-hip ratio above the mean increased mortality risk from ischemic and cerebrovascular heart

disease by up to 1.24 times and that this relationship was linear (Terry et al. 1992). Yao et al.


  10
    However, in later work Costa (2003) did not find a relationship between height and older age mortality among
Union Army veterans. Costa (1993) showed that the relationship between height and mortality among Norwegian
males was very sensitive to sample size.



                                                      20
(1991) find that measures of central body are linearly related to cardiovascular disease, but, like

BMI, they have a U-shaped relation with all cause mortality. Costa (forthcoming) found that in a

sample of Civil War soldiers measured by the United States Sanitary Commission, waist-hip ratio

at young adult ages was an excellent predictor of older age mortality from ischemic heart disease

or stroke and that the relationship was U-shaped.

          In the sample of Union Army veterans used in this paper, height at enlistment was

not a predictor of older age mortality. BMI in 1900 was a U-shaped predictor of both all-cause

and respiratory disease mortality, but did not significantly affect death from the other specific

causes, suggesting that BMI at older ages may be reflecting current underlying disease conditions,

particularly respiratory ones. Controlling for all other early and later life socioeconomic and

demographic characteristics, men with a BMI of 24 circa 1900 were the most likely to survive to

age 85.

          Past populations were shorter, lighter, and, controlling for BMI, had more abdominal fat

(Fogel and Costa 1997; Costa and Steckel 1997; Costa forthcoming). How did changes in frame

size affect mortality trends? Costa (1993) calculated that increases in BMI from 1900 to 1986

explain roughly 20 percent of the total decline in mortality above age 50. Costa (forthcoming)

estimated that changes in frame size (height, BMI, and waist-hip ratio) accounted for almost half

of the mortality declines among 56-72 year old white men between 1914 and 1988. The impact

of changes in frame size on mortality may have been even larger in other countries. Changes

in French height and weight jointly explain about 90 percent of the decline in French mortality

rates between 1785 and 1870 and about half of the decline in the twentieth century, with much

of the mortality improvement prior to 1870 due to increases in height and much of it after 1870

due to increases in weight (Fogel and Costa 1997). These calculations reinforce the importance

of environmental stress (though improvements in BMI could arise from better medical control of

chronic conditions), but suggest that the childhood factors proxied by height have become less


                                                21
important over time.



7    Other Factors

We estimated that at least one-fifth of the increase between 1900 and 1999 in the probability of a

65 year old surviving to age 85 to become oldest-old may be attributable to improvements in early

life conditions. What might account for the remaining four-fifths? Potential explanations include

improvements in medical care and knowledge, a move away from salt as a food preservative with

the rise of refrigeration, and declines in environmental pollution and poison, among other factors,

and these are the explanations that we review below in greater detail. (Other explanations such

as smoking may explain the recent decline in death rates, but probably initially increased death

rates during the twentieth century.)

          Inadequate medical care, such as lack of treatment for heart attacks, can have immediate

effects on mortality. Suggestive evidence for the impact of medical care on mortality comes from

cross-country mortality comparisons. Velkova, Volleswinkel-Van den Bosch, and Mackenbach

(1997) report that temporary life expectancy from birth to age 75 (the average number of years

a cohort of newly born infants would live between birth and age 75) was higher by 1.25 to 6.29

years for men and 1.09 to 3.44 years for women in Western compared to Central and Eastern

Europe. Excluding neonatal deaths, mortality from conditions amenable to medical intervention

accounted for 11 to 50 percent of the difference in temporary life expectancy among men and 24

to 59 percent of the difference among women. Gjonça, Brockman, and Maier (2000) report that

among those older than 79 mortality in Western Germany was decreasing since the 1970s whereas

in East Germany mortality did not decline until the late 1980s and the decline accelerated sharply

after German re-unification when the Western health care and pension system was installed in

East Germany and when purchases of fresh fruits and vegetables increased. Bailey and Garber


                                                22
(1997) point out that the United States devotes more resources to curing lung cancer, breast cancer,

and diabetes than the United Kingdom and has the more favorable outcomes for breast and lung

cancer whereas the United Kingdom has the most favorable outcomes for diabetes, a condition

controlled by patient behavior not by capital intensive equipment.

           Evidence for the effects of medical care on mortality also come from clinical studies of

specific conditions. Cutler, McClellan, and Newhouse (1999) document the substantial change

in heart attack treatment from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s and, based upon their review of

clinical studies, conclude that changes in medical treatment used in the management of acute

myocardial infarction account for approximately 55 percent of the reduction in mortality that has

occurred in acute myocardial infarction cases between 1975 and 1995, a time period when heart

attack mortality fell by almost one-third. Their analysis of Medicare claims data from 1984 to

1991 confirms that mortality rates following a heart attack have fallen sharply (by 2 percentage

points during the initial hospital stay and by 5 percentage points after one year) and have fallen

more for heart attack patients than for the general population of the same age, suggesting that

improved medical treatment is the most likely explanation.

           The shift from salting and smoking to preserve foods to refrigeration has been pointed

to as an explanation for the decline in stroke mortality.11 Thus in Belgium where only 21 percent

of households had a refrigerator in 1960 compared to 96 percent in the United States (Lebergott

1993: 111), researchers documented a 50 percent decline in mean 24-hour sodium excretion in

subjects studied between 1966 and 1979 (e.g. Joossens, Kesteloot, and Amery 1979). But, a

comparison of age-adjusted international stroke mortality trends (see de Looper and Bhatia 1998)

reveals no clear pattern by refrigerator diffusion. In the United States 44 percent of homes had a

refrigerator in 1940, a level achieved in France only 20 years later (Lebergott 1993: 111, 113), but


  11
     It has also been pointed to as an explanation for declines in stomach cancer because of the interaction between
salt and helicobactor pylori (Manton, Stallard, and Corder 1997).


                                                        23
declines in stroke mortality for men and women were of a similar order of magnitude (around 70

percent) in the two countries between 1950-54 and 1992. Cummins (1983) found that although

salt purchases in England and Wales declined between 1958 and 1978, coincident with declines

in stroke mortality, the picture is confused by an increase in meals eaten outside the home and

by the consumption of more processed foods. Other scholars have questioned whether there

even is a relationship between the sodium contents of food and salt use and hypertension (e.g.

Harlan et al. 1984). Lawlor et al. (2002) used data on British autopsies to infer that although both

cerebral infarct mortality and cerebral hemorrhage mortality have fallen since 1932, the different

patterns suggest that the aetiological factors differ. Estimated cerebral infarct mortality first rose

and then declined sharply after the 1960s, following a pattern similar to that of coronary heart

disease mortality. In contrast, estimated cerebral hemorrhage mortality declined steadily. They

hypothesize that whereas smoking and cholesterol may be important risk factors for coronary

heart disease and cerebral infarct, early life risk factors may be more important for cerebral

hemorrhage.12

           Rising urbanization and industrialization, signalled by the heavy black clouds that hung

over many early twentieth century cities (Stradling 1999), may have initially contributed to an

upsurge in the United States in respiratory disease and mortality, which then declined with anti-

smoke and anti-pollution efforts after World War II. Studies based upon both geographic and

temporal variation in air pollution find substantial effects of pollution on mortality and health.

Ransom and Pope (1995) measured the external health costs of air pollution by using variation in

the operation of a steel mill in a mountain valley in Central Utah and by using a nearby valley as

a control. They reported that elevated pollution levels were associated with significant declines

in childrens’ lung function and that deaths in Utah county when the steel mill was operating were


  12
     Birth weight is strongly inversely associated with cerebral hemorrhage but not with cerebral infarct (Hyppönen
et al. 2001; Eriksson et al. 2000).


                                                        24
3.2 percent higher per day than when it was not. Chay and Greenstone (2003) used geographic

variation in the effects of the 1981-1982 recession to find that pollution significantly affects infant

deaths, particularly within one month and one day of birth, suggesting that fetal exposure may be

harmful. They also find that the incidence of low birth weight babies (less than 2500 grams) falls

with declines in pollution.

          Another environmental hazard at the beginning of the twentieth century was lead poi-

soning, which by impairing the immune system, could have far reaching effects on older age

mortality (e.g. see Fischbein et al. 1993). Troesken (2003) documents that in 1897 half of United

States municipalities were using water from lead pipes and that lead levels in Massachusetts towns

ranged from 3 to 411 times current Environmental Protection Agency guidelines. He finds that

the use of lead pipes increased infant mortality rates by 25 to 50 percent, depending on the age

of the lead pipes and on the corrosiveness of the water supply. Corrosiveness of the water supply

was a problem particularly in New England. Troesken (2003) estimates that between 1910 and

1921, the decline in lead levels in New Hampshire water either from the gradual oxidization of

lead pipes and their replacement or from declining industrial pollution cut infant deaths rates by

up 16 percent. Given that roughly 28 percent of all births in the death registration areas were from

New England, we calculate that if all of New England experienced New Hampshire’s decline in

lead levels then 12 percent of the decline in infant mortality between 1910 and 1921 is explained

by reductions in lead levels.



8    The Mortality of the Oldest-Old

The evidence that we have presented suggests that the environment determines the level of

mortality. But, by examining advanced ages can we say anything about the mortality trajectory?

Is its shape the biological constant postulated by Robine (2003) in which mortality rates increase


                                                  25
and then plateau at very advanced ages? Figure 6 presents suggestive evidence from a sample of

Union Army veterans who survived to age 85.13 Mortality rates increase at a regular rate from

age 85 to age 90, continue to increase at ages 90 to 95 and 95 to 98, but at lower rates, and then

plateau. The oldest age of death is 105. The nonparametric estimate of the hazard (not shown)

first rises and then declines after around age 98. Our evidence can only be suggestive – because

95 percent of the sample died before reaching age 95 and 99 percent of the sample died before

reaching age 99 there are only 12 observations on the mortality plateau.

           Very few environmental characteristics predict survival among the oldest-old. Men who

were farmers circa 1900 lived longer than non-farmers and men who had not been wounded in

the war lived longer than men who had. In contrast, when we did not restrict our sample to

the oldest-old we found substantial effects on older age mortality of quarter of birth, residency

in early childhood, occupation, wealth at young ages, and infectious disease experience when

young. However, in our younger sample we did not find a statistically significant effect of war

wounds and we found somewhat smaller farm versus non-farm occupational effects.



9        Conclusion

This paper has used longitudinal data on past populations who faced extreme variations in local

environmental conditions to study the role of environmental stress throughout the life cycle on

older-age mortality. We found that environmental insults in early childhood and during young

adulthood reduced life expectancy. Among Union Army veterans age 60-74 in 1900, those born

in either the second or third quarter relative to the fourth, those enlisting in a large city, and


    13
     The sample used differs from that used in our previous analysis. We use all Union Army veterans who survived
to age 85 and who were on the pension rolls by age 85 regardless of their pension or survivorship status in 1900 or
their age in 1900. We verified birth year using both the military service records and the pension records.




                                                       26
those of low socioeconomic status in their youth whether measured by occupation at enlistment

or family wealth before the war did not live as long and were less likely to become the oldest-old.

The infectious disease that soldiers had while in the army affected their later probability of death

from a specific cause. Those who had had rheumatic fever as young men in the army were more

likely to die of heart disease after age 60, those who had had tuberculosis were more likely to

die of infectious disease, those who had had a respiratory disease were more likely to die of a

respiratory disease, and those who had had diarrhea or had been prisoners of war were more

likely to die of stomach ailments. Among Americans in their sixties and seventies in 1960-1980,

mortality rates also varied by place of birth and mortality rates were higher for those born in the

second and third quarters relative to the fourth quarter, but the magnitude of the effect of quarter

of birth, particularly for the third quarter, was smaller in these more recent data than among Union

Army veterans. We showed that in the first third of the twentieth century, the birth weights of

children born in the spring were lower than those of children born in the summer, suggesting that

quarter of birth may in part proxy for intrauterine growth retardation, though it could also reflect

seasonal differences in the disease environment a child was born into. We calculated that 16 to 17

percent of the difference in older age ten year mortality rates between Union Army veterans and

Americans in 1960-1980 was attributable to the declining impact of quarter of birth on mortality

rates. We also estimated that at least one-fifth of the increase between 1900 and 1999 in the

probability of a 65 year old surviving to age 85 may be attributable to early life conditions.

          What explains improvements in early life conditions? The twentieth century witnessed

the filtration and chlorination of water, the construction of integrated sewage systems and the

adoption of sewage treatment, the cleaning of the milk supply and the eradication of bovine

tuberculosis, widespread vaccination against childhood diseases, improved commercial food

processing and the supplementation of foods with iodine and iron, the decline in exposure to

environmental pollution and poisons both in the home and in the workplace, the decrease in


                                                27
crowding that coincided with reductions in fertility and immigration and with rising incomes,

and the availability of more varied and fresher food with the growing use of refrigeration in

transportion, in stores, and in the home. The relative contributions of public health campaigns,

technological change, and rising wealth to the improvement in early life conditions still remains

an issue for future research.

          Our findings have implications for future mortality trends. The cohort which will

reach age 65 in 2020 was born in 1955 after the steep plunge in infant and child mortality and

the historical record suggests that this cohort may be particularly long-lived compared to past

cohorts. However, mortality rates may not fall as steeply for the cohorts born after 1955 as

for earlier cohorts. The difference in early life conditions for cohorts born in 1955 instead of

1995 was not as stark as that for cohorts born in 1915 instead of 1955. For cohorts born after

1955 improvements in older age mortality rates will need to come from medical care or better

health habits and unless the rate of innovation in medical increases the rate of reduction in future

mortality improvements may not be as sharp as it has been in the recent past. Our suggestive

evidence that the mortality trajectory of Union Army veterans reached a plateau at older ages

does however provide grounds for optimism. As long as we can change the level of the plateau,

investments in health at very old ages will not hit diminishing returns.




References
 [1] Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee. 2002. “Does Low Birth Weight
     Matter? Evidence from the U.S. Population of Twin Births.” Center for Labor Economics
     University of California Berkeley Working Paper No. 53.

 [2] Baily, Martin Neil and Alan M. Garber. 1997 “Health Care Productivity.” Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, Microeconomics: 143-202.

 [3] Barker, D.J.P. 1992. Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease. London: British Medical
     Journal Publishing Group.


                                                28
 [4] Barker, D.J.P. 1994. Mothers, Babies, and Disease in Later Life. London: British Medical
     Journal Publishing Group.

 [5] Beardsley, Edward H. 1987. “A History of Neglect: Health Care for Blacks and Mill Workers
     in the Twentieth Century South.” Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Press.

 [6] Blair D, Habicht JP, Sims EAH, et al. 1984. “Evidence for an increased risk of hypertension
     with centrally located body fat and the effect of race and sex on this risk.” American Journal
     of Epidemiology. 119(4): 526-40.

 [7] Chapin, C.V. 1924. “Death Among Taxpayers and Non-Taxpayers, Income Tax, Providence,
     1865.” American Journal of Public Health. 14: 647.

 [8] Charlesworth, Brian. 2001. “Patterns of age-specific means and genetic variances of mortal-
     ity rates predicted by the mutation-accumulating theory of ageing.” Journal of Theoretical
     Biology 210: 47-65.

 [9] Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
     Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Reces-
     sion.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Forthcoming.

[10] Christensen, K., J.W. Vaupel, H.V. Holm, and A.I. Yashin. 1995. “Mortality among twins age
     6: Fetal origins hypothesis versus twin method.” British Medical Journal. 310(?): 432-436.

[11] Condran, Gretchen and Rose A. Cheney. “Mortality Trends in Philadelphia: Age- and
     Case-Specific Death Rates 1870-1930.” Demography. 19(1): 97-123.

[12] Costa, Dora L. 2003a. “Race and Pregnancy Outcomes in the Twentieth Century: A Long-
     Term Comparison.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9593.

[13] Costa, Dora L. 2003b. “Understanding Mid-Life and Older Age Mortality Declines: Evi-
     dence from Union Army Veterans.” Journal of Econometrics.

[14] Costa, Dora L. 2002. “Changing Chronic Disease Rates and Long-term Declines in Func-
     tional Limitation Among Older Men.” Demography. 39(1): 119-138.

[15] Costa, Dora L. 2000. “Understanding the Twentieth Century Decline in Chronic Conditions
     Among Older Men.” Demography. 37(1): 53-72.

[16] Costa, Dora L. 1993. “Height, Weight, Wartime Stress, and Older Age Mortality: Evidence
     from the Union Army Records.” Explorations in Economic History. 30: 424-449.

[17] Costa, Dora L. and Richard H. Steckel. 1997. “Long-Term trends in Health, Welfare, and
     Economics Growth in the United States.” In R. Floud and R.H. Steckel (Eds), Health and
     Welfare During Industrialization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER,



                                               29
[18] Cummins, Richard O. 1983. “Recent changes in salt use and stroke mortality in England and
     Wales. Any help for the salt-hypertension debate?” Journal of Epidemiology and Community
     Health. 37: 25-28.

[19] Cutler, David M., Mark McClellan, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 1999. “The Costs and Benefits
     of Intensive Treatment for Cardiovascular Disease.” Chapter 2 in Measuring the Price of
     Medical Services, edited by J.E. Triplett. Washington DC: The Brookings Institute.

[20] Doblhammer, Gabriele. 1999. “Longevity and month of birth: Evidence from Austria and
     Denmark.” Demographic Research.
     http://www.demographic-research.org/Volumes/Vol1/3

[21] Doblhammer, Gabriele and James W. Vaupel. 2001. “Lifespan depends on month of birth.”
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 98(5): 2934-2939.

[22] Elo, Irma T. and Samuel H. Preston. 1992. “Effects of early-life conditions on adult mortality:
     A review.” Population Index. 58(2): 186-212.

[23] Eriksson, J.G., T. Forsén, J. Tuomilehto, C. Osmond, and D.J. Barker. 2000. “Early growth,
     adult income, and risk of stroke.” Stroke. 31(4): 869-74.

[24] Ewbank, Douglas and Samuel H. Preston. 1990. “Personal Health Behavior and the Decline
     in Infant and Child Mortality: The United States, 1900–1930. Proceedings of the Health
     Transition Workshop, Canberra, Australia, 15-19 May.

[25] Ferrie, Joseph P. 2003. “The Poor and the Dead: Socioeconomic Status and Mortality in the
     United States, 1850-1860.” In Dora L. Costa, Ed, Health and Labor Force Participation Over
     the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.

[26] Fischbein, A., P. Tsang, J.J. Luo, J.P. Roboz, J.P. Jiang, and J.G. Bekesi. 1993. “The Immune
     System as a Target for Subclinical Lead Related Toxicity.” British Journal of Industrial
     Medicine. 50: 185-86.

[27] Fogel, Robert W. 1994. “Economic Growth, Population Theory, Physiology: The Bearing
     of Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy.” American Economic Review.
     84(3): 369-395.

[28] Fogel, Robert W. and Dora L. Costa. 1997. “A Theory of Technophysio Evolution, With
     Some Implications for Forecasting Population, Health Care Costs, and Pension Costs.”
     Demography. 34(1): 49-66.

[29] Folsom AR, Prineas RJ, Kaye SA, et al. 1989. “Body fat distribution and self-reported
     prevalence of hypertension, heart attack, and heart disease in older women.” International
     Journal of Epidemiology. 18(2): 361-7.




                                                30
[30] Forsén, T., J.G. Eriksson, J. Tuomilehto, C. Osmond, and D.J. Barker. 1999. “Growth in
     utero and during childhood among women who develop coronary heart disease. Longitudinal
     study.” British Medical Journal. 319(7222): 1403-7.

[31] Fries, J.F. 1980. “Aging, Natural Death, and the Compression of Morbidity.” New England
     Journal of Medicine. 303: 130-36.

[32] Gavrilov, L.A. and N.S. Gavrilov. 1999. Journal of Anti-Aging Medicine. 2, 365-366.

[33] Gjonça, Arjan, Hilke Brockmann, and Heiner Maier. 2000. “Old-Age Mortality in Germany
     prior to and after Reunification.” Demographic Research.
     http://www.demographic-research.org/Volumes/Vol3/1

[34] Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo. 1989. “The Poor at Birth: Birth Weights and Infant
     Mortality at Philadelphia’s Almshouse Hospital, 1848-1873.” Explorations in Economic
     History. 26(3): 360-79.

[35] Harlan, William R., Alan L. Hull, Robert L. Schmouder, J. Richard Landis, Frances E.
     Thompson, and Frances A. Larkin. 1984. “Blood Pressure and Nutrition in Adults: The
     National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.” American Journal of Epidemiology.
     120(1): 17-28.

[36] Horiuchi, Shiro and John R. Wilmoth. 1998. “Deceleration in the age pattern of mortality at
     older ages.” Demography. 35(4): 391-412.

[37] Huntington, E. 1938. Season of Birth. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

[38] Huxley, Rachel, Andrew Neil, and Rory Collins. 2002. “Unravelling the fetal origins hy-
     pothesis: is there really an inverse association between birthweight and subsequent blood
     pressure?” The Lancet. 360: 659-665.

[39] Hyppönen, E. D.A. Leon, M.G. Kenward, and H. Lithell. 2001. “Prenatal growth and risk
     of occlusive and haemorrhagic stroke in Swedish men and women born 1915-29: historical
     cohort study.” British Medical Journal. 323(3): 1033-1034.

[40] Joossens, J.V., H. Kesteloot, and A. Amery. 1979. “Salt intake and mortality from stroke.”
     New England Journal of Medicine. 300: 1396.

[41] Kanjanapipatkul, Tayatat. 2002. “Seasonal Fluctuations in Food Prices, Foreign Trade, and
     their Interaction with Technophysio Evolution.” Unpublished Phd Dissertation. University
     of Chicago.

[42] Kannisto, Väinö. 1994. Development of oldest-old mortality, 1950-1990. Odense, Denmark:
     Odense University Press.
     http://www.demogr.mpg.de/Papers/Books/Monographs1/OldestOld.htm



                                              31
[43] Kannisto, Väinö. 1996. The Advancing Frontier of Survival: Life Tables for Old Age.
     Odense, Denmark: Odense University Press.
     http://www.demogr.mpg.de/Papers/Books/Monograph3/The advancing.htm

[44] Kannisto, V., K. Christensen, and J.W. Vaupel. 1997. “No increased mortality later in life
     for cohorts born during famine.” American Journal of Epidemiology. 145(11): 987-994.

[45] Lagerström, M, K. Bremme, P. Eneroth, and C-G Janson. 1994. “Long-term Development for
     Boys and Girls at Age 16-18 as Related to Birth Weight and Gestational Age. International
     Journal of Psychophysiology. 17(2):175-80.

[46] Lawlor, Debbie A., George Davey Smith, David A. Leon, Jonathan AC Sterne, Shah
     Ebrahim. 2002. “Secular trends in mortality by stroke subtype in the 20th century: a
     restrospective analysis.” The Lancet. Published online Nov 12, 2002,
     http://image.thelancet.com/extras/02art1139web.pdf

[47] Lebergott, Stanley. 1993. Pursuing Happiness: American Consumers in the Twentieth
     Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[48] Lee, Chulhee. 2003. “Prior Exposure to Disease and Later Health and Mortality: Evidence
     from Civil War Records.” In Dora L. Costa, Ed, Health and Labor Force Participation Over
     the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.

[49] Leon, David A., Hans O. Lithell, Denny Vȧgerö, Ilona Koupilovaá, Rawya Mohsen, Lars
     Berglund, Ulla-Britt Lithell, and Paul M. McKeigue. 1998. “Reduced fetal growth rate and
     increased risk of death from ischaemic heart disease: Cohort study of 15,000 Swedish men
     and women born 1915-29.” British Medical Journal. 317: 241-45.

[50] Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2002. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality
     in the United States.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8986.

[51] de Looper, Michael and Kuldeep Bhatia. 1998. “International Health – how Australia com-
     pares.” Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Canberra. AIHW cat. no. PHE8.

[52] Manton, Kenneth G., Eric Stallard, and Larry Corder. 1997. “Changes in the Age Dependence
     of Mortality and Disability: Cohort and Other Determinants.” Demography. 34(1): 135-158.

[53] Manton, Kenneth G. and James W. Vaupel. 1995. “Survival after the age of 50 in the United
     States, Sweden, France, England, and Japan.” The New England Journal of Medicine.
     333(18): 1232-5.

[54] McCarron, P., C.L. Hart, D. Hole, G. Davey Smith. 2001. “The relation between adult
     height and haemorrhagic and ischaemic stroke in the Renfrew/Paisley study.” Journal of
     Epidemiology and Community Health. 55: 404-5.




                                              32
[55] Ohlson LO, Larsson B, Svardsudd K, et al. 1985. “The influence of body fat distribution on
     the incidence of diabetes mellitus. 13.5 years of follow-up of the participants in the study of
     men born in 1913.” Diabetes. 34(10): 1055-8.

[56] Paneth, Nigel and Mervyn Susser. 1995. “Early origin of coronary heart disease (the “Barker
     hypothesis”).” British Medical Journal. 310(6977):411-12.

[57] Paz, I, D.S. Seidman, Y.L. Dnon, A. Laor, D.K. Stevenson, and R. Gale. 1993. “Are children
     born small for gestational age at increased risk of short stature?” American Journal of
     Diseases of Children. 147(3): 337-9.

[58] Perls, Thomas T., John Wilmoth, Robin Levenson, Maureen Drinkwater, Melissa Cohen,
     Hazel Bogan, Erin Joyce, Stephanie Brewster, Louis Kunkel, and Annibale Puca. 2002.
     “Life-long sustained mortality advantage of siblings of centenarians.” Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences. 99(12): 8442-8447.

[59] Preston, Samuel H. and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late
     Nineteenth Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[60] Preston, Samuel H., Mark E. Hill, and Greg L. Drevenstedt. 1998. “Childhood conditions that
     predict survival to advanced ages among African-Americans.” Social Science and Medicine.
     47(9): 231-46.

[61] Preston, Samuel and Etienne Van de Walle. 1978. “French Urban Mortality in the Nineteenth
     Century.” Population Studies. 32: 275-97.

[62] Ransom, Michael R. and C. Arden Pope III. 1995. “External Health Costs of a Steel Mill.”
     Contemporary Economic Policy. 13(2): 86-97.

[63] Robine, Jean-Marie. 2001. “A new biodemographic model to explain the trajectory of
     mortality.” Experimental Gerontology. 36: 899-914.

[64] Robine, Jean-Marie. 2003. “Life Course, Environmental Change, and Life Span.” In James
     R. Carey and Shripad Tuljapurkar, Eds., Life Span: Evolutionary, Ecological, and De-
     mographic Perspectives, A supplement to Population and Development Review, 29(2003):
     229-238.

[65] Robine, Jean-Marie and James W. Vaupel. 2002. “Emergence of Supercentenarians in Low-
     Mortality Countries.” North American Actuarial Journal. 6(3): 54-63.

[66] Rochester, Anna. 1923. Infant Mortality: Results of a Field Study in Baltimore, MD. Based
     on Births in One Year. U.S. Department of Labor. Children’s Bureau. Bureau Publication
     No. 119. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.

[67] Sánchez, Mario. 2003. “Internal Migration, Return Migration and Mortality: Evidence
     from Panel Data on Union Army Veterans.” In Dora L. Costa, Ed, Health and Labor Force

                                                33
     Participation Over the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press. Forthcoming.

[68] Scrimshaw, Nevin S. 1997. “More evidence that foetal nutrition contributes to chronic
     disease in later life.” British Medical Journal. 315(7112): 825-20.

[69] Steckel, Richard H. 1986. “A Peculiar Population: The Nutrition, Health, and Mortality of
     American Slaves from Childhood to Maturity.” Journal of Economic History 46(3): 721-41.

[70] Steckel, Richard H. 1988. “The Health and Mortality of Women and Children, 1850-1860.”
     Journal of Economic History. 48(2): 333-45.

[71] Stein, C.E., C.H. Fall, K. Kumaran, C. Osmond, V. Cox, and D.J. Barker. 1996. “Fetal
     growth and coronary disease in south India.” Lancet. 348(9037): 1269-73.

[72] Stradling, David. 1999. Smokestacks and Progressives: Environmentalists, Engineers, and
     Air Quality in America, 1881-1951. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

[73] Terry Richard B., William F. Page, and William L. Haskell. 1992. “Waist/hip ratio, body
     mass index and premature cardiovascular disease mortality in US Army veterans during a
     twenty-three year follow-up study.” International Journal of Obesity. 16(6): 417-23.

[74] Thatcher, A. Roger, Väinö Kannisto, and James W. Vaupel. 1998. The Force of Mortality at
     Ages 80 to 120. Odense: Odense University Press.
     http://www.demogr.mpg.de/Papers/Books/Monograph5/ForMort.htm

[75] Troesken, Werner. 2003. “Lead Water Pipes and Infant Mortality in Turn-of-the-Century
     Massachusetts.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9549.

[76] Vaupel, James W. 1997. “The remarkable improvements in survival at older ages.” Philosoph-
     ical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences. 352(1363):
     1799-1804.

[77] Vaupel, James W. and Bernard Jeune. 1995. “The Emergence and Proliferation of Centenar-
     ians.” Exceptional Longevity. Odense, Denmark. Odense University Press.
     http:
     www.demogr.mpg.de/Papers/Books/Monograph2/

[78] Vaupel, James W., James R. Carey, Kaare Christiansen, Thomas E. Johnson, Anatoli I.
     Yashin, Niels V. Holm, Ivan A. Iachine, Väinö Kannisto, Aziz A. Khazaeli, Pablo Liedo,
     Valter D. Longo, Yi Zeng, Kenneth G. Manton, and James W. Curtsinger. 1998. “Biodemo-
     graphic trajectories of longevity.” Science. 28: 855-860.

[79] Velkova, Angelika, Judith H. Wolleswinkel-Van den Bosch, and Johan P. Mackenbach. 1997.
     “The East-West Life Expectancy Gap: Differences in Mortality from Conditions Amenable
     to Medical Intervention.” International Journal of Epidemiology. 26(1): 75-84.

                                              34
[80] Ward, W. Peter. 1993. Birth Weight and Economic Growth: Women’s Living Standards in
     the Industrializing West. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[81] Wilmoth, John R. and Shiro Horiuchi. 1999. “Rectangularization Revisted: Variability of
     Age at Death Within Human Populations.” Demography. 36(4): 475-95.

[82] Wilmoth, J.R., and Hans Lundström. 1995. “Extreme Longevity in Five Countries.” Euro-
     pean Review of Population/Revue Européene de Démographie. 12: 63-93.

[83] Wilmoth, John R., Leo J. Deegan, Hans Lundström, and Shiro Horiuchi. 2000. “Increase of
     maximum life-span in Sweden, 1861-1999.” Journal of Experimental Gerontology. 35(9-
     10): 1111-1129.

[84] Yao, Chong-Hua, Martha L. Slattery, David R. Jacobs, Jr, Aaron R. Folsom, and Eileen T.
     Nelson. 1991. American Journal of Epidemiology. 134(11): 1278-1289.




                                             35
Table 1: Effects of Region and Season of Birth on Ten Year Mortality Rates of 60-79 Year-Olds
in the United States, 1960-1980

                                                                             Std
                                                                 Coef        Err
                              Dummy=1 if born in the
                                 Northeast
                                                                        z
                                 Midwest                        -0.014      0.006
                                 South                           -0.005     0.005
                                                                        z
                                 West                           -0.053      0.005
                              Dummy=1 if born in
                                 First quarter                    0.003     0.005
                                                                        z
                                 Second quarter                  0.030      0.006
                                                                        y
                                 Third quarter                   0.013      0.006
                                 Fourth quarter
                              Observations                          128
                              R2                                  0.984

          Source: Authors’ calculations from the Integrated Public Use Census Samples. Each
          observation is an age group, sex, cohort, region, and quarter of birth cell. The sample
          was restricted to the native-born. The dependent variable is the 10 year mortality rate of
          each cell. The mean weighted 10 year mortality rate was 0.36. Additional controls include
          dummies for age 70 or older, female, and birth cohort (1900-1909 and 1910-1919, with
          1890-1899 as the omitted category). The ordinary least squares regression is weighted
          by cell size. The symbols z and y indicate that the coefficient is statistically significantly
          different from zero at the 1 and 5 percent level, respectively.




                                                       36
Table 2: Effects of Foreign Birth on Ten Year Mortality Rates of White 60-79 Year Olds, by
Cohort


                                                           Census Year
                                                  1900-1920        1940-1990
                                                             Birth Year
                                                   1830-59 1870-99 1900-29
                                                                                    z            
                     Coefficient on foreign-birth      0.011     0.032   -0.029
                     Standard error                  (0.009) (0.007) (0.015)
                     R2                                0.992      0.993    0.987
                     Observations                         16         20       20
                     Mortality rate (weighted)         0.501      0.450    0.335

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Integrated Public Use Census Samples. Each observation is an age group, sex,
cohort, and native-born/foreign-born cell. The dependent variable is the 10 year mortality rate of each cell. Average
weighted mortality rates were 0.50, 0.45, and 0.34 for the 1830-59, 1870-99, 1900-29 cohorts, respectively. Additional
controls include dummies for age 70 or older, female, and birth cohort. The ordinary least squares regression is
weighted by cell size. The symbols z and indicate that the coefficient is statistically significantly different from zero
at the 1 and 10 percent level, respectively.




                                                         37
Table 3: Probability Model of Surviving to Age 85 and Hazard Model of Years to Death, Union
Army Veterans Age 60-74 in 1900
                                                                      Probit Model        Hazard Model
                                                                               Std         Haz     Std
                                                                       @P      Err         Rat     Err
                                                                       @x
                Dummy=1 if born
                  First quarter                                      -0.012    0.016       1.062    0.048
                  Second quarter                                    -0.036y    0.016      1.105y    0.051
                  Third quarter                                      -0.014    0.017      1.095 y   0.051
                  Fourth quarter
                Dummy=1 if enlisted in city with population of
                  50,000+                                           -0.055     0.027      1.241z    0.102
                  25,000-50,000                                      -0.028    0.032       1.063    0.096
                  2,500-25,000                                       -0.016    0.013       1.056    0.036
                  Less than 2,500
                Dummy=1 if personal property wealth in
                  1860 household above $250                           0.023    0.016      0.925     0.039
                Dummy=1 if occupation at enlistment
                  Farmer
                  Professional                                        0.022    0.038       1.024    0.097
                  Manager/Proprietor                                -0.100     0.044       1.183    0.211
                  Clerical/Service                                  -0.008     0.053       1.073    0.157
                  Craft                                              -0.034    0.018      1.130y    0.057
                  Service                                                                 1.118     0.076
                  Operative                                         -0.050y    0.022       2.022    0.836
                  Laborer                                            -0.014    0.021       1.074    0.062
                Dummy=1 if occupation circa 1900
                  Farmer
                  Professional                                       -0.001    0.034       1.079    0.098
                  Manager/Proprietor                                  0.008    0.026       0.976    0.067
                  Clerical/Service                                    0.001    0.034       0.956    0.087
                  Craft                                              -0.003    0.020       1.009    0.054
                  Operative                                          -0.024    0.024      1.208z    0.082
                  Service                                            -0.009    0.048       1.144    0.146
                  Laborer                                            -0.001    0.019       1.066    0.055
                Dummy=1 if was POW                                   -0.020    0.019       1.046    0.055
                Dummy=1 if in service had
                  Diarrhea                                           -0.002    0.012       1.017    0.034
                  Respiratory                                        -0.020    0.016       1.065    0.047
                  Measles                                             0.016    0.027       0.903    0.063
                  Tuberculosis                                        0.022    0.043       0.900    0.096
                  Rheumatism/rheumatic fever                         -0.022    0.016       1.033    0.045
                Observations                                          4,641                4,647
                Pseudo R2                                             0.030
                                                                                          0.090z    0.002
                 (42) for
                 2

                  Significance of all coefficients                                      481.770     0.000

The dependent variable for the probit equation is whether the individual lived until age 85, an age achieved by 17
percent of the sample. The dependent variable in the hazard model is years lived, where average years lived are 12.6
years. The symbols , y, and z indicate that in the probit the coefficient is significantly different from 0 and that in the
hazard model the coefficient is significantly different from 1, at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. Additional
covariates include age in 1900 dummies, indicators of missing occupational information, dummies for whether the
veteran was ever wounded in the war or ever had malaria, typhoid, stomach problems, or syphilis, dummies for size of
city of residence in 1900, marital status in 1900, a dummy indicating if quarter of birth was unknown, and dummies
indicating linkage to the 1860 and 1900 census.            38
Table 4: Independent Competing Risk Model of Years until Death from Heart Disease (Excluding
Stroke) and from Stroke, Union Army Veterans Age 60-74 in 1900


                                                                  Heart Disease            Stroke
                                                                  Haz      Std           Haz     Std
                                                                   Rat     Err           Rat     Err
                 Dummy=1 if born
                                                                                               y
                   First quarter                                  0.964 0.121           1.583      0.336
                                                                                               z
                   Second quarter                                 1.141 0.139           1.701      0.362
                                                                                              y
                   Third quarter                                 1.251 0.156            1.596      0.347
                   Fourth quarter
                 Dummy=1 if occupation circa 1900
                   Farmer
                   Professional                                   1.187      0.274      1.174      0.495
                   Manager/Proprietor                             1.146      0.217      1.510      0.430
                                                                        
                   Clerical/Service                              1.442       0.294      1.172      0.407
                                                                        y
                   Craft                                         1.319       0.183      1.429      0.325
                                                                                             
                   Operative                                     1.324       0.225     1.658       0.440
                   Service                                        1.472      0.407      1.921      0.788
                                                                        z
                   Laborer                                       1.392       0.185      1.051      0.245
                 Dummy=1 if in service had
                                                                        y
                   Rheumatism/rheumatic fever                    1.249 0.133             0.778 0.161
                 Observations                                     2,178                  2,178
                                                                       z
                                                                 0.081 0.005                   z
                                                                                        0.106 0.008
                 2(42) for
                    Significance of all coefficients             84.760      0.000     62.780 0.021

The dependent variables are years lived until death from the specific causes. The symbols , y, and z indicate that the
coefficient is significantly different from 1 at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. Additional covariates include
dummies for size of city of enlistment, a dummy for personal property wealth in 1860, dummies for occupation at
enlistment, a dummy if the veteran was a POW, dummies if the veteran had in service diarrhea, respiratory conditions,
measles, or tuberculopsis, age in 1900 dummies, indicators of missing occupational information, dummies for whether
the veteran was ever wounded in the war or ever had malaria, typhoid, stomach problems, or syphilis, dummies for size
of city of residence in 1900, marital status in 1900, a dummy indicating if quarter of birth was unknown, and dummies
indicating linkage to the 1860 and 1900 census.




                                                           39
Table 5: Effects of Illness in Service on Years until Death from Selected Acute Conditions
(Independent Competing Risks Model), Union Army Veterans Age 60-74 in 1900


                                                    Infectious           Respiratory            Stomach
                                                   Haz      Std          Haz     Std          Haz     Std
                                                   Rat      Err          Rat     Err          Rat     Err
                                                                                                    z
       Dummy=1 if was POW                          1.170 0.476           1.027 0.231         1.592 0.393
       Dummy=1 if in service had
                                                                                                    z
         Diarrhea                                  0.828     0.235       0.906    0.130      1.562      0.276
                                                                              z
         Respiratory                               0.967     0.344      1.982     0.320       1.389     0.307
                                                                                                   
         Measles                                   0.741     0.541       0.864    0.285      1.782      0.579
                                                         z
         Tuberculosis                             4.113      1.870       0.988    0.326       0.240     0.243
         Rheumatism/rheumatic fever                0.830     0.303       0.855    0.164       1.070     0.243
       Observations                                2,178                 2,178                2,178
                                                 -0.027     0.020      0.092 z
                                                                                  0.008      0.037  y
                                                                                                        0.012
       2 (42) for
          Significance of all coefficients 38.750            0.614     73.490      0.002    45.570      0.326

The dependent variables are years lived until death from the specific causes. The category respiratory includes chronic
respiratory conditions, pneumonia, influenza, and acute bronchitis. The category stomach includes gastritis/duondentis
and ulcers. The category infectious includes tuberculosis. The symbols , y, and z indicate that the coefficient is
significantly different from 1 at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively. Additional covariates include dummies
for quarter of birth, dummies for size of city of enlistment, a dummy for personal property wealth in 1860, dummies
for occupation at enlistment, dummies for occupation circa 1900, age dummies, indicators of missing occupational
information, dummies for whether the veteran was ever wounded in the war or ever had malaria, typhoid, stomach
problems, or syphilis, dummies for size of city of residence in 1900, marital status in 1900, a dummy indicating if
quarter of birth was unknown, and dummies indicating linkage to the 1860 and 1900 census.




                                                        40
Table 6: Comparison of the Effects of Quarter of Birth on Ten Year Mortality Rates of 60-79 Year
Olds, Union Army Veterans, 1900, and Native-Born Americans, 1960-1980


                                                        UA Veterans            1960-1980
                                                                Std                   Std
                                                        Coef    Err           Coef    Err
                          Dummy=1 if born in
                            First quarter     0.020                0.022      0.003 0.005
                                                                                   z
                            Second quarter   0.042                 0.023     0.030 0.006
                                                                                   y
                            Third quarter    0.041                 0.023     0.013 0.006
                            Fourth quarter
                          Observations                   4927                   128
                          Pseudo R2 /R2                 0.036                 0.984

The Union Army regression results are from a probit equation on individual level data in which the dependent variable
is whether the veteran died within 10 years of being observed alive in 1900. The control variables are the full set of
control variables used in Table 3. The 1960-1980 results are from the weighted ordinary least squares equation using
group-level data given in Table 1. Ten year mortality rates in the Union Army sample are 0.445 and in 1960-1980 are
0.358. The symbols z and y indicate that the coefficient is statistically significantly different from zero at the 1 and 5
percent level, respectively.




                                                          41
Figure 1: Survival Probabilities Over Time by Quarter of Birth, Union Army Veterans Age 60-74
in 1900




Source: Authors’ calculations. Survival probabilities are adjusted for age. The sample was restricted to native-born
veterans who were on the pension rolls by 1900.




                                                        42
Figure 2: Survival Probabilities Over Time by Size of City of Enlistment, Union Army Veterans
Age 60-74 in 1900




Source: Authors’ calculations. Survival probabilities are adjusted for age. The sample was restricted to native-born
veterans who were on the pension rolls by 1900.




                                                        43
Figure 3: Birth Weight and Month of Birth by Race of Live Births Attended by Johns Hopkins
Physicians, 1897-1935




Source: Authors’ calculations. See Costa (2003) for data details.




                                                        44
Figure 4: Survival Probabilities Over Time by Personal Property Wealth in 1860 Family, Union
Army Veterans Age 60-74 in 1900




Source: Authors’ calculations. High Wealth is defined as holdings of $250 or more. Survival probabilities are
adjusted for age. The sample was restricted to native-born veterans who were on the pension rolls by 1900.




                                                     45
Figure 5: Survival Probabilities Over Time by Occupation at Enlistment, Union Army Veterans
Age 60-74 in 1900




Source: Authors’ calculations. Survival probabilities are adjusted for age. The sample was restricted to native-born
veterans who were on the pension rolls by 1900.




                                                        46
            Figure 6: Probability of Death for Union Army Veterans Age 85 and Older




Source: Authors’ calculations. The sample consists of 2036 Union Army veterans who survived to age 85 and were
on the pension rolls by age 85. All ages were verified using both the pension records and the military records. The
dashed lines indicate 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                       47
