                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   UNBUNDLING INSTITUTIONS

                                            Daron Acemoglu
                                             Simon Johnson

                                          Working Paper 9934
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9934


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




We thank Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Amir Licht, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and
seminar participants at the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, MIT, and the University of Illinois for
helpful comments and discussions. We also thank Simeon Djankov, Ross Levine, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes,
and Todd Mitton for generously providing data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Daron Acemoglu and Simon Johnson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Unbundling Institutions
Daron Acemoglu and Simon Johnson
NBER Working Paper No. 9934
August 2003
JEL No. E44, G18, K00, N20, P16, P17

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the importance of "property rights institutions", which protect citizens against

expropriation by the government and powerful elites, and "contracting institutions", which enable

private contracts between citizens. We exploit exogenous variation in both types of institutions

driven by colonial history, and document strong first-stage relationships between property rights

institutions and the determinants of European colonization (settler mortality and population density

before colonization), and between contracting institutions and the identity of the colonizing power.

Using this instrumental variables strategy, we find that property rights institutions have a first-order

effect on long-run economic growth, investment, and financial development. Contracting institutions

appear to matter only for the form of financial intermediation. A possible interpretation for this

pattern is that individuals often find ways of altering the terms of their formal and informal contracts

to avoid the adverse effects of contracting institutions but are unable to do so against the risk of

expropriation.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

Simon Johnson
Sloan School of Management
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu
1         Introduction
Douglass North opens Structure and Change in Economic History by distinguishing be-
tween a “contract theory” of the state and a “predatory theory” of the state (1981, pp.
20-27). According to the first theory, the state and associated institutions provide the
legal framework that enables private contracts to facilitate economic transactions (i.e.,
“reduce transaction costs”). According to the second, the state is an instrument for
transferring resources from one group to another. Throughout his book, North develops
a story combining the two theories, and argues that good institutions will simultaneously
support private contracts and provide checks against expropriation by the government or
other politically powerful groups.
        There is a growing consensus among economists and political scientists that the broad
outlines of North’s story are correct: the social, economic, legal, and political organization
of a society, i.e., its “institutions,” is a primary determinant of economic performance.
However, like North, the contemporary literature has not attempted to determine the
relative roles of institutions supporting private contracts (“contracting institutions”) and
institutions constraining government and elite expropriation (“property rights institu-
tions”).1 Instead, it has documented the importance of a “cluster” of institutions that
include both contracting and private property protection elements. This is in spite of
well-established theoretical arguments emphasizing each set of institutions. For exam-
ple, the contract theory literature, starting with Coase (1937, and especially 1960) and
Williamson (1975, 1985), links the eﬃciency of organizations and societies to what type
of contracts can be written and enforced, and thus underscores the importance of con-
tracting institutions (see also Grossman and Hart, 1986, Hart and Moore, 1990, and Hart,
1995). In contrast, other authors emphasize the importance of private property rights,
especially their protection against government expropriation (see, among others, Jones,
1981, De Long and Shleifer, 1993, or Olson, 2000).
        This paper is an attempt to unbundle the broad cluster of institutions, and learn more
    1
     Alternatively, we could refer to institutions constraining government expropriation as “political in-
stitutions” as we did in a previous version of this paper. We decided not to use this term, since some
readers interpreted it as referring to the type of constitution or to the ideological leanings of politicians
or society. In addition, “contracting institutions” could be called “legal institutions”. We opted for the
former term, since certain aspects of the legal institutions, such as the independence of the judiciary from
politics, may have an important eﬀect on the security of property rights against expropriation by the
government or other powerful groups.



                                                     1
about the relative importance of contracting versus property rights institutions at the
macro level. Such an attempt has to start with some proxies for the two sets of institu-
tions. We will proxy property rights institutions using two alternative measures: Political
Risk Services’ assessment of protection against government expropriation in a country,
and Polity IV’s constraint on the executive measure.2 For contracting institutions, we
would like a measure of costs of enforcing private contracts (contracts where both par-
ties are ordinary citizens), and we proxy this with the data on legal formalism developed
and used by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002, 2003). This vari-
able measures the number of formal legal procedures necessary to resolve a simple case
of collecting on an unpaid check or evicting a non-paying tenant. These authors show
that countries with greater legal formalism have higher costs of enforcing simple contracts,
longer delays in courts, and lower perceived fairness and eﬃciency of the judiciary system.
It is then natural to presume that greater legal formalism is a proxy for worse contracting
institutions.3 In Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions, long-run economic growth,
investment rates, and financial development are correlated with both contracting insti-
tutions and property rights institutions. However, OLS correlations do not establish a
causal eﬀect. To make further progress, we need to isolate potentially exogenous sources
of variation in both legal formalism and private property rights.
       Fortunately, the literature oﬀers potential instruments for both variables. Djankov,
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002, 2003), building on work by La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) and by legal scholars such as Dawson
(1960) and Merryman (1985), show that the “legal origin” of a country has an important
eﬀect on the degree of legal formalism, and most relevant for our sample, countries with
French legal origin have substantially higher degrees of legal formalism than English legal
origin countries. Moreover, as they point out, at least for former European colonies, the
legal system can be thought of as “exogenous”, because it was largely imposed by colonial
   2
     Constraint on the executive is clearly related to the “political institutions” of a society. Our use of
this measure as a proxy for property rights institutions reflects the fact that political constraints on the
executive are closely interwoven with the security of property rights.
   3
     Djankov et al. do not relate legal formalism to long-run economic growth. But this seems a natural
step: if legal formalism aﬀects the costs of contract enforcement (as Djankov et al. argue) and if con-
tracting institutions are important for growth (as North and many others argue), then there should be
an eﬀect of legal formalism on economic growth.
  The legal formalism data are available from the World Bank’s Doing Business website, under the
heading Contract Enforcement: http://rru.worldbank.org/DoingBusiness/.




                                                     2
powers.4 Our previous work in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002), on the
other hand, shows the importance of the mortality rate facing potential European settlers
and population density before colonization on the colonization strategy of Europeans.
Via this channel, these variables have influenced the historical development of the state-
society relations and the degree of private property rights enforcement in the former
colonies today.
       Our approach in this paper is to use a multiple instrumental variables (IV) strategy,
exploiting these sources of variation. The success of the multiple IV strategy depends
on the two sets of instruments to isolate the contracting and property rights channels.
In this respect, colonial history oﬀers an ideal setup. In the sample of former European
colonies, the legal system imposed by colonial powers has a strong eﬀect on the degree of
legal formalism, and almost no eﬀect on measures of property rights institutions today.
At the same time, both mortality rates for potential European settlers and population
density in 1500 have a large eﬀect on current property rights institutions, and no impact
on measures of legal formalism.
       The results of our empirical investigation using this multiple IV strategy are interest-
ing: we find strong support for the importance of property rights institutions on current
economic outcomes. Countries with greater constraints on politicians and elites, and more
protection against expropriation by these powerful groups, have substantially higher in-
come per capita (i.e., higher long-run growth rates), greater investment rates, more credit
to the private sector relative to GDP, and more developed stock markets. In contrast,
our findings indicate that the role of contracting institutions is more limited. Countries
with greater legal formalism have less developed stock markets. However, once we control
for the eﬀects of property rights institutions, legal formalism seems to have no impact on
income per capita, the investment to GDP ratio, and the private credit to GDP ratio.
       These results suggest that contracting institutions aﬀect the form of financial inter-
   4
    The La Porta et al. papers suggest a number of channels through which legal origin could aﬀect
economic outcomes. In addition, Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) argue that the origin of the legal system
aﬀects not only legal transactions, but also regulates the power of politically powerful groups. Mahoney
(2001) also argues that legal origin has a positive eﬀect on economic growth through channels other
than legal formalism. If these views are correct, our IV estimates for the importance of legal formalism,
and therefore for contracting institutions, will be biased upwards. Consequently, our estimates of the
importance of contractual institutions can be interpreted as upper bounds. The reduced-form evidence
in the Appendix Table A3 does not show any evidence of a significant (direct or indirect) eﬀect of legal
origin on economic growth, investment, bank credit, or stock market development once we control and
instrument for property rights.



                                                   3
mediation, but have less eﬀect on economic growth, investment, and the overall level of
financial development. It seems that society can function in the face of weak contracting
institutions without first-order economic costs, but has a much harder time dealing with
a significant risk of expropriation from the government or other powerful groups.5 Our in-
terpretation, consistent with the simple model we use to highlight the distinction between
contracting and property rights institutions, is that contracting institutions aﬀect pri-
vate transactions and create ex post transfers between parties (for example, when lenders
face large costs of collecting on their loans from borrowers). Private contracts or other
reputation-based mechanisms can, at least in part, alleviate these problems.6 For exam-
ple, when it is more diﬃcult for lenders to collect on their loans, interest rates increase, or
banks that can monitor eﬀectively will play a more important role, or reputation-based
credit relationships will develop. Private contracting and alternative financial arrange-
ments therefore limit the eﬀects of contracting institutions and legal formalism.
       In contrast, protection of private property rights relates to the relationship between
the state and the citizens. When there are no checks on the state, on politicians, and on
elites, private citizens do not have the security of property rights necessary for investment.
In this case, they are also unable to enter into private arrangements to circumvent these
problems; it is impossible to write credible contracts with the state to prevent future
expropriation, since the state, with its monopoly of legitimate violence, is the ultimate
arbiter of contracts (see Acemoglu, 2003a).
       At this point we have to emphasize the limitations of our analysis. First, to the extent
that contracting and property rights institutions interact in regulating relations between
the state and citizens, or even between citizens, the interpretation of our results is more
   5
     This pattern is also consistent with the results we obtain using the entry barriers data from Djankov,
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002). We find that the key determinant of the number of
procedures to open a new business is legal formalism–greater legal formalism, naturally, means more
procedures. However, when we use their measures for the total costs of opening new businesses, the main
determinant appears to be property rights institutions, not legal formalism. Therefore, it again appears
that contracting institutions aﬀect the form of economic transactions, but have less impact on the overall
economic outcome (here, the total cost of opening a business).
   6
     See the emphasis of, among others, Ellickson (1991) and Greif (1989) on the ability of individual
agents to substitute reputation-based arrangements for legal contracts. The World Bank’s Doing Business
study has found that in countries such as Bulgaria, Egypt, Mozambique, and Tunisia, creditors structure
contracts so as to be able to seize collateral when a borrower defaults without using standard slow court
procedures (Djankov, 2003). Naturally, as also highlighted by the theoretical model below, there may
exist a certain threshold beyond which contracting institutions may matter more, and consequently, our
results here are consistent with the notion that a substantial worsening in contracting institutions could
have significant economic implications.



                                                    4
diﬃcult.7 Second, our “property rights institutions” are still somewhat of a black box,
and could reflect the eﬀect of other political or non-political institutional features.8
       In addition to work by La Porta et al., Djankov et al., and Acemoglu et al., the
papers closest to our work are Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2003a, 2003b), and
Rajan and Zingales (2003), which critically evaluate the eﬀect of legal origin on financial
development. Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2003a) find evidence that both legal
origin and potential settler mortality matter for financial development.9 However, they
only estimate reduced-form relationships and do not specify the mechanisms through
which legal origin may aﬀect economic and financial outcomes. Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt,
and Levine (2003b) test whether legal origin matters because it aﬀects state control over
the judiciary, or because some legal systems are more “adaptable” than others. They do
not address the nature or origin of property rights institutions.10
       Rajan and Zingales (2003) oﬀer an “interest group” explanation for the development
of investor protection in Europe. They argue that changes in financial arrangements at
the turn of the twentieth century are evidence against “time invariant” explanations,
such as the legal origin approach, and instead support their theory in which incumbent
producers oppose financial development to prevent entry from newcomers. In contrast, in
our model and empirical work, we focus on the eﬀect of legal origin on legal formalism,
and show that contracting institutions and legal formalism generally matter less than
property rights institutions for credit, investment, and long-run economic growth.11
   7
      But in our defense, we find no evidence in the data for a significant interaction eﬀect between
property rights and contracting institutions. Moreover, if legal formalism also determines how constrained
politicians and political elites are in practice, this would create an upward bias in our estimates for the
importance of contracting institutions.
    8
      In Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002), we provide detailed evidence that the eﬀects
of mortality rates for potential European settlers and population density in 1500 are working through
institutions, and not through geographic, religious, or some other omitted factors.
    9
      Levine (2002), Beck and Levine (2002), and Demirgüç-Kunt and Maksimovic (2002) all find a link
between legal origin and both the level of financial development and the extent to which external finance
is market- rather than bank-based. Levine (2003) reports results where legal origin explains the level of
financial development across countries and these in turn account for diﬀerences in long-run growth.
   10
      See also Berkowitz, Pistor, and Richard (2003), who argue that countries that developed their own
legal systems, or that substantially adapted any “transplanted” law, have a more eﬀective legal system,
and Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruﬀ (2002), who present micro evidence from five post-communist
countries showing that eﬀective property rights matter more for firm investment than financial constraints.
   11
      Finally, there is also some recent work investigating which type of institutions matter more for eco-
nomic outcomes. For example, Persson and Tabellini (1999) find that within the set of democracies,
presidential regimes have smaller governments and majoritarian (non-proportional representation) elec-
toral systems are correlated with less government spending and less welfare spending. Barro (1997), on
the other hand, investigates the relative importance of rule of law and democracy in stimulating economic



                                                    5
    Section 2 develops a simple model to highlight how contracting and property rights
institutions might have diﬀerent eﬀects on economic outcomes. Section 3 discusses our
empirical strategy and the basic data. Section 4 provides details on the sample and
descriptive statistics. Section 5 shows some basic univariate results. Section 6 provides
our main results, contrasting the impact of contracting and property rights institutions
on a range of economic outcomes. It also contains robustness checks. Section 7 concludes.


2     Theory
We now outline a simple reduced-form model to highlight how diﬀerences in contract-
ing and property rights institutions aﬀect financial and economic outcomes. We think
of contracting institutions as mainly aﬀecting the costs of enforcing private contracts.
Property rights institutions, on the other hand, determine the interaction between indi-
viduals and the government (and the political elites who control the government). When
property rights institutions do not constrain elites, these elites are more likely to violate
the property rights of individual producers and expropriate their incomes or assets.
    The purpose of this model is not to develop a micro-founded analysis of financial
intermediation or the role of property rights institutions, but simply to highlight issues
that will help with interpretation of our empirical results. In particular, the model illus-
trates how, under certain circumstances, contracting institutions may influence the form
of financial transactions but have relatively limited eﬀects on the overall level of financial
intermediation, investment, and output, because individuals can vary the terms of their
contracts ex ante to deal with the ex post costs of contract enforcement.

2.1     The Environment
The model lasts for one period and consists of three groups of agents: producers, lenders,
and the elite. All agents are risk neutral. There is a unique good that can be used
for investment or consumption. We normalize the number of producers to 1. Lenders
have suﬃcient funds to lend to producers, but no investment opportunities. Producers
have productive investment opportunities but no funds to undertake these investments.
growth. These studies typically do not isolate an exogenous source of variation in institutions, so the
results may reflect omitted factors or be driven by diﬀerential measurement error (hence attenuation bias)
in various measures of institutions.




                                                    6
Finally, elites do not have a directly productive role, but control the state apparatus, and
can use their political power to expropriate the incomes of other groups in society.12
       We will think of contracting institutions as regulating the relationship between lenders
and producers, and property rights institutions as aﬀecting the relationship between pro-
ducers and lenders on the one hand and the elite on the other.
       Each producer can produce a > 1 units of the final good by investing 1 unit. Each
producer j also incurs a non-pecuniary cost ej when she undertakes production. The
distribution of ej in the population is given by a continuous distribution function G (e).
Since producers have no funds, each of them needs to borrow 1 unit from the lenders.
They can do this using either a debt contract or an equity contract. We start with a
discussion of the debt contract, returning to equity contracts later. The cost of providing
1 unit of loan to a producer with a debt contract is 1 + md where md < a − 1 represents
administrative costs, or costs of collecting funds from savers. A debt contract will specify
a gross interest rate R that the lender has to repay. However, the producer can renege on
her payment promise. In this case, the lender can take the producer to court. The cost
of taking producer j to court, i.e., filing a complaint, is

                                                C d + θj                                              (1)

where C d is a feature of the legal system that is specific to debt contracts. A higher C d
implies that enforcing debt contracts is more costly, which may be because there is a high
degree of “legal formalism”. The parameter θj is project complexity, which determines
how costly it will be for the lender to prove that there is malfeasance by the producer. For
example, if the project turns out to be very complex (or diﬃcult to monitor or adjudicate),
the producer may find ways of not repaying without the court easily detecting this, e.g.,
diverting the proceeds while pretending to be bankrupt. If the lender files a complaint,
he incurs the cost in (1) and always wins and receives the promised payment, while the
producer incurs some positive cost ε. If the lender does not file a complaint after the
  12
     A central assumption here is that producers are distinct both from the elite and from the lenders
(we do not need these groups to be disjoint, but simply to be suﬃciently distinct). This assumption
is reasonable given our focus on financial relations and growth in modern economies. Although there
have been societies such as the plantation economies of the Caribbean between 17th and 19th centuries
where the elites were also the producers, in most modern societies there are important producer groups
outside the elite. Moreover, in many societies expropriation by government is a major concern, and in this
case there is a natural distinction between producers and groups involved in expropriation. In addition,
the distinction between lenders and producers is a key element of any modern economy–without this
distinction, a discussion of financial intermediation would not be meaningful.

                                                    7
producer reneges, there is no repayment and the producer receives the full output of the
project. We assume that θj is distributed uniformly in the population between 0 and 1.
   Finally, the elite can decide to expropriate the returns from the project. However,
they can only do so when the checks and balances that the society imposes on them are
suﬃciently lax. We model this by assuming that “property rights institutions” constrain
the elite in their expropriation. More specifically, after investment decisions take place,
the aggregate state of nature σ is realized, and expropriation is avoided if σ ≤ P . In
this formulation, P measures the degree of political checks and balances on the elite. For
example, a stronger, more independent legislature (assuming this represents non-elites)
would correspond to a high value of P , meaning that only in special circumstances can
the elite expropriate producers. We assume that the distribution of σ is given by a
continuous distribution function, F (σ); this represents political events that we are not
modelling explicitly here. What matters for the economic decisions of producers and
lenders will be the risk of expropriation by the elite, and with this reduced-form modeling
we want to emphasize that this risk is in turn related to political constraints that society
imposes on the elite and the government.
   The timing of events in this economy is as follows:

  1. Producers observe their non-pecuniary cost of production, {ej }.

  2. Lenders compete to provide funds to producers.

  3. The aggregate state σ is realized, and the elite take the expropriation decision.

  4. Producers and lenders observe the realization of the project complexity, {θj }.

  5. If there has been no expropriation, producers decide whether to renege on their
     payments.

  6. Lenders decide whether to take producers who have reneged to court or not.

  7. Returns are realized and consumed.

   We next characterize the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game in the standard
way by backward induction. This equilibrium will turn out to be unique.




                                             8
2.2     Equilibrium with Only Debt Contracts
Let us start with a subgame where there has been no expropriation and producer j,
who has borrowed at the rate R, reneges. Then the payoﬀ from the strategy of filing
a complaint for the lender, conditional on the realization of project complexity θj , is:
V (file | R, θj ) = R − 1 − md − θj − C d , since in this case he will get back R, he has already
incurred the investment cost, 1+ md , and he will incur the legal costs θj + C d . The payoﬀ
when he does not file a complaint is V (no file | R, θj ) = −1 − md , as he will not incur
legal costs, but will also not receive the payment R. Therefore, the lender will file if

                                          θj ≤ R − C d .                                        (2)

Since reneging on the debt contract when the lender files a complaint is costly and creates
no benefits, the producer will renege only when (2) does not hold. Given the uniform
assumption, the probability of repayment before the realization of θj is therefore
                                      ­   ­           ® ®
                                   min max R − C d , 0 , 1 ,

where the max and min operators make sure that the probability remains bounded be-
                                               ¡       ¢
tween 0 and 1. We assume throughout that C d ≥ 1 + md F (P )−1 − 1, which ensures
that 0 ≤ R−C d ≤ 1 (see footnote 14). Then, using the fact that the elites will expropriate
whenever σ > P ,13 the expected return of a lender at the lending stage (before σ and θj
are realized) is:
                         V (lend | R) = −1 − md + F (P ) (R − C d )R,

where the first two terms are the costs of lending and monitoring, and the third term
is the probability that there will be no expropriation, F (P ), times the probability that
there is no reneging, (R − C d ), times the repayment amount, R. By not lending, the
lender will receive 0. Thus, we need V (lend | R) ≥ 0. Moreover, since there are suﬃ-
cient funds among lenders to cover all the demand for funds from producers, whenever
V (lend | R) > 0, competition between lenders will reduce R, so in equilibrium we must
have V (lend | R) = 0. Straightforward algebra shows that the unique positive solution
  13
    With a reasoning similar to that for the Laﬀer curve, for very high values of P the ruling elite
or the government may want to reduce P in order to encourage greater investment and increase their
revenues. The simplifying assumption here is that they are unable to do so (see Acemoglu, 2003b, for
more discussion).



                                                 9
to this equation is:14
                                         q
                                  Cd +    (C d )2 + 4 (1 + md ) F (P )−1
                            R=                                             .                         (3)
                                                        2
However, for the producer to be able to repay, we also need R ≤ a, or
                                            ¡         ¢
                          d     d             1 + m d
                                                        F (P )−1
                        C ≤ C̄ (P ) ≡ a −                        .                                   (4)
                                                      a
In other words, for the credit market not to collapse, the legal costs of enforcing contracts
need to be less than a critical threshold. Moreover, C̄ d (P ) is increasing in P , so that
better property rights institutions increase the range of legal costs over which a credit
market can be supported.
       It can also be verified that ∂R/∂C d > 0 and ∂R/∂C d < 0, thus better contracting
institutions and stronger constraints on elites reduce the required repayments (the interest
rate) in the credit market.
       Now going to the first stage of the game, we can write the expected utility of a producer
with eﬀort cost ej as:
                                               £   ¡       ¢ ¤
                           Uj (ej | R) = F (P ) a − R − C d R − ej ,

which takes into account that with probability 1 − F (P ), there is expropriation by the
elite. Otherwise, the producer receives the output a, and whether she makes the payment
back to lenders depends on the realization of θj . With probability R − C d , we have
θj ≤ R − C d , so she will have to make the payment. Using (3) to substitute out for R,
we obtain:
                                 Uj (ej ) = F (P ) a − 1 − md − ej .                                 (5)

Notice an important feature of (5): as long as (4) is satisfied, Uj (ej ) does not depend
on C d . This is because lenders and producers write ex ante contracts, and they can
change the terms of these contracts to deal with the fact that there is a low probability
  14                     d
    Note that
            ¡     R−  ¢ C ≥−10 is always true. Straightforward algebra using (3) establishes that as long
as C ≥ 1 + m F (P ) − 1, we also have R − C d ≤ 1, as claimed in the text. Alternatively, if
     d              d
        ¡         ¢       −1
C d < 1 + md F (P ) − 1, then the probability that θj < R − C d is equal to 1, and as a result,
      ¡         ¢       −1                                        ¡       ¢      −1
R = 1 + m F (P ) , and the credit market collapses only if 1 + md F (P ) > a. Thus, if C d <
              d
¡         ¢                                         ¡       ¢
 1 + md F (P )−1 − 1, the interest rate is R = 1 + md F (P )−1 (as long as this is less than a); if
    ¡         ¢                      ¡       ¢
a − 1 + md F (P )−1 /a ≥ C d ≥ 1 + md F (P )−1 − 1, the interest rate is given by (3), and if C d >
    ¡         ¢
a − 1 + md F (P )−1 /a, the credit market collapses.


                                                   10
of repayment when C d is high. In other words, R adjusts to keep the expected payments
from the producer to the lender constant irrespective of the value of C d . Therefore, when
C d is high, the producer is more likely to be able to avoid payments, but in return, she
will have to promise to pay a higher interest rate.15
       To calculate total investment when (4) is satisfied, i.e., when the credit market does
not collapse, notice that if the producer does not undertake the investment, she receives
0, so we need Uj (ej | R) ≥ 0 for producer j to invest. Thus using the fact that the
distribution of ej is given by G (e), total investment is given by:

                                     I = G[F (P ) a − 1 − md ].                                       (6)

Since all investment is financially intermediated, this is also total credit (financial interme-
diation) in the economy. This expression shows that, as long as (4) is satisfied, investment
and credit are independent of C d . Contracting institutions therefore may have limited
eﬀects on investment, because ex ante contracting enables the parties to circumvent po-
tential enforcement problems. However, there are limits to this argument: if the cost of
contract enforcement, C d , is very high, the credit market will collapse and there will be
no investment.
       Notice also that when (4) holds, investment is always increasing in the degree of
political constraints on elites, i.e., ∂I/∂P > 0. The reason why property rights institutions
have a “more important” eﬀect on investment than contracting institutions in this model
is that, in contrast to contracts between lenders and producers, there are no ex ante
contracts between producers (or lenders) and the elite that can be used to circumvent the
ex post holdup and expropriation problem. Here we take it as given that such contracting
possibilities are absent, but it is clear why this would be so: it is impossible to write
credible contracts with the state to prevent future expropriation, since the state, with its
monopoly of legitimate violence, is the ultimate arbiter of contracts.16
       We can now summarize this discussion as follows:
  15
     The fact that these two eﬀects exactly cancel out is a special feature of this model, where parties
never go to court along the equilibrium path. If they did, R would have to increase further to compensate
lenders for the expected court costs as well, and C d would have an eﬀect on Uj (ej ). Nevertheless, it
can be verified that even in this case, ex ante contracting possibilities would reduce the eﬀect of C d on
investment.
  16
     One way of “writing” such contracts is through trigger strategies in a repeated game, whereby if
the state expropriates too much, agents will stop investing. Acemoglu (2003a,b) shows that there are
generally limits to how useful these trigger strategies will be in a political context.



                                                   11
Result 1 In the model outlined above with only debt contracts, there exists a threshold
      for legal costs C̄ d (P ) such that if C d < C̄ d (P ), changes in legal costs have no eﬀect
      on equilibrium investment. If C d rises above C̄ d (P ), the credit market collapses
      and investment falls to zero. Greater constraint on elite expropriation, P , reduces
      the likelihood of credit market collapse, i.e., increases C̄ d (P ). Moreover, as long as
      C d < C̄ d (P ), a higher P raises investment.

   Figure 1 is a simple diagrammatic representation of the equilibrium, with the legal
costs of debt contract enforcement, i.e., legal formalism, C d on the vertical axis and
constraint on elite expropriation, P , on the horizontal axis. Above the line C̄ d (P ), the
credit market collapses because the costs of contract enforcement are too high. In this
region a higher value of P does not aﬀect investment, since investment is already 0. Below
the C̄ d (P ) line the credit market exists and a higher value of P raises investment directly.
In this region, private contracting undoes the eﬀects of higher legal costs, so C d has no
eﬀect on investment. A greater C d reduces investment only when it induces the economy
to cross from above to below the threshold line C̄ d (P ).

2.3    Equity Contracts
To introduce equity contracts in the simplest possible way, we assume that in stage 2 of
the above timing of events, lenders can decide between a debt contract as described above,
or an equity contract where they will lend 1 unit in return for a fraction s of the project
returns. With equity contracts, raising 1 unit of funds costs 1 + me , where me ≤ md . This
implies that, everything else equal, equity finance is cheaper, for example because money
can be raised from a broader group of savers, or because equity finance is administratively
less costly or makes better use of market information (e.g., Holmstrom and Tirole, 1993).
   The costs of court action when the producer reneges on her equity payments are
diﬀerent from the legal costs involved in enforcing debt contracts, and are equal to C e ≥
C d , so that settling disputes related to equity are more costly. This might be, for example,
because when the producer fails to repay debt, the lender may be able to foreclose on
her assets. In contrast, shareholders do not have access to this option when the producer
does not pay dividends, making the enforcement of equity contracts more costly for lenders
(see, e.g., Hart, 1995).
   The analysis in the pure equity case is parallel to the debt case, and we can easily see

                                               12
that when the producer reneges on the payment, the lender will file a complaint only if:
θj ≤ sa − C e . The equilibrium equity share given to lenders will be:
                                   q
                              C + (C e )2 + 4 (1 + me ) F (P )−1
                               e
                          s=                                     ,                            (7)
                                              2a
and naturally, we need s ≤ 1, which gives a condition similar to before for the credit
market to function, i.e.,
                                          C e ≤ C̄ e (P ) .                                   (8)

Once again, as long as this condition is satisfied, we have the utility of producer j as
Uj (ej ) = F (P ) a − 1 − me − ej , and consequently, aggregate investment is

                                   I = G [F (P ) a − 1 − me ] ,                               (9)

which, like (6), does not depend on legal rules C e , as long as (8) holds. This gives us:

Result 2 In the model outlined above with only equity contracts, there exists a threshold
      for legal costs C̄ e (P ) such that if C e < C̄ e (P ), changes in legal costs have no eﬀect
      on equilibrium investment. If C e rises above C̄ e (P ), the equity market collapses and
      investment falls to zero. Greater P reduces the likelihood of equity market collapse
      (i.e., increases C̄ e (P )), and as long as C e < C̄ e (P ), it raises investment.

   It is also straightforward to characterize the equilibrium when both debt and equity
contracts are available. In this case, competition between lenders ensures that the contract
form maximizing the utility of producers will prevail. Thus, we need to calculate the
utilities of producers with debt and equity contracts. As long as (4) and (8) are satisfied,
credit markets will function both with debt and equity contracts, and equity contracts
will prevail as long as me < md , i.e., as long as equity is the more eﬃcient form of financial
intermediation. However, since C e may be greater than C d , an interesting configuration
arises when (4) holds, but (8) fails to hold. In this case, the equilibrium will feature debt
contracts even if me < md . We summarize this discussion as follows:

Result 3 If both (4) and (8) are satisfied, the unique equilibrium involves only equity
      contracts when me < md . If (4) holds and (8) fails to hold, the unique equilibrium
      involves only debt contracts.


                                                 13
    Now in light of these results, let us compare two economies that have the same P , but
one has a higher legal cost of enforcing both debt and equity contracts, corresponding to
high values of C e and C d , and the other has low values of C e and C d . If (8) holds in the low-
enforcement-cost economy, but not in the high-cost one, and if (4) holds in both, then we
will observe debt contracts in the high-cost economy and equity contracts in the low-cost
economy. Despite this sharp diﬀerence in the form of financial intermediation, diﬀerences
                                                                      £                 ¤
in total credit and investment may be small: total investment is G F (P ) a − 1 − md
in the high-cost economy and G [F (P ) a − 1 − me ] in the low-cost one. If me ≈ md ,
investment levels will not diﬀer much in the two economies. This configuration provides
a potential interpretation for our empirical results where economies with diﬀerent legal
rules will exhibit large diﬀerences in the form of financial intermediation, particularly the
use of equity, but only small diﬀerences in levels of long-run income, investment, and
total credit (debt plus equity). Therefore, in this model, legal costs of private contract
enforcement can influence the form of financial intermediation at the same time as having
a relatively small eﬀect on investment and output. In contrast, the risk of expropriation
by the state and political elites typically has a major eﬀect on investment output.


3     Empirical Strategy and Data
3.1     Basic Specification
We are interested in investigating the separate eﬀects of contracting institutions and
property rights institutions. Ignoring nonlinearities, the economic relationship we are
interested in identifying can be written as:

                                 Yc = α · Fc + β · Ic + Zc0 · γ 0 + εc                             (10)

where Yc is the outcome of interest for country c, for example, per capita income, the
investment rate, or the level of financial development. Fc is a measure of legal formalism,
which captures the legal costs of contract enforcement, Ic is a measure of property rights
institutions, and Zc is a set of other controls. α and β are the parameters of interest, and
γ 0 is a vector capturing eﬀects of the control variables in Zc .17
  17
     In addition, we have also investigated whether there is an interaction between property rights and
contracting institutions by adding interaction terms such as Fc · Ic , and whether there are significant
nonlinearities by adding higher-order terms in Fc and Ic . We did not find any evidence for significant
interactions or nonlinearities, so we do not report these results to save space.


                                                  14
       The four outcomes we focus on are: the level of GDP per capita, which is a good
measure of long-run growth since around 1750 there were only minor diﬀerences in in-
come per capita across countries (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2002); the ratio of
investment to GDP, which is the best measure of whether a society is able to channel
money into productive investments; the amount of private credit as a percent of GDP,
as a measure of finance provided through the banking sector and trade credit; and stock
market capitalization as a percent of GDP, which provides a measure of equity finance.
In our baseline regressions, we choose outcomes from the 1990s–this choice is dictated
by data availability and our desire to start the analysis when the countries for which we
have institutions data are all independent states.
       For Ic we use two measures. Our base measure is “protection against expropriation”
by government, averaged over 1985-95, from Political Risk Services. These data were
first used in economics by Knack and Keefer (1995), and are also the main measure
used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001). Political Risk Services reports a value
between 0 and 10 for each country and year, with 0 indicating the lowest protection against
expropriation. The second measure is “constraint on the executive” from the Polity IV
dataset, capturing the degree of constraints on politicians and politically powerful elites
(Gurr, 1997).18 This measure ranges from 1 to 7, where a higher score indicates greater
constraints. In our main regressions, we use the average of the values between 1990 and
2000 inclusive.19
       As already noted, we proxy for contracting institutions with the degree of legal formal-
ism, Fc , using measures constructed by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(2003). The details of these variables are discussed in Section 3.4 below.

3.2       Empirical Strategy
The simplest strategy is to estimate the model in equation (10) using ordinary least
squares (OLS) regression. There are two distinct problems with this strategy. First, both
contracting and property rights institutions are endogenous, so we may be capturing re-
verse causality, or the eﬀect of some omitted characteristics (e.g., geography, religion, or
other variables). Second, both variables are measured with error, so there may be a down-
  18
    The latest version of Polity IV is available on the web at http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/
  19
    Where a year is missing or the coding indicates an interregnum of some kind (e.g., civil war), we
ignore that year for the purposes of constructing the average. We also checked the robustness of our
results using constraint on the executive in 1990, in 1970, and its average value in 1950, 1960, and 1970.

                                                   15
ward attenuation bias. More important, if contracting and property rights institutions
are correlated, the eﬀect of the institution that is measured with greater error will load
on to the other variable.
       Both of these concerns imply that OLS regressions will give results that do not cor-
respond to the causal eﬀect of contracting and property rights institutions on economic
outcomes–upward or downward bias is possible. So we would like to estimate equation
(10) using Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) with distinct and plausible instruments for
legal formalism and property rights. These instruments should be correlated with the
endogenous regressors but orthogonal to any other omitted characteristics (i.e., uncorre-
lated with the outcomes of interest through any channel other than their eﬀect via the
endogenous regressors).20
       In this paper, we pursue a multiple IV strategy to identify the eﬀects of interest. The
two first-stages are:

                              Fc = δ 1 · Lc + η 1 · Mc + Zc0 · γ 1 + u1c                               (11)
                               Ic = δ 2 · Lc + η 2 · Mc + Zc0 · γ 2 + u2c

where Mc is either the log potential mortality rate of European settlers or log of the
indigenous population density in 1500, and conceptually corresponds to the instrument
for property rights institutions. We explain these measures in Section 3.3 below. Lc is a
dummy for English legal origin (or equivalently, whether or not the country was a British
colony) and is the instrument for legal formalism (i.e., contracting institutions). This is
discussed further in Section 3.4. If these instruments are valid, the IV strategy will solve
the endogeneity, the omitted variables bias, and the measurement error problems, and we
can estimate the α and β parameters consistently.
  20
    A potential concern is that legal origin may aﬀect economic outcomes through channels other than
legal formalism (see, for example, La Porta et al., 1998, Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002, and Mahoney, 2001).
In terms of our framework, in particular, equations (10) and (11), this would amount to Cov (εc , Lc ) 6= 0,
whereas the 2SLS identifying assumption is that this covariance should be 0. Since the existing literature
suggests that English legal origin should have a positive eﬀect on the economic outcomes studied here,
we expect that, if anything, Cov (εc , Lc ) ≥ 0, and in this case, the estimate of the impact of legal
formalism on economic outcomes, α, will be biased upwards, and our results can be interpreted as
potential upper bounds on the importance of legal formalism and contracting institutions. The results
reported in Appendix Table A3 do not show any evidence of a major eﬀect of legal origin on the outcome
variables here.




                                                    16
3.3       Settler Mortality and Population Density
Our first instrument for property rights institutions is settler mortality in countries that
were colonized by European nations between 1500 and 1900.21 Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001) documented that European colonization strategies had radically diﬀerent
implications for economic development. Places prospered when Europeans set up institu-
tions that protected private property rights and placed eﬀective constraints on politicians
and powerful elites. In contrast, areas stagnated or grew only slowly when Europeans
established–or took over existing–extractive institutions.
       What determined the Europeans’ colonization strategy? There were two key factors.
The first was the disease environment facing Europeans. Where the disease environment
was favorable for European settlements, they migrated in large numbers and developed
political and economic institutions very similar to, or even substantially better than, the
contemporary institutions in Europe. These settler colonies, such as the United States,
Canada, Australia, or New Zealand, rapidly developed and maintained good institutions,
with tight constraints on politicians and elites, and secure property rights. In many
other colonies, for example in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Central America,
Europeans faced high or very high mortality rates (up to 50 percent mortality per year
in some places) and settlement was not feasible. In these areas, the colonizers were
much more likely to develop extractive institutions, used mostly to exploit the native
population for the benefit of European colonizers. After independence the beneficiaries
of extraction changed, and the form of extraction has evolved over time, but countries
that had rapacious rule under colonialism typically have worse property rights institutions
today. Based on this reasoning, we will use potential European settler mortality rates as
an instrument for current institutions (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001, for
more discussion).22
       The second determinant of European colonization strategy was initial indigenous pop-
  21
     We use the series constructed by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) based primarily on Curtin
(1989, 1998) and Gutierrez (1986).
  22
     Malaria and yellow fever caused the majority of European deaths during the early colonization
period. Although these diseases were fatal to Europeans, they had much less eﬀect on indigenous adults
with aquired or inherited immunity. These diseases are therefore unlikely to be the reason why many
countries in Africa and Asia are poor today. More generally, when we measure the eﬀect of institutions
correctly, there is no evidence that the large income diﬀerences between former colonies are due to
geography, religion, or culture (for more details of this analysis, see Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson,
2001, 2002). These results are robust to alternative measures of outcomes, institutions, and control
variables (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, and Easterly and Levine, 2003).


                                                  17
ulation density. Where this was high, Europeans were more likely to “capture” the local
population and put it to work in some form of forced labor system. Where initial pop-
ulation density was low, Europeans were more likely settle themselves, and less likely
to develop extractive institutions even when they did not settle. Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2002) provide evidence that, for countries colonized by European powers,
there is a strong negative relationship between population density in 1500 and income
per capita today. This relationship is due to the fact that former colonies with greater
population density in 1500 had, and still have, worse property rights institutions. The
density of indigenous population per square kilometer in 1500 is therefore an appealing
alternative instrument. Because settler mortality and population density in 1500 capture
diﬀerent sources of variation in practice (the correlation between the two measures is 0.4),
but should have similar eﬀects on property rights, using these two instruments separately
is a good check on our results.

3.4       Legal Origin and Legal Formalism
The fundamental idea in the line of research of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1997, 1998) is that countries have distinct “legal origins” and these matter for
legal, economic, and financial outcomes.23 La Porta et al. (1998) draw the strongest
distinction between the two great legal traditions: “Common Law” countries that were
part of the UK or the British Empire, and “Civil Law” countries where a French, German,
or Scandinavian legal system has prevailed.
      Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) oﬀer two measures for the
operation of contract enforcement through the legal system. These quantify the “formal”
procedures associated with collecting on a bounced check and evicting a tenant for non-
payment of rent. In both cases, the defendant has no justification and avoids voluntary
payment. The underlying idea is that a pure “neighbors” model, in which disputes are
resolved informally by disinterested local third parties based on fairness criteria, would
quickly rule in favor of the plaintiﬀ (see Shapiro, 1981, and also Ellickson, 1991, for how a
real community works under such a model). More legal formalism creates additional costs
of enforcing the contract implied by the check or the tenancy agreement. Djankov et al.
(2003) measure the extent of these costs–legal formalism–by surveying expert opinions
 23
      See Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) on the origins of these distinct “legal families”.



                                                      18
of lawyers in an international network of law firms in 109 countries. They then construct
indices that are comparable across countries.
    A legal system is more formal, in their metric, if it involves professional judges and
lawyers, written rather than oral arguments, the legal justification of claims and judges’
decisions, the regulation of evidence, superior review of first-instance judgment, other
“engagement formalities”, and more required independent actions. Djankov et al. (2003)
also present evidence that a greater degree of legal formalism raises the cost of adjudication
and creates delay in the resolution of disputes.
    As an extension of the Djankov et al. (2003) study, the World Bank subsequently
collected legal formalism data on more countries, but only for the “check” measure. We
use this measure in our base regressions, as it gives 9 or 10 more observations for former
colonies for which we have all the other necessary data.24 We also confirm all our results
using the eviction measure directly from Djankov et al. (2003).
    Whether a country has a common law or civil law system is an important determinant
of legal formalism. In general, the legal origin of a country may be a choice, but for former
colonies there are good reasons to regard this as exogenous–the British imposed common
law systems on the country they colonized, while countries colonized by other European
powers have civil law systems. We therefore instrument legal formalism with legal origin
in the sample of former European colonies.25 As we will see in greater detail below,
colonies with English legal origin have less formalism than those that were colonized by
other European powers and now have some version of civil law.


4     The Samples and Descriptive Statistics
4.1     Samples
Our basic sample is that of former European colonies. For all these countries we have
information on their legal origin and an estimate of their population density in 1500 (from
Acemoglu et al., 2002). From smaller subsets of countries, we also have data for various
measures of institutions, for potential settler mortality rates (from Acemoglu et al., 2001)
and for measures of legal formalism (from Djankov et al., 2003).
   24
      The extended check measure data were kindly provided by Simeon Djankov in a private communica-
tion.
   25
      Djankov et al (2003) relate legal formalism to legal origin in the whole world sample and show that
legal origin explains about 40 percent of the variation in legal formalism.


                                                   19
       In total, there are 42 common law “English legal origin” countries in the extended
Djankov et al. (2003) sample, of which almost all are former European colonies.26 In our
base sample, we have 30 English legal origin countries, and we lose additional observations
when we use the settler mortality instrument. There are 47 civil law “French legal origin”
countries in the extended Djankov et al. (2003) sample, of which 35 are former European
colonies.27

4.2       Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 summarizes our data. Column 1 reports mean values and standard deviations for
all countries on which we have data. Column 2 shows our data for the former colonies of
European powers. In all cases, the values for former colonies are quite close (within half a
standard deviation or less) of the values for all countries. Column 3 reports mean values
for former British colonies (i.e., common law countries), and columns 4 through 6 break
these down into former British colonies with low, medium, and high settler mortality (with
the break points given by values that divide all excolonies roughly into thirds). Columns
7 through 10 provide parallel data for former colonies with French legal origin.
       The first two rows in Table 1 report our measures of property rights institutions:
protection against expropriation and constraint on the executive. Rows 3 and 4 report
the two measures of legal formalism: the “check measure” and the “eviction measure”.
Former colonies with lower settler mortality and those with an English legal origin have,
on average, better property rights institutions and lower legal formalism.
       Rows 5, 6, 7, and 8 describe our four main dependent variables. Row 5 reports log of
GDP per capita (in PPP terms) in 1995.28 We can see a clear relationship between settler
  26
      The exceptions are: Britain and Ireland in Europe; Thailand, which was never colonized; and Is-
rael, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates, which were formerly part of the Ottoman Empire and
administered by Britain under League of Nations mandates after the end of World War I.
   We do not treat former League of Nations mandate countries as excolonies for three reasons. First,
European control was relatively short-lived and did not generally have major transformative eﬀects on
political institutions. Second, because these mandates were granted in the twentieth century, European
powers were already moving towards decolonization or at least minimal control, rather than the previous
forms of colonial control for either settlement or extraction. Third, by the early twentieth century,
advances in medicine meant that settler mortality was much more even across countries, so our data
on this from earlier centuries do not allow construction of a valid instrument for the League of Nations
mandate countries.
   27
      The exceptions, in addition to France, are Belgium, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Nether-
lands, Portugal, and Spain in Europe, and Jordan, Kuwait, and Turkey in the former Ottoman Empire.
   28
      These data are from the World Bank (2003). The results are robust to using GDP per capita data
from other years or from the Summers-Heston data set.


                                                  20
mortality and income per capita: former colonies with higher settler mortality rates have
substantially lower income per capita today. In addition, a comparison of columns 3 and
7 shows that English legal origin colonies have higher average income per capita than
French legal origin colonies.
       Row 6 reports our data on the ratio of private investment to GDP, measured in current
prices and averaged over the 1990s (from Heston et al. 2002). Investment ratios are higher
in former colonies with lower settler mortality rates, and higher in former British colonies.
       In our baseline regressions we use two standard measures of financial development: the
total amount of credit to the private sector in the economy as a percent of GDP in 1998,
shown in row 7; and stock market capitalization, shown in row 8.29 Former colonies with
lower settler mortality rates and an English legal origin have, on average, higher levels of
credit to the private sector.
       For the size of the stock market, we use average stock market capitalization as a
percent of GDP, provided by Beck et al. (2003a).30 Former colonies with lower settler
mortality rates and English legal origin have much higher stock market capitalizations.
       Below we will also look at the barriers to entry for new businesses, particularly the
oﬃcial regulations required for registration as measured by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-
de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002). There are two main measures (rows 9 and 10 in Table
1). The first is the number of formal procedures needed to register a business. The
second measure is the cost of registration. This is calculated by Djankov et al. (2002)
as a percentage of annual GDP per capita. A higher cost is obviously a greater burden
on potential entrepreneurs. French legal origin former colonies and those with higher
settler mortality rates have more procedures required for registering a new business and
the overall cost of registering a business is higher as a percent of GDP per capita.
  29
      Our base measure for banking system development is credit to the private sector, from the World
Bank (2003). This measure refers to financial resources provided to the private sector, such as through
loans, purchases of nonequity securities, and trade credits and other accounts receivable, that establish a
claim for repayment. For some countries these claims include credit to public enterprises. In the choice
of this and other measures, we are following the financial development literature; see, for example, Levine
(1997), Levine and King (1993), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Levine (2003).
   30
      This measure corresponds to the total value of outstanding shares as a percent of GDP. The series
is averaged over 1990-95, which is appealing since it excludes the large run-up in global stock markets in
the late 1990s (as well as the large, but mostly temporary, eﬀects of the Asian financial crisis).




                                                    21
5     Results
5.1    First-Stage Results
Our regression analysis disentangles the eﬀects of legal origin acting through legal formal-
ism, and colonization strategy acting through property rights institutions. We start by
showing the first-stage relationships in Figures 2 through 4.
    Figure 2, upper left corner, plots on the y-axis the residuals from regressing average
protection against expropriation on English legal origin, against on the x-axis the residuals
from regressing log settler mortality on English legal origin. This is a visual representation
of the strong first-stage relationship between the settler mortality instrument and property
rights institutions today. The upper right corner of Figure 2 shows that, after partialing
out the eﬀects of log settler mortality, there is a substantially weaker but still positive
relationship between protection against expropriation and English legal origin. As our
regression analysis below will illustrate, however, the relationship between protection
against expropriation and English legal origin is generally not robust.
    Figure 2, lower right, plots the residuals from regressing the check measure of legal
formalism on log settler mortality, against the residuals from regressing English legal
origin on log settler mortality. This shows that there is also a strong relationship between
this measure of contracting institutions and legal origin. Figure 2, lower left, depicts a
weaker (and statistically insignificant) relationship between the check measure of legal
formalism and log settler mortality.
    Figure 3 shows a similar pattern using constraint on the executive and the eviction
measure of legal formalism as the dependent variables. In this case the first stages are even
more separable: log settler mortality has a strong eﬀect on this measure of property rights
institutions and no eﬀect on this measure of contracting institutions, while English legal
origin here aﬀects contracting institutions but not property rights institutions. Figure 4
presents the first-stage results for protection against expropriation and the check measure
of legal formalism with log population density in 1500 as the instrument for property
rights institutions; these show a similar pattern to that in Figure 2.

5.2    Univariate Regressions
To provide a benchmark, Table 2 reports results just using legal formalism as the right-
hand side variable. In Panel A the dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995.

                                             22
Columns 1 and 2 report OLS regressions using the check measure of legal formalism.
Column 1 uses data from all 109 countries for which we have GDP data and the check
measure of legal formalism; column 2 limits this to just the 65 countries that were colonized
by European powers and for which we have data on legal formalism.
       There is a significant coeﬃcient on the check measure of legal formalism in the basic
OLS regression–a one standard deviation increase in legal formalism is associated with
over a 30 percent decline in GDP per capita today. When we instrument for legal for-
malism with legal origin, there is a strong first stage (R2 =0.58), but in the second stage
the coeﬃcient becomes insignificant, though it remains quantitatively large; the point
estimate of -0.18 in column 3 implies that a one standard deviation increase in legal for-
malism will reduce log GDP per capita by 0.20 of a standard deviation.31 In columns 4,
5, and 6, the eviction measure of legal formalism is not significant in either OLS or IV
specifications, and the size of the eﬀect is about 1/4 of that implied by column 3. In all
the IV specifications of Table 2, the first stage R2 is in the range 0.56-0.61.32
       In Panel B, the dependent variable is the average investment-GDP ratio in the 1990s.
There is a significant negative coeﬃcient on legal formalism in the OLS specifications of
columns 1 and 2. The coeﬃcient of -1.77 in column 3 is significant at the 10 percent
level (but not at 5 percent) and implies that a one standard deviation increase in legal
formalism would reduce the investment-GDP ratio by 0.3 of a standard deviation. In
columns 4, 5, and 6, the eviction measure of legal formalism is both insignificant and
small. The size of the eﬀect implied by the IV coeﬃcient in column 6 is about 1/2 of
the eﬀect suggested by column 3. Since the first stages in this and subsequent panels are
almost identical to those in Panel A, we do not report them to save space.
       Panels C and D show significant results for both measures of legal formalism. In Panel
C the dependent variable is credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP in 1998. The
coeﬃcient is -0.14 in column 2 (OLS) and -0.13 in column 3 (IV). This is a large eﬀect–
it implies that a one standard deviation increase in legal formalism causes about a half
standard deviation fall in the credit to GDP ratio. The results for the eviction measure
  31
     A one standard deviation change in the check measure of legal formalism in the former colonies
sample is 1.24, thus the estimate implies a change of 0.22, which is about 20 percent of the standard
deviation of log GDP, which is approximately 1 for former colonies.
  32
     The diﬀerence between the results using the check and the eviction measures is not due to diﬀerences
in the samples. When we run regressions with the check measure restricting the sample only to those
countries that have data on the eviction measure, we get very similar results to those using the full check
measure sample.


                                                    23
of legal formalism, in columns 4, 5, and 6 of Panel B, are similar (though slightly less
significant).
   Panel D reports the same set of specifications now with stock market capitalization as
a percent of GDP (averaged over 1990-95) as the dependent variable. Both legal formalism
measures are significant determinants of stock market capitalization, and the OLS and IV
results are quite similar for the check measure (columns 2 and 3), while the IV coeﬃcient
is about twice the size of the OLS coeﬃcient for the eviction measure (columns 5 and
6). A one standard deviation increase in either legal formalism measure implies a half
standard deviation decline in stock market capitalization.
   Table 3 reports parallel univariate specifications using our measures for property rights
institutions, protection against expropriation and constraint on the executive, as the in-
dependent variables, and with settler mortality and log population density in 1500 as
the instruments. In all panels of Table 3 we only include a country in the excolonies
regressions if we have data on both instruments–this ensures that the sample size, for
example in columns 2, 3, and 4, is the same, so the coeﬃcients are directly comparable.
This restriction does not aﬀect the results, and in subsequent tables, when we use log
population density as instrument, we will report results with the full set of countries for
which we have data on that instrument.
   Panel A shows a strong first stage from log settler mortality to property rights insti-
tutions, with an R2 of 0.23 in column 3. The first-stage results are almost identical in all
specifications, so to save space we do not repeat them in the other panels. In all panels
the IV coeﬃcient using log settler mortality is approximately double the OLS coeﬃcient.
This is similar to the results in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), and suggests
that the OLS estimates are significantly biased downwards because of attenuation. This
is not surprising: since the available measures of property rights institutions correspond
quite poorly to the concepts we would like to measure, there is a form of measurement er-
ror, creating downward attenuation bias. The instrumental variables strategy corrects for
this type of attenuation bias. The first-stage relationship between log population density
in 1500 and protection against expropriation is a bit weaker, with an R2 of 0.17 in column
4. For this instrument, the IV coeﬃcient is also typically twice the OLS coeﬃcient.
   Property rights institutions have a large eﬀect on income per capita. In the IV spec-
ification of Panel A, the coeﬃcients of 1.05 and 1.07 in columns 3 and 4 imply that a
one standard deviation improvement in this measure of institutions leads to about a 1.5

                                            24
standard deviation increase in GDP per capita. The estimated eﬀect of constraint on the
executive, in column 7, is similar.
       Property rights also have a large eﬀect on the investment to GDP ratio, on the private
credit to GDP ratio, and on stock market development. For example, in column 3 of
Panel B, the coeﬃcient of 5.5 implies that a one standard deviation improvement in
property rights causes a 1.1 standard deviation increase in the investment-GDP ratio.
The estimates in column 3 of Panels C and D, imply that a one standard deviation
improvement in property rights would cause a 1.5 standard deviation increase in the
credit to GDP ratio and a 1.2 standard deviation increase in stock market capitalization.
The results using constraint on the executive are qualitatively and quantitatively similar.
       Taken together, Tables 2 and 3 show strong eﬀects of property rights institutions
on GDP per capita, investment, credit, and stock market development both in univariate
OLS and IV regressions. They also show strong eﬀects of contracting institutions (proxied
by legal formalism) on credit and stock market development, with more limited eﬀects on
GDP per capita and the investment-GDP ratio. We next turn to investigating how these
results change when the two sets of variables are included simultaneously.


6        Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions
6.1       Main Results
Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7 report our main results. In all four tables, columns 1 through 4
use protection against expropriation as the measure of property rights institutions and
columns 5 through 8 use constraint on the executive. Columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 use the check
measure of legal formalism, and columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 include results with the eviction
measure of legal formalism. For each specification we present a pair of results: OLS in
odd-numbered columns and IV in even-numbered columns. For the IV specifications,
the top panel reports the second stage and the other panels report the first stages for
the measure of property rights institutions and the measure of legal formalism in that
order. All four tables use log settler mortality rates as the instrument for property rights
institutions, and Tables A4, A5, A6 and A7 in the Appendix have an identical structure,
but use log population density in 1500 as the instrument.33
  33
    In addition, Appendix Table A2 reports regressions in which the dependent variable is economic
growth between 1970 and 1995. The results are similar to Table 4, where log GDP per capita is the


                                               25
    The first-stage regressions in all eight tables are quite similar and consistent with the
patterns shown in Figures 2 through 4. In the first stage for property rights institutions,
using either measure, there is a strong robust eﬀect of log settler mortality–the coeﬃcient
is between -0.65 and -0.92, and typically four times larger than the standard error. English
legal origin is positive and significant in the specification of column 2, but in column 4 it
is significant only when we use log population density as the instrument. When we use
constraint on the executive as the measure of property rights institutions (columns 6 and
8), the sign on English legal origin is insignificant and usually negative. Overall, the way
in which countries were colonized, but not who colonized them, is a robust determinant
of property rights institutions.
    In the first stage for legal formalism, using either the check or eviction measure, English
legal origin has a strong robust negative eﬀect. In contrast, log settler mortality and log
population density in 1500 are not significant in any specification. Who colonized, but
not the way in which countries were colonized, appears to aﬀect the extent of formalism
in legal procedures.
    These strong first-stage results enable us to disentangle the eﬀect of property rights
and contracting institutions. In column 2 of Table 4, the coeﬃcient on protection against
expropriation is 0.95. This implies that a one standard deviation improvement in property
rights will lead to a 1.4 standard deviation increase in GDP per capita. Similarly, the
results in column 6 imply that a one standard deviation increase in constraint on the
executive causes a two standard deviation increase in GDP per capita. In contrast, the
coeﬃcient on legal formalism is often not significant, and when it is significant, e.g.,
columns 2 and 4, it has the “wrong” sign–countries with more formalism actually have
higher GDP per capita. Note the change from Table 2, where the coeﬃcient on legal
formalism, while not always significant, was negative and quite large (e.g., -0.18 in column
2 of that table). This change in the implied eﬀect of legal formalism on long-run growth
implies that in OLS or in regressions that do not control for property rights institutions,
the importance of contracting institutions is exaggerated because they capture some of
the diﬀerences in protection of property rights.
    Appendix Table A4, which uses log population density in 1500 in place of log settler
mortality, has between 6 and 9 more observations, and shows results consistent with those
in Table 4. For example, the estimated coeﬃcient for protection against expropriation in
outcome of interest.

                                              26
column 2 is 1.09 (s.e. 0.22), compared with 0.95 (s.e. 0.16) in Table 4, while in column 4
it is 0.97 (s.e. 0.18) compared with 1.53 (s.e. 0.25) in Table 4. The first-stage pattern is
also similar in the two tables.
   Table 5 shows a robust positive eﬀect of property rights institutions on the investment
to GDP ratio. According to the estimate in column 2, a one standard deviation strength-
ening of property rights causes a 0.95 standard deviation increase in the investment to
GDP ratio. In contrast, there is no significant eﬀect of legal formalism on the investment-
GDP ratio in any specification. The coeﬃcient on legal formalism is negative and small
in columns 5 through 8, and actually positive in columns 1 through 4. The results in
Appendix Table A5 are similar.
   Table 6 shows a strong eﬀect of property rights institutions on credit to the private
sector. The coeﬃcient of 0.28 in column 2 implies that a one standard deviation increase
in protection against expropriation causes a 1.2 standard deviation increase in the credit
to GDP ratio. The coeﬃcient of 0.27 in column 6 implies that a one standard deviation
improvement in constraint on the executive causes a 1.61 standard deviation increase in
credit.
   Once we control for the eﬀect of property rights institutions with our IV strategy, legal
formalism is no longer a significant determinant of credit–it is insignificant in all the IV
specifications of Table 6. The coeﬃcient on legal formalism is actually positive in columns
2 and 4. When it is negative, it is highly insignificant and small, e.g., the coeﬃcient of
-0.08 in column 6 (down from the univariate estimate of -0.13 in Table 2).
   Appendix Table A6 reports parallel results using log population density in 1500 as an
instrument in place of settler mortality. The coeﬃcients on the property rights measures
are now slightly lower, but the eﬀects are still large and highly significant (e.g., the
coeﬃcient of 0.25 in column 2 implies a one standard deviation increase in protection
against expropriation causes about a one standard deviation increase in credit to the
private sector). The coeﬃcients on the legal formalism measures are consistently small
and insignificant.
   The pattern in Table 7, where we look at stock market capitalization, is slightly dif-
ferent. The eﬀect of a one standard deviation increase in protection against expropriation
(using the coeﬃcient of 0.21 in column 2) is about 0.8 of a standard deviation increase
in stock market capitalization. The coeﬃcient of 0.2 in column 6 implies that a one
standard deviation improvement in constraint on the executive would raise stock market

                                            27
capitalization by one standard deviation. With protection against expropriation in the
regression, the coeﬃcient on legal formalism is negative but not significant. In contrast,
with constraint on the executive as the measure of property rights, there is a statistically
significant negative eﬀect of legal formalism on stock market development. For exam-
ple, the estimate in column 6, -0.16 (s.e. 0.07) implies that a one standard deviation
increase in legal formalism would reduce stock market capitalization by 0.2 of a standard
deviation. So the eﬀect of contracting institutions, even when significant, is substantially
smaller than that of property rights institutions. The results in Appendix Table A7, with
log population density in 1500 as the instrument, are similar. There is a strong eﬀect of
property rights institutions, and a smaller eﬀect of legal formalism that is significant only
when competing against constraint on the executive.
       Overall, the results in this section suggest that property rights institutions have a first-
order eﬀect on income per capita, the ratio of investment to GDP, the level of credit, and
stock market development. In contrast, legal formalism appears to have an eﬀect only on
stock market development; for the other outcomes, the eﬀect is not significantly diﬀerent
from zero. Moreover, for all variables, the eﬀect of legal formalism is quantitatively much
smaller than the eﬀect of property rights institutions. The rest of this section shows that
this pattern is robust and attempts to develop a potential explanation.34

6.2        Alternative Samples
Table 8 reruns our basic regressions using alternative samples. To save space, it reports
the first-stage regressions in full just in Panel A; the first stages for Panel B are almost
identical. All columns use protection against expropriation, instrumented with log settler
mortality. Results using constraint on the executive as the measure of property rights or
log population density in 1500 as the instrument are very similar, but not reported to
  34
     In addition, Appendix Table A3 reports partial reduced-form specifications in which we instrument
for property rights (using settler mortality in columns 1 through 6 and log population density in columns 7
through 12), but legal origin is entered directly. The specifications are useful since they do not restrict the
eﬀect of legal origin to work solely through legal formalism, and are informative on whether legal origin
has a direct eﬀect on the economic outcomes studied here. The results are similar to our baseline results
in Tables 4 through 7, but now English legal origin has a negative (i.e., wrong signed) and significant eﬀect
on GDP per capita and does not appear to be a significant determinant of stock market capitalization.
   We have also experimented with other measures of credit and financial development, including the same
measures as in Tables 6 and 7 but calculated over diﬀerent periods, measures of overall size of financial
system (sum of bank credit and stock market capitalization), M2 over GDP, and liquid liabilities over
GDP. The results are similar to those in Tables 6 and 7, and are available upon request.



                                                      28
save space.
   In columns 1 and 5, we restrict the sample to just common law countries (i.e., former
British colonies) and in columns 2 and 6 to just French legal origin countries. Here we
drop legal formalism, and examine whether there is an eﬀect of property rights institutions
within each legal “family”. There is a strong first stage for log settler mortality in both
specifications, with a slightly larger coeﬃcient for common law countries than for French
legal origin countries and a much higher R2 (e.g., R2 of 0.30 vs. 0.07, comparing columns
1 and 2 of Panel A). This result suggests that much of the considerable variation in
institutions within the set of common law countries can be explained by the colonization
strategy of European powers. In the second stage there is a large significant eﬀect of
property rights institutions on GDP per capita for both legal systems (with a larger,
but less precisely estimated, coeﬃcient for French legal origin countries). The eﬀect of
property rights on income per capita is approximately the same within “legal families” as
it is across all excolonies (compare with Table 4). The results for the investment to GDP
ratio are similar, while for credit and stock market development there is a stronger eﬀect
among common law countries
   Columns 3 and 7 drop the four “neo-Europes,” i.e., the richest former colonies with the
closest geographic conditions to Western Europe (Crosby, 1972): Australia, Canada, New
Zealand, and the USA. This is useful to show that the results are not driven simply by
the contrast between these four countries and other former European colonies. Without
these countries, the coeﬃcient for protection against expropriation goes up slightly in the
GDP per capita, investment, and private credit regressions and increases by about 50%
for stock market capitalization. Legal formalism shows the same pattern as before; it is
significant only for stock market capitalization. Legal formalism is also almost significant
for log GDP per capita, but with the wrong sign.
   Columns 4 and 8 in Panel A report the GDP per capita and investment-GDP ratio
regressions just for countries above median world income, to establish that the results are
not driven simply by the comparison of rich and poor countries. The results are close to
those in Table 4.
   Although there are no significant outliers in the GDP per capita and investment to
GDP ratio data used here, there are some major outliers in the financial development
outcomes. Columns 4 and 8 in Panel B drop outliers from the credit and stock market
capitalization regressions respectively. For credit, the outliers are Malaysia, South Africa,

                                             29
and the United States, and for the stock market they are Malaysia, Singapore, and South
Africa. The results for property rights institutions change little; the coeﬃcient falls from
0.28 (column 2 in Table 6) to 0.24 (column 4, Panel B, Table 8); and from 0.21 (column
2 in Table 7) to 0.14 (column 8, Panel B, Table 8). In both cases the standard error also
declines, so the eﬀect remains highly significant. Notably, once these outliers are dropped,
legal formalism is no longer a significant determinant of stock market development.

6.3       Additional Control Variables
Table 9 includes with three important control variables from the literature on long-run
growth and financial development.35 Columns 1, 4, 7 and 10 control for religion; columns
2, 5, 8 and 11 control for latitude, and columns 3, 6, 9 and 12 control for log average
inflation over 1970-97. In all columns, we include these control variables in the first-stage
regressions but do not report their coeﬃcients to save space; the first-stage results are
very similar to those in earlier tables. To save space, Table 9 only reports results using
protection against expropriation to measure property rights and log settler mortality as
the instrument. However, the results are similar if we use constraint on the executive to
measure property rights or log population density as the instrument.
       A number of recent papers have taken religion seriously as a determinant of financial
development (e.g., Stulz and Williamson, 2003). We use the measure from La Porta et
al. (1999) with the percent of the population that is Catholic, Protestant, Muslim and
“other”; these shares add to 100. In our specification, we treat Catholic as the omitted
base category. Including religion in this form hardly aﬀects the coeﬃcient on protection
against expropriation. The check measure of legal formalism remains positive, small, and
insignificant in column 1, and negative, small, and insignificant in columns 4 and 7. The
most notable change is in the results for stock market capitalization: in column 10, legal
formalism is no longer significant. In all cases, the p-values of the F-test for religion
variables indicate that these variables themselves are not significant.36
  35
     A fourth potential control is the level of human capital. Unfortunately, this is highly correlated
with our measures of property rights institutions–only countries with relatively good institutions have
encouraged the majority of the population to accumulate human capital. It is therefore diﬃcult to
disentangle the separate eﬀects of human capital, property rights, and the legal system without additional
instruments. When we include this measure as an exogenous regressor and use the protection against
expropriation measure, we find similar results to those in our baseline estimates. However, when we use
the constraint on the executive measure, there is too much multi-collinearity.
  36
     Stulz and Williamson (2003) argue that religion should be coded diﬀerently, with a “1” for the most
popular religion of a country and a zero for all other religions, no matter how large. Using this alternative


                                                     30
    It might also be useful to control for latitude, because countries that are closer to the
equator are often argued to be poorer, perhaps because of the hotter climate or because
they are exposed to more virulent diseases. The results in Table 9 confirm findings we
have reported in other work (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001, 2002)–once we
control for institutions there is no significant eﬀect for geography on income per capita.
These tables also show there is no significant eﬀect of geography on investment and on
measures of financial development. The pattern of results for property rights institutions
and legal formalism is essentially unchanged, except the check measure of legal formalism
is no longer a significant determinant of stock market capitalization (see column 11).
    Log inflation is included as the most plausible macroeconomic determinant of financial
development. Countries with high inflation are often thought to have less developed finan-
cial systems. However, the addition of this variable does not reduce the eﬀects of property
rights institutions, or increase the eﬀects of legal formalism, on growth, investment, and
financial development.

6.4     Controlling for GDP Per Capita
We have shown robust eﬀects of property rights institutions on GDP per capita, as well as
on investment, credit, and stock market development. These results are not informative,
however, on the question of whether the eﬀect of institutions on investment, credit and
stock market development is direct or indirect. One possibility is that the eﬀect is direct,
that is, present-day institutions aﬀect these outcomes directly. The polar alternative
is a purely indirect eﬀect whereby current and past institutions have determined GDP
per capita, and GDP per capita today is the main influence on investment and financial
development. In practice, both direct and indirect eﬀects are likely to be present.
    Table 10 briefly investigates this issue. We include log GDP per capita in 1995 on the
right hand side of regressions for the investment to GDP ratio and financial development.
Since we do not have plausible instruments for GDP, we have no choice but to treat
log GDP per capita as exogenous. As explained in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
(2001), this procedure generally leads to an upward bias in the estimated coeﬃcient
for the variable treated as exogenous, and a corresponding downward bias for the eﬀect
of property rights institutions. Here the problem is much worse, since log GDP per
coding does not significantly aﬀect our main results.



                                                   31
capita and property rights institutions are very strongly correlated precisely because these
institutions have a causal eﬀect on economic development–in fact, our results (e.g., Table
4) show that they are a major determinant of GDP per capita.
   Not surprisingly given these concerns, the results in Table 10 show a high degree of
collinearity, and log GDP per capita, property rights institutions, and legal formalism are
not individually significant. However, joint significance tests reported in the table show
that GDP per capita and property rights institutions are almost always jointly highly
significant, while GDP per capita and legal formalism are never jointly significant. These
results therefore confirm the overall patterns shown above–property rights institutions
but not contracting institutions have significant eﬀects on investment and financial devel-
opment. Unfortunately, however, they do not enable us to ascertain whether the eﬀect of
property rights institutions on investment and financial development is direct or indirect
through aﬀecting GDP per capita. This remains an interesting area for future research.

6.5    Corroborating Evidence
In terms of long-run economic and financial outcomes, our results suggest that the eﬀects
of legal formalism are quite limited. Tables 11 and 12 further explore why this may be the
case. Both tables use data from the Djankov et al. (2002) “Regulation of Entry” study
(with an extended sample provided by Djankov, 2003). We show OLS and IV results,
in pairs, for the protection against expropriation measure of property rights and both
measures of legal formalism; the full first stage results are provided for IV specifications.
   Table 11 reports regressions in which the log of the number of procedures for registering
a new business is the dependent variable. This is a good measure of the formal steps
needed to legally start a new firm which, as shown by Djankov et al. (2002), is highly
correlated with other measures of formal requirements imposed on firms. The pattern of
results in this table indicates that both legal formalism and property rights institutions
have significant eﬀects on the number of procedures.
   However, in Table 12 the results are quite diﬀerent. Here the dependent variable is the
actual cost of registering a new business, as a percent of GDP per capita (per annum).
Property rights institutions again have a large eﬀect on these costs: a one standard
deviation increase in protection against expropriation reduces the cost of registering by
0.65 of a standard deviation, which is quantitatively similar to its eﬀect on the number


                                             32
of procedures. But in this table there is no robust significant eﬀect for legal formalism
in the IV specifications. The coeﬃcient on legal formalism is consistently small; e.g., the
coeﬃcient of 0.03 in column 2 implies that a one standard deviation increase in legal
formalism causes only a 0.03 of a standard deviation increase in the cost of registration.
   These findings seem to corroborate our main results. Contracting institutions have
a significant eﬀect on the formal procedures that regulate business. But they appear to
have more limited eﬀects on the major economic outcomes–long-run growth, investment,
the overall size of the financial system, and the real costs of regulation that businesses
face.

6.6     Interpretation
Our empirical investigation reveals an interesting pattern: contracting institutions and
legal rules, as approximated by legal formalism, have some eﬀect on the form of finance
(the use of equity versus debt contracts) and the form of business regulation (in particu-
lar, the number of procedures necessary to open a business). But they have limited or no
eﬀects on major economic outcomes, including long-run growth (current income levels),
the investment to GDP ratio, and the overall amount of financial intermediation in the
economy (also on medium-run growth). Property rights institutions, which determine the
degree to which the government, politicians, and elites are constrained in their relation-
ships with the rest of the society, on the other hand, matter significantly for all these
outcomes.
   Although a precise explanation for this pattern of results is not possible with our
current level of knowledge, our simple reduced-form model suggests a potential expla-
nation: legal rules and procedures primarily aﬀect the contracting relationship between
private individuals, in particular between lenders and producers. As long as these legal
institutions are not extremely dysfunctional, individuals can avoid most of the adverse
eﬀects of bad legal rules by changing the terms of their contracts or entering into informal
arrangements. One way of contracting around these rules is to change the form of financial
intermediation, so in places with a high degree of legal formalism (i.e., worse contracting
institutions), we may see more debt rather than equity, perhaps because debt contracts
are cheaper to enforce. Once these adjustments have been made, the eﬀect of contracting
institutions on investments and growth is relatively limited.


                                            33
    When it comes to arrangements regulating property rights and the relationship be-
tween the state and individuals, i.e., property rights institutions, the option to engage in
ex ante contracts to avoid ex post distortions is not available. Individuals cannot write
contracts with the state to constrain future actions by the state and elites controlling the
state. Therefore, property rights institutions have a more important eﬀect on economic
outcomes than do contracting institutions.
    An alternative, and related, explanation would be based on the recent paper by
Djankov, Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003), where they introduce
the concept of an “institutions possibilities frontier,” representing the trade-oﬀ between
disorder and centralized control. In terms of their framework, we can think of legal rules
as moving an economy along a given frontier (e.g., greater formalism may correspond to
less disorder). Changes in property rights institutions, on the other hand, would induce
shifts of the frontier, so that with worse property rights institutions, a society has to
suﬀer higher costs of both disorder and centralized control. As a result, diﬀerences in
property rights institutions may have much more pronounced eﬀects on investment and
output than do diﬀerences in contracting institutions.
    At present, these interpretations are merely conjectures, however, and more detailed
work is necessary to investigate them in greater detail and also to determine the precise
channels through which property rights institutions matter so much for finance, invest-
ment, and long-run economic performance.


7     Conclusion
There is now considerable evidence that “institutions” are of first-order importance for
economic and financial outcomes. Douglass North, for example, emphasized in equal mea-
sure the importance of “contracting institutions”, enabling private contracts between cit-
izens, and “property rights institutions”, protecting the property rights of citizens against
rulers. Despite the importance of these questions for the study of long-run economic per-
formance, there has been relatively little work investigating which types of institutions
matter more and for which economic outcomes. This paper oﬀers a step in that direction.
    We proxied contracting institutions with the legal formalism measure of Djankov et al.,
and property rights institutions with measures of protection for citizens against govern-
ment expropriation and constraints on government power. We used a multiple instrumen-


                                             34
tal variables strategy in the sample of former European colonies, where both contracting
institutions (i.e., legal rules and procedures for private contracts) and property rights
institutions are shaped by the experience of colonialism. In this sample, there are strong
first-stage relationships between legal origin and legal formalism on the one hand, and
between colonization strategy and property rights institutions on the other. Using this
multiple instrumental variables strategy, we found robust evidence that property rights in-
stitutions have a major influence on long-run economic growth, investment, and financial
development, while contracting institutions appear to aﬀect the form of financial interme-
diation and the form of regulation, but have more limited eﬀects on growth, investment,
and the total amount of credit in the economy.37
       Our conjecture is that individuals can structure contracts to reduce the adverse ef-
fects from contracting institutions, for example, by changing the form of intermediation
to reduce the cost of providing outside finance to firms. Because of these adjustments,
the usual eﬀect of rules governing contracts on investment and growth may be relatively
limited; exceptions occur only when contracting institutions are extremely bad. In con-
trast, because enforceable contracts between the state and individuals are not possible,
property rights institutions constraining arbitrary behavior and expropriation by the state
and elites controlling the state have more important eﬀects on economic outcomes.
       We view this paper as a first step, and much more empirical and theoretical work
is needed. Our explanation for the patterns in the data is no more than a conjecture,
and detailed work using both macro and micro data is necessary to investigate whether
individuals are indeed avoiding the costs of distortionary legal rules by changing the terms
of their contracts and the form of their financial relations. Moreover, the eﬀects of property
rights institutions on economic outcomes, though highly robust, are still something of a
black box–how exactly do property rights institutions aﬀect investment, credit, and
growth? Is it because the government and politically powerful groups are expropriating
the incomes of other groups? Or is it because they are blocking entry by new groups and
producers? Or because they are creating a non-level playing field and a high degree of
inequality?

  37
    Our results also suggest that there may be a mispecification in growth regressions that use legal origin
as an instrument for financial development (see Levine, 2003, for a discussion of this common approach).
Legal origin is correlated with total financial intermediation or credit, but this eﬀect disappears once we
control for property rights institutions. Consequently, the instrumented financial development variable
in these growth regressions could be capturing the eﬀect of property rights institutions on growth.

                                                    35
8       References
     Acemoglu, Daron (2003a) “Why Not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Conflict,
Commitment and Politics,” Journal of Comparative Economics, forthcoming.
    Acemoglu, Daron (2003b) “State Power and Economic Development” MIT mimeo.
    Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001) “The
Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American
Economic Review, December, 91, 5, 1369-1401.
    Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal
of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income
Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, November, 1231-1294.
    Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Yunyong
Thaicharoen (2003) “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises,
and Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1), January, 49-123.
    Barro, Robert (1997) Determinants of Economic Growth, MIT University Press,
Cambridge.
    Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2001) “The Financial
Structure Database,” chapter 2 in Financial Structure and Economic Growth, edited by
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 17-80.
    Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine (2002) “Industry Growth and Capital Alloca-
tion: Does Having a Market-Based or Bank-Based System Matter?” Journal of Financial
Economics, 64, 147-180.
    Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2003a) “Law, En-
dowments, and Finance,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
    Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2003b) “Law and
Finance: Why Does Legal Origin Matter?” Journal of Comparative Economics, forth-
coming.
    Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, Jean-Francois Richard (2003) “Eco-
nomic Development, Legality, and the Transplant Eﬀect,” European Economic Review,
47(1), 165-195.
    Coase, Ronald (1937) “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, 4(16), 386-405.
    Coase (1960) “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, III,
1-44.


                                         36
   Crosby, Alfred (1972) The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Conse-
quences of 1492, Greenwood Press, Westport, Connecticut.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1989) Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical
World in the 19th Century, Cambridge University Press, New York.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1998) Disease and Empire: The Health of European Troops in
the Conquest of Africa, Cambridge University Press, New York.
   Dawson, John (1960) A History of Lay Judges, Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
   De Long, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer (1993) “Princes and Merchants:
European City Growth before the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics,
36, October, 671-702.
   Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maskimovic (2002) “Funding Growth in
Bank-Based and Market-Based Financial Systems: Evidence from Firm-Level Data,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 65(3), 337-363.
   Djankov, Simeon (2003) Personal Communication.
   Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2003) “The New Comparative Economics,” Journal of
Comparative Economics, forthcoming.
   Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer (2002) “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1),
1-37.
   Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer (2003) “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 2, May, 453-517.
   Easterly, William and Ross Levine (2003) “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How
Endowments Influence Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1),
January, 3-39.
   Ellickson, Robert C. (1991) Order Without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
   Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer (2002). “Legal Origins,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, November, 117, 1193-1230.
   Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart (1986) “The Costs and Benefits of Own-
ership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Ownership,” Journal of Political Economy, 94,
691-719.

                                          37
   Greif, Avner (1989) “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade: Evidence from
the Maghribi Traders,” Journal of Economic History, XLIX, 4, December, 857-882.
   Gurr, Ted Robert (1997) “Polity II: Political Structures and Regime Change, 1800-
1986,” Unpublished paper, University of Colorado, Boulder.
   Gutierrez, Hector (1986) “La Mortalité des Eveques Latino-Americains aux XVIIe
et XVIII Siecles,” Annales de Demographie Historique, 29-39.
   Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1990) “Property Rights and the Nature of the
Firm,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1119-58.
   Hart, Oliver (1995) Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
   Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten (2002), “Penn World Table
Version 6.1,” Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania
(CICUP), October, downloaded in March 2003 from http://webhost.bridgew.edu/baten/
   Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2002) “Prop-
erty Rights and Finance,” American Economic Review, December, 92, 1335-1356.
   Jones, Eric L. (1981) The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopol-
itics in the History of Europe and Asia, Cambridge University Press, New York.
   Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer (1995) “Institutions and Economic Perfor-
mance: Cross-Country Tests using Alternative Measures,” Economics and Politics, 7,
207-227.
   La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
Vishny (1997) “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, 1131-
1150.
   La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
W. Vishny (1998) “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155.
   La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
W. Vishny (1999) “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, V15, N1, 222-279.
   Levine, Ross (1997) “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and
Agenda,” Journal of Economic Literature, June, 35, 688-726.
   Levine, Ross (2003) “Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Mechanisms,”
Handbook of Economic Growth, forthcoming, March draft.
   Levine, Ross and Robert G. King (1993) “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter

                                          38
Might Be Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 153, August, 717-738.
   Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck (2000) “Financial Interme-
diation and Growth: Causality and Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 31-77.
   McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones (1978) Atlas of World Population History,
Facts on File, New York.
   Mahoney, Paul G. (2001) “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might
be Right,” Journal of Legal Studies, 30, 503-525.
   Merryman, John (1985) The Civil Law Tradition, Stanford University Press, Stan-
ford, CA.
   North, Douglass C. (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, W.W.
Norton & Co., New York.
   Olson, Mancur (2000) Power and Prosperity: Outgrowing Communist and Capi-
talist Dictatorships, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1999) “The Size and Scope of Govern-
ment: Comparative Politics with Rational Politicians, 1998 Alfred Marshall Lecture,”
European Economic Review, 43, 699-735.
   Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (1998) “Financial Dependence and Growth,”
American Economic Review 88, 3, 559-586.
   Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (2003) “The Great Reversals: The Politics
of Financial Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 69(1),
5-50.
   Shapiro, Martin (1981) Courts, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
   Stulz, René and Rohan Williamson (2003) “Culture, Openness, and Finance,”
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
   Williamson, Oliver (1975) Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Im-
plications, New York, NY, Free Press.
   Williamson, Oliver (1985) The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York,
NY, Free Press.
   World Bank (2003) World Development Indicators, at publications.worldbank.org/WDI/.




                                           39
                                                                                                          Table 1
                                                                                                    Descriptive Statistics
                                                       (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)                 (7)               (8)                (9)               (10)

                                                                                                           English          English           English                                   French            French             French
                                                                                                       excolonies with excolonies with excolonies with                              excolonies with    excolonies with   excolonies with
                                                 Whole World          Excolonies          English        low settler    medium settler      high settler          French              low settler      medium settler      high settler
                                                  Sample               Sample            excolonies       mortality        mortality         mortality          excolonies             mortality          mortality         mortality
                                                                                                                Mean Values (with standard deviations in parentheses)
Average Protection Against Risk                       7.07               6.39               6.93             7.93             6.21              6.21               6.02                   6.31              6.34               5.63
  of Expropriation                                   (1.81)             (1.47)             (1.70)          (1.63)            (1.42)            (1.43)             (1.16)                 (1.05)            (1.07)             (1.20)
Constraint on the Executive                           4.48               4.15               4.48             5.65             4.54              3.57               3.99                   4.32              4.87               3.31
                                                     (2.09)             (2.09)             (2.06)          (1.55)            (2.60)            (1.88)             (1.78)                 (2.05)            (1.72)             (1.50)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)                       3.66               3.78               2.77             2.38             2.57              3.15               4.65                   4.27              4.79               4.60
                                                     (1.06)             (1.24)             (0.88)          (0.96)            (0.59)            (0.79)             (0.75)                 (0.74)            (0.89)             (0.54)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                    3.73               3.75               2.99             2.98             2.61              3.15               4.60                   4.44              4.65               4.58
                                                     (0.92)             (1.09)             (0.68)          (0.82)            (0.49)            (0.58)             (0.79)                 (0.86)            (0.77)             (0.91)
Log GDP per capita in 1995 (PPP Measure)              8.36               7.91               8.17             9.04             8.21              7.65               7.71                   8.20              8.23               7.22
                                                     (1.11)             (1.00)             (1.14)          (1.03)            (1.12)            (0.91)             (0.83)                 (0.95)            (0.57)             (0.65)
Average Investment-GDP ratio                         14.73              12.30              14.86           19.42             10.13            13.67               10.53                  10.98             13.31               8.59
                                                     (7.89)             (7.21)             (8.37)          (9.71)            (4.97)            (7.34)             (5.49)                 (6.63)            (4.36)             (5.22)
Credit to the Private Sector                          0.42               0.36               0.48            0.83              0.36              0.29               0.26                   0.45              0.27               0.19
                                                     (0.40)             (0.35)             (0.44)          (0.55)            (0.22)            (0.25)             (0.21)                 (0.19)            (0.17)             (0.22)
Stock Market Capitalization                           0.22               0.17               0.30            0.72              0.13              0.04               0.07                   0.18              0.07               0.03
                                                     (0.37)             (0.37)             (0.51)          (0.68)            (0.15)            (0.06)             (0.14)                 (0.28)            (0.08)             (0.09)
Log Number of Procedures                              2.25               2.27               1.88            1.64              2.09              2.19               2.61                   2.38              2.68               2.62
 for Registering a New Business                      (0.51)             (0.57)             (0.56)          (0.59)            (0.43)            (0.36)             (0.29)                 (0.19)            (0.29)             (0.32)
Cost of Registering a New Business                    0.48               0.70               0.49            0.15              0.35              1.05               0.89                   0.34              1.02               1.00
 as Percent of GDP per capita                        (0.81)             (1.05)             (0.88)          (0.18)            (0.23)            (1.33)             (1.17)                 (0.42)            (1.42)             (1.04)
Log Settler Mortality                                  n.a.              4.68               4.25            3.01              4.56              6.14               4.93                   3.78              4.44               5.75
                                                                        (1.20)             (1.49)          (0.64)            (0.26)            (0.94)             (0.92)                 (0.46)            (0.25)             (0.64)
Log Population Density in 1500                        n.a.               0.52               0.25            -0.54             1.35              0.37               0.75                   0.83              0.36               0.99
                                                                        (1.53)             (1.77)          (2.53)            (1.15)            (1.13)             (1.29)                 (2.61)            (1.20)             (0.95)
   Mean values, with standard deviations in parentheses. "High", "medium", and "low" settler mortality are defined as roughly one third each of the distribution for all excolonies. We have log settler mortality data for 80
former colonies: 29 English legal origin, of which 14 with low mortality, 7 with medium mortality, and 8 with high mortality; 51 French legal origin, of which 8 with low mortality, 20 with medium mortality and 23 with high
mortality. Log settler mortality and log population density in 1500 defined only for excolonies. For detailed sources and definitions see Appendix Table A1.
   Average protection against risk of expropriation ranges from 1 to 10, where a higher score indicates more protection. The number of observations is 120 (whole world); 75 excolonies; 31 English legal origin excolonies of
which 13 with low settler mortality, 6 with medium settler mortality, and 12 with high settler mortality; 44 French legal origin excolonies, of which 6 with low settler mortality, 18 with medium settler mortality, and 20 with high
settler mortality.
  Constraint on the Executive ranges from 1 to 7, where a higher score indicates more constraint. The number of observations is 159 (whole world); 92 excolonies; 35 English legal origin excolonies of which 13 with low
settler mortality, 5 with medium settler mortality and 17 with high settler mortality; 56 French legal origin excolonies, of which 7 with low settler mortality, 20 with medium settler mortality, and 29 with high settler mortality.
  Legal Formalism (Check Measure) ranges from 0 to 7, where a higher score indicates a higher level of control or intervention in the judicial process. The number of observations is 113 (whole world); 65 excolonies; 30
English legal origin excolonies of which 11 with low settler mortality, 5 with medium settler mortality, and 14 with high settler mortality; 35 legal origin French excolonies, of which 5 with low settler mortality, 17 with medium
settler mortality, and 13 with high settler mortality.
  Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure) ranges from 0 to 7, where a higher score indicates a higher level of control or intervention in the judicial process. The number of observations is 103 (whole world); 55 excolonies; 29
English legal origin excolonies of which 11 with low settler mortality, 5 with medium settler mortality, and 13 with high settler mortality; 26 French legal origin excolonies, of which 4 with low settler mortality, 16 with medium
settler mortality, and 6 with high settler mortality.
  Log GDP per capita in 1995 is PPP adjusted. The number of observations is 168 (whole world); 97 excolonies; 42 English legal origin excolonies of which 13 with low settler mortality, 7 with medium settler mortality and
22 with high settler mortality; 55 French legal origin excolonies, of which 8 with low settler mortality, 19 with medium settler mortality and 28 with high settler mortality.
   Investment-GDP ratio is in current prices. The number of observations is 167 (whole world); 98 excolonies; 42 English legal origin excolonies of which 13 with low settler mortality, 7 with medium settler mortality and 22
with high settler mortality; 55 French legal origin excolonies, of which 7 with low settler mortality, 19 with medium settler mortality and 29 with high settler mortality.
   Credit to the private sector is percent of GDP. The number of observations is 165 (whole world); 97 excolonies; 43 English legal origin excolonies of which 14 with low settler mortality, 7 with medium settler mortality, and
22 with high settler mortality; 54 French legal origin excolonies, of which 8 with low settler mortality, 19 with medium settler mortality, and 27 with high settler mortality.
  Stock Market Capitalization is the market value of all traded stocks as a percent of GDP. The number of observations is 115 (whole world); 84 excolonies; 37 English legal origin excolonies of which 13 with low settler
mortality, 7 with medium settler mortality and 17 with high settler mortality; 47 French legal origin excolonies, of which 7 with low settler mortality, 17 with medium settler mortality and 23 with high settler mortality.
  Log procedures is the log of number of procedures needed to open a new business. We have data on 82 countries in our sample, of which 43 are former colonies: 20 English legal origin excolonies, of which 11 are low
mortality, 2 are medium mortality and 7 are high mortality; 23 French legal origin excolonies, of which 4 are low mortality, 11 are medium mortality and 8 are high mortality.
  Cost of registering a new business as a percent of GDP per capita per annum. We have data on 81 countries in our sample, of which 42 are former colonies: 20 English origin excolonies, of which 11 are low mortality, 2
are medium mortality and 7 are high mortality; 22 French origin excolonies, of which 4 are low mortality, 11 are medium mortality and 7 are high mortality.
  Log Population density in 1500 is available for 98 former colonies, of which: 42 are English origin, of which 13 are low mortality, 7 are medium mortality, and 22 are high mortality; and 56 are French legal origin, of which 6
are low mortality, 20 are medium mortality, and 30 are high mortality.
                                                              Table 2
           Contracting Institutions: GDP per capita, Credit, and Stock Market Capitalization
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)
                                                        Excolonies     Excolonies                   Excolonies
                                       Whole World       Sample         Sample       Whole World     Sample      Excolonies Sample

                                                                       2SLS, with
                                                                         Check                                      2SLS, with
                                                    OLS                 Measure                  OLS             Eviction Measure
                                                         Panel A: Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)            -0.28           -0.21          -0.18
                                          (0.10)          (0.10)         (0.14)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                                       -0.10          -0.06           -0.04
                                                                                        (0.12)         (0.12)          (0.17)
R-Squared in OLS                          0.07            0.07                          0.008          0.005
                                                   First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                                        -1.87                                      -1.61
                                                                           (0.20)                                     (0.20)
R-Squared in First Stage                                                0.58                                           0.56
Number of Observations                     109            65             65              99             55              55
                                               Panel B: Dependent variable is average ratio of investment to GDP in 1990s
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)            -1.85         -1.19          -1.77
                                          (0.67)        (0.71)         (0.94)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                                      -0.69          -0.43           -1.15
                                                                                       (0.82)         (0.91)          (1.22)
R-Squared in OLS                           0.07          0.04                          0.007          0.004
Number of Observations                     110            65             65             100             55              55
                                        Panel C: Dependent variable is credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP in 1998
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)            -0.16           -0.14          -0.13
                                          (0.04)          (0.03)         (0.05)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                                       -0.08          -0.08           -0.12
                                                                                        (0.05)         (0.05)          (0.07)
R-Squared in OLS                          0.16            0.21                           0.03           0.05
Number of Observations                    104              65             65              94             55             55
                                        Panel D: Dependent variable is stock market capitalization as a percent of GDP, average
                                                                             over 1990-95
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)            -0.17           -0.17          -0.16
                                          (0.03)          (0.04)         (0.05)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                                         -0.11          -0.09              -0.17
                                                                                          (0.05)         (0.06)             (0.07)
R-Squared in OLS                             0.24          0.26                            0.06           0.05
Number of Observations                         90           62              62              80             52                 52
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country. The dependent variable
is: in Panel A, log GDP per capita (in PPP terms) in 1995, from the World Bank's WDI on-line; in Panel B, the investment to GDP
ratio, in current prices, average over 1990s, from Penn World Tables 6.1; in Panel C, level of credit to the private sector as a
percent of GDP in 1998, from the World Bank's WDI on-line; and in Panel D, the level of stock market capitalization as a percent
of GDP, 1990-95, from Beck et al (2003a). The independent variable is: in columns 1, 2 and 3, legal formalism, using the "check
measure", from Djankov (2003); in columns 4, 5, and 6, legal formalism, using the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In all four panels the measure of legal formalism is instrumented using a dummy variable for
whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and
Djankov (2003).
                                                                          Table 3
                                    Property Rights Institutions: GDP per capita, Credit, and Stock Market Capitalization
                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                   (5)                 (6)                   (7)                 (8)
                                         Whole World      Excolonies Sample     Excolonies Sample   Excolonies Sample       Whole World      Excolonies Sample     Excolonies Sample   Excolonies Sample
                                                                                   2SLS, with         2SLS, with                                                      2SLS, with           2SLS, with
                                                                                 Protect. Against   Protect. Against                                                 Constraint on        Constraint on
                                                       OLS                           Exprop.            Exprop.                         OLS                            Executive            Executive
                                                                                       Panel A: Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
Average Protection                           0.56                0.52                  1.05             1.07
 Against Risk of Exprop.                    (0.04)              (0.06)                (0.19)           (0.22)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                                         0.34                0.32                  0.76                0.70
                                                                                                                               (0.04)              (0.05)                (0.15)              (0.15)
R-Squared in OLS                             0.63                0.54                                                          0.35                0.34
                                                                  First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protection Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive )
Log Settler Mortality                                                                 -0.57                                                                               -0.80
                                                                                     (0.13)                                                                              (0.16)
Log Population Density                                                                                     -0.36                                                                              -0.56
 in 1500                                                                                                  (0.10)                                                                             (0.12)
R-Squared in First Stage                                                              0.23                 0.17                                                           0.26                0.24
Number of Observations                       110                  65                   65                   65                  146                  69                    69                  69
                                                                              Panel B: Dependent variable is average ratio of investment to GDP in 1990s
Average Protection                           3.17                3.00                 5.50                 5.48
 Against Risk of Exprop.                    (0.33)              (0.48)               (1.12)               (1.33)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                                         1.61                1.40                  4.16                3.76
                                                                                                                               (0.30)              (0.42)                (1.04)              (1.08)
R-Squared in OLS                             0.45                0.38                                                           0.16                0.14
Number of Observations                       113                  65                   65                  65                   149                  70                   70                   70
                                                                         Panel C: Dependent variable is credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP in 1998
Average Protection                           0.15                0.16                 0.37                0.31
 Against Risk of Exprop.                    (0.02)              (0.03)               (0.08)              (0.08)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                                         0.08                0.08                  0.25                0.17
                                                                                                                               (0.02)              (0.02)                (0.06)              (0.05)
R-Squared in OLS                             0.32                0.33                                                          0.15                0.19
Number of Observations                       109                  66                   66                  66                  140                  70                    70                   70
                                                               Panel D: Dependent variable is stock market capitalization as a percent of GDP, average over 1990-95
Average Protection                           0.11               0.14               0.30                0.26
 Against Risk of Exprop.                    (0.02)             (0.03)             (0.08)              (0.09)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                                         0.06                0.06                  0.21                0.14
                                                                                                                               (0.02)              (0.02)                (0.06)              (0.05)
R-Squared in OLS                             0.24                0.25                                                           0.12               0.07
Number of Observations                        95                  63                   63                  63                   105                 66                    66                   66
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country. The dependent variable is: in Panel A, log GDP per capita (in PPP terms) in 1995; in Panel B,
the investment to GDP ratio, in current prices, average over 1990s, from Penn World Tables 6.1; in Panel C, the level of credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP in 1998, from the World Bank's
WDI on-line; and in Panel D, the level of stock market capitalization as a percent of GDP, 1990-95, from Beck et al (2003a). The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in columns 1
through 4, average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001); in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the executive, averaged over the 1990s, from
Polity IV. The measure of institutions is instrumented: in columns 3 and 7, using log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement) from Acemoglu, Johnson
and Robinson (2001); and in columns 4 and 8, using log population density in 1500 from Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002).
                                                                          Table 4
                                                Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: GDP per capita
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)             (6)                 (7)         (8)
                                                                                 Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
                                                       2SLS, with                                                            2SLS, with                       2SLS, with
                                                     Protect Against                   2SLS, with Protect                   Constraint on                    Constraint on
                                                    Exprop. & Check                    Against Exprop. &                   Exec. & Check                    Exec. & Eviction
                                         OLS            Measure              OLS        Eviction Measure         OLS          Measure             OLS          Measure
                                                                                          OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                        0.63             0.95               0.64             1.53
 Against Risk of Expropriation           (0.08)           (0.16)             (0.08)           (0.25)

Constraint on Executive                                                                                          0.31           0.99             0.33             0.75
                                                                                                                (0.07)          (0.29)           (0.07)          (0.18)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)           0.11             0.35                                                  -0.16           0.05
                                         (0.09)           (0.15)                                                (0.10)          (0.24)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                            0.28             0.45                                               -0.04           0.08
                                                                             (0.09)           (0.16)                                             (0.11)          (0.20)
R-Squared in OLS                         0.62                                0.61                                0.33                            0.34
                                                First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                        0.60                                0.44                             -0.002                           -0.22
                                                           (0.31)                              (0.33)                            (0.48)                          (0.46)
Log Settler Mortality                                       -0.71                               -0.70                             -0.65                           -0.92
                                                           (0.12)                              (0.15)                            (0.19)                          (0.21)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.50                                0.42                              0.21                           0.33
                                                             First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                        -1.96                               -1.69                             -1.88                            -1.7
                                                           (0.24)                              (0.24)                            (0.23)                          (0.24)
Log Settler Mortality                                       0.15                                -0.02                              0.11                           0.01
                                                           (0.10)                              (0.11)                            (0.09)                          (0.11)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.63                                0.57                              0.62                            0.56
Number of Observations                    51                51                43                43                51             51               42              42
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is log
GDP per capita (PPP adjusted) in 1995, from the World Bank's WDI on-line. The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in columns 1 through 4, average
protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001); in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the executive, averaged over the
1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from Djankov (2003); in columns 3-
4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8
the instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and
Djankov (2003); and log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement).
                                                                     Table 5
                                        Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Investment-GDP ratio
                                         (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)              (7)           (8)
                                                                       Dependent variable is average ratio of investment to GDP in 1990s
                                                       2SLS, with                         2SLS, with                        2SLS, with                     2SLS, with
                                                     Protect Against                    Protect Against                    Constraint on                  Constraint on
                                                    Exprop. & Check                       Exprop. &                       Exec. & Check                  Exec. & Eviction
                                        OLS             Measure              OLS       Eviction Measure         OLS          Measure            OLS         Measure
                                                                                         OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                       3.88              4.68              4.23             5.28
 Against Risk of Expropriation          (0.65)            (1.11)            (0.72)           (1.18)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                         1.08           4.70              1.04          3.91
                                                                                                               (0.57)         (1.87)            (0.66)        (1.40)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)          0.67              0.57                                                 -1.05          -0.80
                                        (0.71)            (1.08)                                               (0.83)         (1.55)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                           1.57             0.91                                               -0.46         -0.85
                                                                            (0.85)           (1.20)                                             (1.01)        (1.64)
R-squared in OLS                        0.47                                 0.47                              0.10                             0.06
                                               First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                        0.60                                0.44                           -0.002                          -0.22
                                                          (0.31)                              (0.33)                           (0.48)                         (0.46)
Log Settler Mortality                                      -0.71                               -0.70                            -0.65                          -0.92
                                                          (0.12)                              (0.15)                           (0.19)                         (0.21)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.50                                0.42                            0.21                           0.33
                                                             First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                       -1.96                               -1.69                            -1.88                          -1.70
                                                          (0.24)                              (0.24)                           (0.23)                         (0.24)
Log Settler Mortality                                       0.15                               -0.02                             0.11                           0.01
                                                          (0.10)                              (0.11)                           (0.09)                         (0.11)
R-Squared in First Stage                                   0.63                                0.57                             0.62                           0.56
Number of Observations                   51                51                 43               43                51             51               42            42
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is
the investment to GDP ratio, in current prices, average over 1990s, from Penn World Tables 6.1. The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in
columns 1 through 4, average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001); in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the
executive, averaged over the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from
Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS
results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); and log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement).
                                                                         Table 6
                                                Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Private Credit
                                          (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)            (6)                 (7)           (8)
                                                                   Dependent variable is credit to the private sector in 1998 as a percent of GDP
                                                       2SLS, with                                                           2SLS, with                      2SLS, with
                                                     Protect Against                  2SLS, with Protect                   Constraint on                   Constraint on
                                                       Exprop. &                      Against Exprop. &                   Exec. & Check                   Exec. & Eviction
                                         OLS         Check Measure          OLS        Eviction Measure         OLS          Measure             OLS         Measure
                                                                                          OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                        0.13            0.28              0.19              0.36
 Against Risk of Expropriation           (0.04)           (0.07)           (0.05)            (0.09)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                         0.06            0.27             0.06            0.19
                                                                                                               (0.03)          (0.10)           (0.03)          (0.06)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)           -0.09            0.01                                                 -0.13           -0.08
                                         (0.04)           (0.07)                                               (0.04)          (0.08)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                         0.01              0.001                                               -0.08           -0.13
                                                                           (0.05)            (0.09)                                             (0.05)          (0.08)
R-squared in OLS                         0.42                               0.34                                0.28                             0.13
                                                First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                        0.60                               0.44                            -0.002                            -0.22
                                                          (0.31)                              (0.33)                           (0.48)                           (0.46)
Log Settler Mortality                                      -0.71                               -0.70                            -0.66                            -0.92
                                                          (0.12)                              (0.15)                           (0.19)                           (0.21)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.50                               0.42                             0.21                            0.33
                                                              First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                       -1.96                               -1.69                            -1.88                            -1.70
                                                          (0.24)                              (0.24)                           (0.23)                           (0.24)
Log Settler Mortality                                       0.15                               -0.02                            0.11                             0.01
                                                          (0.10)                              (0.11)                           (0.09)                           (0.11)
R-Squared in First Stage                                   0.63                                0.57                             0.62                             0.56
Number of Observations                    51               51                43               43                 51             51                42             42

   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is
credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP in 1998, from the World Bank. The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in columns 1 through 4,
average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001); in columns 4 through 8, constraint on the executive, averaged over
the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from Djankov (2003); in
columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS results. In columns 2,
4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003)
and Djankov (2003); and log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement).
                                                                     Table 7
                                    Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Stock Market Capitalization
                                          (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)           (8)
                                                             Dependent variable is stock market capitalization, average 1990-95, as a percent of GDP

                                                       2SLS, with                        2SLS, with                         2SLS, with                     2SLS, with
                                                     Protect Against                   Protect Against                     Constraint on                  Constraint on
                                                       Exprop. &                         Exprop. &                        Exec. & Check                  Exec. & Eviction
                                         OLS         Check Measure          OLS       Eviction Measure         OLS           Measure             OLS        Measure
                                                                                          OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                        0.10            0.21              0.17             0.32
 Against Risk of Expropriation           (0.04)           (0.07)           (0.06)           (0.10)

Constraint on Executive                                                                                        0.04             0.20             0.05          0.17
                                                                                                              (0.03)           (0.09)           (0.04)        (0.06)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)           -0.15            -0.10                                               -0.17            -0.16
                                         (0.05)           (0.07)                                              (0.04)           (0.07)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                          -0.03            -0.10                                               -0.10         -0.20
                                                                           (0.07)           (0.10)                                              (0.06)        (0.08)
R-squared in OLS                         0.43                               0.23                              0.31                               0.11
                                                First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                         0.61                             0.45                              -0.05                          -0.28
                                                           (0.31)                            (0.33)                            (0.49)                         (0.46)
Log Settler Mortality                                       -0.71                             -0.70                             -0.65                          -0.91
                                                           (0.12)                            (0.15)                            (0.19)                         (0.21)
R-Squared in First Stage                                     0.50                             0.42                              0.20                           0.33
                                                              First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                        -2.00                             -1.76                             -1.93                          -1.77
                                                           (0.24)                            (0.23)                            (0.23)                         (0.23)
Log Settler Mortality                                        0.15                            -0.004                             0.11                          0.004
                                                           (0.09)                            (0.10)                            (0.09)                         (0.11)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.66                              0.62                              0.65                           0.62
Number of Observations                    50                50               42               42                50              50                41           41
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is
the level of stock market capitalization as a percent of GDP in 1990-95, from Beck et al (2003). The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in columns
1 through 4, average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); and in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the
executive, averaged over the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from
Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS
results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); and log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement).
                                                       Table 8
                           Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Alternative Samples
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
                                               Just French Without Just countries                          Just French     Without Just countries
                                  Just Common legal origin     neo-    above median         Just Common legal origin         neo-    above median
                                  Law countries countries     Europes world income          Law countries countries        Europes world income
            Panel A:               Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995           Dependent variable is investment-GDP ratio in 1990s
                                                                                Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                    1.12          1.45        1.10           1.15            6.30            5.37          5.72           6.65
 Against Risk of Expropriation        (0.27)        (0.67)      (0.23)         (0.29)          (1.78)          (2.46)        (1.57)         (2.18)
Legal Formalism                                                  0.31           0.40                                          0.26           1.52
 (Check Measure)                                                (0.16)         (0.22)                                        (1.12)         (1.63)
                                                           First Stage for Average Protection Against Risk of Expropriation
English Legal Origin                                              0.33          0.61                                         0.33            0.61
                                                                 (0.30)        (0.39)                                       (0.30)          (0.39)
Log Settler Mortality                 -0.59         -0.32        -0.55          -0.65          -0.59          -0.45         -0.55           -0.65
                                      (0.19)        (0.19)       (0.13)        (0.19)         (0.19)          (0.20)        (0.13)          (0.19)
R-Squared in First Stage               0.30          0.07         0.32          0.41           0.30            0.12          0.32            0.41
                                                                   First Stage for Check Measure of Legal Formalism
English Legal Origin                                             -1.89          -2.16                                       -1.89           -2.16
                                                                 (0.26)        (0.32)                                       (0.26)          (0.32)
Log Settler Mortality                                             0.09          0.12                                         0.09            0.12
                                                                 (0.11)        (0.16)                                       (0.11)          (0.16)
R-Squared in First Stage                                          0.56          0.65                                         0.56            0.65
Number of Observations                  25           40           47            42               25             40            47             42

                                               Just French     Without                                    Just French       Without
                                  Just Common legal origin      neo-          Without       Just Common legal origin         neo-          Without
                                  Law countries countries      Europes        Outliers      Law countries countries         Europes        Outliers
                                  Dependent variable is credit to the private sector as a    Dependent variable is stock market capitalization as a
            Panel B:                               percent of GDP                                              percent of GDP
Average Protection                    0.44          0.24        0.35           0.24            0.39            0.09          0.36           0.14
 Against Risk of Expropriation        (0.13)        (0.17)      (0.11)         (0.06)          (0.15)          (0.05)        (0.11)         (0.05)

Legal Formalism                                                 -0.03          -0.02                                         -0.14          -0.06
 (Check Measure)                                                (0.08)         (0.06)                                        (0.07)         (0.05)
Number of Observations                   26            40          47             48                25             38            46             47
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are two stage least squares; cross-sectional data with one observation per country; we use only
the excolonies sample. The dependent variables are: in columns 1-4, Panel A, log GDP per capita, PPP adjusted, from the World Bank's WDI on-
line; in columns 5-8, Panel A, investment-GDP ratio, average over 1990s, from Penn World Tables 6.1; in columns 1-4, Panel B, credit to the private
sector as share of GDP in 1998, from the World Bank's WDI on-line; in columns 5-8, Panel B, stock market capitalization as share of GDP, from
Beck et al. (2003a). The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is average protection against risk of expropriation, as used in
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001). The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is the "check measure", from Djankov
(2003). The instruments are: in columns 3-4 and 7-8 a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov,
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); in all columns, log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000
per annum with replacement).
   Columns 3 and 7 drop the four "neo-Europes": Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and USA. In columns 4 and 8, Panel A, we drop all countries
below median world income (using GDP per capita, PPP, in 1995). In columns 4 and 8, Panel B, we drop outliers. The Excolonies Sample includes
all former colonies of European Powers for which we have data. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                       Table 9
                                                         Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Other Control Variables
                                       (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)              (9)              (10)           (11)            (12)
                                  Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in     Dependent Variable is investment-GDP         Dependent Variable is private credit as a           Dependent variable is stock market
                                                    1995                                         ratio                                    percent of GDP                            capitalization as percent of GDP
                                    Religion        Latitude     Log Inflation    Religion      Latitude    Log Inflation      Religion       Latitude       Log Inflation       Religion       Latitude     Log Inflation
                                                                                                                         Second Stage
Average Protection                    0.88            0.96            0.98            3.65        5.60           4.68            0.28           0.30             0.28              0.21           0.28            0.22
 Against Risk of Expropriation       (0.16)          (0.18)          (0.16)         (1.36)       (1.32)         (1.13)          (0.09)         (0.09)           (0.07)            (0.09)         (0.09)          (0.07)
Legal Formalism                       0.09            0.34            0.32           -2.56        0.93           0.55            -0.05         0.001             0.01              -0.14          -0.08           -0.10
(Check Measure)                      (0.28)          (0.15)          (0.16)         (2.31)       (1.14)         (1.14)          (0.15)         (0.08)           (0.07)            (0.15)         (0.08)          (0.08)

p-value for religion                 [0.50]                                         [0.24]                                      [0.82]                                            [0.48]

Latitude                                              0.37                                       -12.70                                         -0.31                                             -0.86
                                                     (1.00)                                      (7.42)                                        (0.49)                                            (0.51)
Log Inflation                                                         0.08                                       0.11                                            -0.03                                            -0.02
                                                                     (0.09)                                     (0.65)                                          (0.70)                                           (0.04)
                                                                                                 First Stage for Average Protection Against Expropriation
English Legal Origin                  0.09            0.61            0.58           0.09         0.61           0.58           0.09          0.61               0.58               0.08           0.62            0.58
                                     (0.42)          (0.31)          (0.33)         (0.42)       (0.31)         (0.33)         (0.42)        (0.31)             (0.33)            (0.44)         (0.31)          (0.33)
Log Settler Mortality                 -0.70           -0.65           -0.71          -0.70        -0.65          -0.71          -0.70         -0.65              -0.71             -0.70          -0.65           -0.71
                                     (0.12)          (0.13)          (0.13)         (0.12)       (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.12)        (0.13)             (0.13)            (0.13)         (0.14)          (0.13)
R-Squared in First Stage              0.55           0.52            0.50           0.55         0.52           0.50             0.55           0.52             0.50             0.55            0.52           0.50
                                                                                                    First Stage for Check Measure of Legal Formalism
English Legal Origin                  -1.10           -1.97           -1.94          -1.10        -1.97          -1.94           -1.10          -1.97            -1.94             -1.13          -2.01           -1.94
                                     (0.28)          (0.24)          (0.25)         (0.28)       (0.24)         (0.25)          (0.28)         (0.24)           (0.25)            (0.29)         (0.24)          (0.25)
Log Settler Mortality                 0.19            0.12            0.15           0.19         0.12           0.15            0.19           0.12             0.15              0.19           0.12            0.15
                                     (0.08)          (0.11)          (0.09)         (0.08)       (0.11)         (0.09)          (0.08)         (0.11)           (0.09)            (0.08)         (0.10)          (0.09)
R-Squared in First Stage              0.76           0.64            0.66           0.76         0.64           0.66             0.76           0.64             0.66             0.76            0.66           0.66

Number of Observations                 51              51             50             51            51             50              51             51               50                50             50              50
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are two stage least squares; cross-sectional data with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variables are: in columns 1-
3, log GDP per capita in 1995; in columns 4-6, investment-GDP ratio, average over 1990s; in columns 7-9, private credit as share of GDP; in columns 10-12, stock market capitalization as share of GDP. The
independent variables are: in columns 1, 4 and 7, dummy variables for majority religions, Protestant, Muslim, and Other, with Catholic as the omitted category, from La Porta et al (1999); in columns 2, 5 and 8, the
absolute normalized value of distance from the equator (i.e., a standardized measure of latitude), in which a higher value indicates that a country's capital is further from the equator; in columns 3, 6 and 9, the log of
average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1997, from the World Bank. The other control variables are included in the first stage but not reported to save space.
 The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is the "check measure", from Djankov (2003). The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is constraint on the executive, averaged
over the 1990s, from Polity IV. The instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov
(2003); and log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement). The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which we have data. For more
detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                      Table 10
                                                Investment-GDP ratio, Credit, and Market Capitalization: Controlling for GDP per capita
                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)                  (5)                (6)               (7)                 (8)               (9)              (10)             (11)               (12)
                                              Dependent variable is average ratio investment to GDP in 1990s                       Dependent variable is credit to private sector                             Dependent variable is market capitalization

                                                                              2SLS, with           2SLS, with                                                2SLS, with        2SLS, with                                         2SLS, with           2SLS, with
                                              2SLS, with      2SLS, with    Protect Against      Protect Against       2SLS, with      2SLS, with          Protect Against   Protect Against      2SLS, with      2SLS, with    Protect Against      Protect Against
                                            Protect Against Protect Against   Exprop. &            Exprop. &         Protect Against Protect Against         Exprop. &         Exprop. &        Protect Against Protect Against   Exprop. &            Exprop. &
                                              Exprop. &       Exprop. &        Eviction             Eviction           Exprop. &       Exprop. &              Eviction          Eviction          Exprop. &       Exprop. &        Eviction             Eviction
                                            Check Measure Check Measure        Measure              Measure          Check Measure Check Measure              Measure           Measure         Check Measure Check Measure        Measure              Measure
                                                                                                                                             Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                                -0.59            5.11              2.71              3.14                0.51               -0.04           1.83                   -0.12            0.42              0.04             1.96                -0.04
 Against Risk of Expropriation                   (6.72)           (9.27)           (20.17)            (4.04)              (0.64)             (0.42)          (5.38)                 (0.24)           (0.62)            (0.51)           (5.95)              (0.31)

Legal Formalism (Check Measure)                   -1.28            0.99                                                    0.07               -0.11                                                   -0.03             -0.14
                                                 (2.66)           (4.02)                                                  (0.25)             (0.18)                                                  (0.25)            (0.22)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                                   -0.18             0.02                                                      0.62                -0.18                                               0.60                -0.22
                                                                                    (8.58)            (2.03)                                                    (2.29)              (0.12)                                              (2.53)              (0.15)

Log GDP per capita in 1995                        5.35             0.64              2.57              2.42                -0.24              0.27               -1.47               0.37             -0.21             0.15             -1.65               0.26
                                                 (6.14)           (7.51)           (19.49)            (3.38)              (0.58)             (0.34)             (5.20)              (0.20)           (0.57)            (0.41)           (5.76)              (0.26)

p-value for joint test Protection against        [0.00]           [0.00]            [0.00]            [0.00]              [0.01]             [0.00]             [0.43]              [0.00]           [0.05]            [0.00]           [0.59]              [0.00]
 Expropriation and GDP per capita

p-value for joint test Check Measure             [0.46]           [0.42]            [0.65]            [0.36]              [0.90]             [0.62]             [0.96]              [0.20]           [0.42]            [0.49]           [0.89]              [0.32]
 of Formalism and GDP per capita
                                                                                                                                 First Stage for Protection Against Expropriation
English Legal Origin                              0.67             0.80              0.70              0.71                0.67               0.80              0.70              0.71                0.70              0.82             0.75                0.73
                                                 (0.25)           (0.24)            (0.28)            (0.25)              (0.25)             (0.24)            (0.28)            (0.25)              (0.25)            (0.24)           (0.28)              (0.26)
Log Settler Mortality                             -0.17                              -0.03                                 -0.17                                -0.03                                 -0.16                              -0.01
                                                 (0.15)                             (0.20)                                (0.15)                               (0.20)                                (0.15)                             (0.20)
Log Population Density in 1500                                     -0.07                               -0.12                                  -0.07                               -0.12                                 -0.08                                -0.12
                                                                  (0.08)                              (0.09)                                 (0.08)                              (0.09)                                (0.08)                               (0.09)
Log GDP per capita in 1995                        0.84             0.80              0.95               0.70                0.84               0.80              0.95              0.70               0.86              0.81             0.99                 0.71
                                                 (0.17)           (0.13)            (0.22)            (0.16)              (0.17)             (0.13)            (0.22)            (0.16)              (0.17)            (0.13)           (0.23)              (0.16)
R-Squared in First Stage                          0.68             0.62              0.61              0.53                 0.68              0.62              0.61              0.53                0.68              0.62             0.58                0.56
                                                                                                                          First Stage for Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                              -1.97            -1.94             -1.72             -1.66               -1.97              -1.94             -1.72             -1.66               -2.02             -1.98            -1.81               -1.73
                                                 (0.24)           (0.22)            (0.25)            (0.22)              (0.24)             (0.22)            (0.25)            (0.22)              (0.24)            (0.21)           (0.23)              (0.20)
Log Settler Mortality                              0.05                              -0.08                                  0.05                                -0.08                                  0.03                              -0.13
                                                 (0.14)                             (0.18)                                (0.14)                               (0.18)                                (0.14)                             (0.17)
Log Population Density in 1500                                     0.03                                -0.04                                   0.03                               -0.04                                 0.04                                 -0.03
                                                                  (0.08)                              (0.08)                                 (0.08)                              (0.08)                                (0.08)                               (0.07)
Log GDP per capita in 1995                        -0.14            -0.12             -0.09             -0.09               -0.14              -0.12             -0.09             -0.09               -0.18             -0.13            -0.18               -0.11
                                                 (0.16)           (0.12)            (0.20)            (0.14)              (0.16)             (0.12)            (0.20)            (0.14)              (0.16)            (0.12)           (0.19)              (0.13)
R-Squared in First Stage                          0.62             0.63              0.57              0.57                0.62               0.63              0.57              0.57                0.67              0.65             0.60                0.60
Number of Observations                             51              57                43                49                   51                 57                43                  49                50                56               42                 48
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is: in columns 1 through 4, the investment to GDP ratio, in current prices, average over 1990s,
from Penn World Tables 6.1; in columns 5 through 8, credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP in 1998, from the World Bank; and in columns 9 through 12, stock market capitalization as a percent of GDP in 1990-95, from Beck et al (2003). The
measure of institutions used as an independent variable is average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001). The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2, 5-6, and 9-10
the "check measure", from Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4, 7-8, and 11-12 the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). The instruments are: in all columns, log GDP per capita in 1995 and a dummy variable for
whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); in odd numbered columns, log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with
replacement); and in even numbered columns, log population density in 1500.
                                                                    Table 11
                                        Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Procedures for Entry
                                          (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)           (7)              (8)
                                                                 Dependent variable is log number of procedures for registering a new business
                                                     2SLS, with                         2SLS, with                          2SLS, with                    2SLS, with
                                                   Protect Against                    Protect Against                     Protect Against               Protect Against
                                                     Exprop. &                          Exprop. &                           Exprop. &                     Exprop. &
                                         OLS       Check Measure           OLS       Eviction Measure        OLS          Check Measure      OLS       Eviction Measure
                                                                                       OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                      -0.17           -0.20              -0.21           -0.31             -0.17            -0.24          -0.21           -0.27
 Against Risk of Expropriation          (0.05)          (0.08)             (0.05)          (0.09)            (0.04)           (0.10)         (0.05)          (0.08)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)         0.15            0.18                                                 0.16             0.16
                                        (0.05)          (0.08)                                               (0.05)           (0.08)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                          0.17            0.21                                              0.17            0.22
                                                                           (0.06)          (0.09)                                            (0.06)          (0.08)
R-squared in OLS                         0.50                              0.51                              0.50                            0.52
                                                                       First Stage for Protection Against Expropriation
English Legal Origin                                     0.53                                0.35                              0.83                           0.51
                                                        (0.32)                              (0.34)                            (0.32)                         (0.31)
Log Settler Mortality                                   -0.72                                -0.71
                                                        (0.12)                              (0.15)
Log Population Density                                                                                                        -0.36                          -0.38
                                                                                                                              (0.09)                         (0.08)
R-Squared in First Stage                                 0.51                              0.43                           0.35                                0.37
                                                         First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                    -1.86                             -1.64                          -1.87                               -1.60
                                                        (0.25)                            (0.25)                        (0.22)                               (0.22)
Log Settler Mortality                                    0.16                             -0.01
                                                        (0.10)                            (0.11)
Log Population Density                                                                                                    0.08                               0.003
                                                                                                                        (0.06)                               (0.06)
R-Squared in First Stage                                0.62                              0.54                           0.61                                0.55
Number of Observations                    48              48                40               40               54                54            46               46
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable
is the log of the number of procedures needed to register a business, from Djankov (2003). The measure of institutions is average protection against the risk of
expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001). The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the
"check measure", from Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1,
3, 5, and 7 we report OLS results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: in all columns, a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as
classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); in columns 2 and 4, log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is
per 1000 per annum with replacement); and in columns 6 and 8, log population density in 1500.
                                                                   Table 12
                                           Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Cost of Entry
                                         (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                         Dependent variable is cost of registering a new business as percent of GDP per capita
                                                    2SLS, with                      2SLS, with
                                                  Protect Against                 Protect Against                     2SLS, with                      2SLS, with
                                                    Exprop. &                        Exprop. &                     Protect Against                  Protect Against
                                                      Check                           Eviction                        Exprop. &                       Exprop. &
                                         OLS         Measure          OLS             Measure            OLS       Check Measure        OLS        Eviction Measure
                                                                                    OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                      -0.43          -0.44           -0.23           -0.38             -0.40          -0.28           -0.22           -0.25
 Against Risk of Expropriation          (0.11)         (0.18)          (0.05)          (0.09)            (0.10)         (0.22)          (0.05)          (0.09)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)         -0.07           0.03                                              0.06           0.11
                                        (0.12)         (0.18)                                            (0.11)         (0.19)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                      -0.13           -0.17                                            -0.12           0.10
                                                                       (0.07)          (0.10)                                           (0.06)          (0.09)
R-squared in OLS                         0.30                           0.33                              0.28                           0.29
                                                                            First Stage for Protection Against Expropriation
English Legal Origin                                    0.53                             0.37                            0.83                            0.51
                                                       (0.32)                          (0.32)                          (0.32)                           (0.31)
Log Settler Mortality                                  -0.72                            -0.71
                                                       (0.12)                          (0.15)
Log Population Density                                                                                                  -0.36                           -0.38
                                                                                                                       (0.09)                           (0.08)
R-Squared in First Stage                               0.51                              0.43                            0.35                            0.37
                                                      First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                  -1.86                             -1.64                           -1.87                            -1.6
                                                      (0.25)                           (0.25)                          (0.22)                           (0.22)
Log Settler Mortality                                  0.16                             -0.01
                                                      (0.10)                           (0.11)
Log Population Density                                                                                                  0.08                            0.003
                                                                                                                       (0.06)                           (0.06)
R-Squared in First Stage                               0.62                             0.54                            0.61                             0.55
Number of Observations                   48             48               40              40               54              54              46              46

   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent
variable is the cost of registering a business as a percent of GDP per capita, from Djankov (2003). The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is
average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001). The measure of legal formalism used as an independent
variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country
has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); in columns 2 and 4, log settler mortality
before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement); and in columns 6 and 8, log population density in 1500.
                                                                                                Appendix Tables: Not for Publication
                                                                                                                   Appendix Table A1
                                                                                                            Variable Definitions and Sources
                     Variable                                                                               Description                                                                                                     Source
Average Protection against Expropriation Risk         Risk of expropriation of private foreign investment by government, from 0 to 10, where a higher score means less risk. We Dataset obtained directly from Political Risk Services, September 1999. These data
                                                      calculated the mean value for the scores in all years from 1985 to 1995. This variable is as previously used in Acemoglu, were previously used by Knack and Keefer (1995) and were organized in electronic
                                                      Johnson, and Robinson (2001).                                                                                             form by the IRIS Center (University of Maryland). The original compilers of these
                                                                                                                                                                                data are Political Risk Services.
Constraint on Executive                               A seven category scale, from 1 to 7, with a higher score indicating more constraint. Score of 1 indicates unlimited                Polity IV dataset, downloaded from Inter-University Consortium for Political and
                                                      authority; score of 3 indicates slight to moderate limitations; score of 5 indicates substantial limitations; score of 7 indicates Social Research. Variable described in Gurr (1997).
                                                      executive parity or subordination. Scores of 2, 4, and 6 indicate intermediate values. We calculated average values from
                                                      1990 to 2000, inclusive, treating interregnums as missing values.

Legal Formalism (Check Measure)                       Index of formality in legal procedures for collecting on a bounced check, from 1 to 7.                                         Djankov (2003), an extension of the data in Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                                                                                                                                                                                     and Shleifer (2003).

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                    Index of formality in legal procedures for evicting a tenant for nonpayment of rent, from 1 to 7.                              Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003)



Log GDP per capita in 1995 (PPP Measure)              Logarithm of GDP per capita, on Purchasing Power Parity Basis, in 1995.                                                        World Bank, World Development Indicators, on-line version, February 2003.



Average Investment-GDP ratio in 1990s                 Ratio of investment to GDP, in current prices, average from 1990 to 1999. If data are missing for a country in any year, this Penn World Tables version 6.1., Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002), data from the
                                                      year is ignored in calculating the average.                                                                                   web at http://webhost.bridgew.edu/baten/


Credit to the Private Sector (or private credit)      As a percent of GDP in 1998: financial resources provided to the private sector, such as through loans, purchases of           World Bank (2003), World Development Indicators, on-line version, February 2003.
                                                      nonequity securities, and trade credits and other accounts receivable, that establish a claim for repayment. For some
                                                      countries these claims include credit to public enterprises.
Stock Market Capitalization                           Market value of all traded stocks as a percent of GDP, average over 1990-95                                                    Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine(2003a); data from the web at
                                                                                                                                                                                     http://www.worldbank.org/research/bios/tbeck/LPF.xls.


Procedures for Registering a New Business             Number of separate procedures needed to register a new business                                                                Djankov (2003), an extension of the data in Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                                                                                                                                                                                     and Shleifer (2002).
Cost of Registering a New Business                    Cost of registering a new business, as a percent of GDP per capita                                                             Djankov (2003), an extension of the data in Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                                                                                                                                                                                     and Shleifer (2002).

Alternative Measure of Credit to the Private Sector   Credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to the private sector as share of GDP, average over 1980-95. Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2003a); data from the web at
                                                                                                                                                                                  http://www.worldbank.org/research/bios/tbeck/LPF.xls
M2                                                    M2 monetary aggregate, as percent of GDP, average over 1980-95.                                                                Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2001); data from the web at
                                                                                                                                                                                     http://www.worldbank.org/research/projects/finstructure/database.htm

Liquid Liabilities                                    Ratio of currency plus demand and interest-bearing liabilities of banks and nonbank financial intermdiaries to GDP,            Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2003a); data from the web at
                                                      average over 1980-95.                                                                                                          http://www.worldbank.org/research/bios/tbeck/LPF.xls

Alternative Measure of Stock Market Capitalization Ratio of total value of outstanding traded shares to GDP, average over 1980-95.                                                   Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2003a); data from the web at
                                                                                                                                                                                     http://www.worldbank.org/research/bios/tbeck/LPF.xls

Overall Size of Financial System                      Credit to the private sector, as percent of GDP, in 1998 plus stock market capitalization, average over 1990-95                Credit from World Bank (2003), World Development Indicators, on-line version,
                                                                                                                                                                                     February 2003. Stock market capitalization from Beck et al (2003a); data from the
                                                                                                                                                                                     web at http://www.worldbank.org/research/bios/tbeck/LPF.xls


Overall Size of Financial System, Alternative         Deposit money bank assets plus stock market capitalization as share of GDP, averages over 1980-95.                             Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2001). Data from the web at
Measure                                                                                                                                                                              http://www.worldbank.org/research/projects/finstructure/database.htm


Religion Variables                                    Percentage of the population that belonged in 1980 (or for 1990-95 for countries formed more recently) to the following        La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
                                                      religions: Roman Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, and "other".
                   Variable                                                                            Description                                                                                                Source
Latitude                                         Absolute value of the latitude of the country, scaled to take values between 0 and 1, where 0 is the equator.              La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
Log Inflation                                    Log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1998.                                             World Bank, World Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999, as used in Acemoglu,
                                                                                                                                                                            Johnson, Robinson, and Thaicharoen (2003).
English Legal Origin (or Common Law countries)   Coded zero or one. One indicates that country was colonized by Britain and English legal code was transferred.             La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999), and Djankov, La Porta,
                                                                                                                                                                            Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003).
French Legal Origin (or Civil Law countries)     Coded zero or one. One indicates that country was colonized by France, Spain, Belgium, Portugal or Germany and French      La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999), and Djankov, La Porta,
                                                 legal code was transferred.                                                                                                Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003).
Log Settler Mortality                            Log of estimated mortality for European settlers during the early period of European colonization (before 1850). Settler       Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), based on Curtin (1989) and other sources.
                                                 mortality is calculated from the mortality rates of European-born soldiers, sailors and bishops when stationed in colonies. It
                                                 measures the effects of local diseases on people without inherited or acquired immunities.

Log Population Density                           Log of population density in 1500; population density is inhabitants per square kilometer.                                 Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002), based on McEvedy and Jones (1978).
                                                                     Table A2
                                      Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Economic Growth, 1970-95
                                          (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                                   Dependent variable is annual average growth rate of GDP per capita, 1970-95
                                                      2SLS, with                          2SLS, with
                                                      Protection                       Protection Against                   2SLS, with                         2SLS, with
                                                    Against Risk of                         Risk of                        Constraint on                      Constraint on
                                                    Expropriation &                     Expropriation &                   Exec. & Check                      Exec. & Eviction
                                         OLS        Check Measure            OLS       Eviction Measure         OLS          Measure              OLS           Measure
                                                                  Panel A: OLS or Second Stage Regression, with log settler mortality as instrument
Average Protection Against               0.64             1.00               0.59             0.99
 Risk of Expropriation                  (0.20)           (0.32)             (0.22)           (0.38)

Constraint on Executive                                                                                         -0.07           1.00              -0.05             0.68
                                                                                                               (0.15)          (0.52)            (0.15)            (0.38)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)          -0.08            0.13                                                  -0.38           -0.10
                                        (0.21)           (0.31)                                                (0.20)          (0.41)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                           0.11             0.25                                                -0.21             -0.05
                                                                            (0.25)           (0.36)                                              (0.22)            (0.38)
R-squared in OLS                         0.29                                0.19                               0.07                             0.03
Number of Observations                    47               47                 40               40                47             47                39                39
                                                     Panel B: OLS or Second Stage Regression, with log population density as instrument
Average Protection Against               0.79            0.25             0.75            0.37
 Risk of Expropriation                  (0.21)          (0.53)           (0.23)          (0.42)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                          0.04            0.09             0.06              0.21
                                                                                                               (0.15)          (0.44)            (0.16)            (0.42)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)          0.11             -0.30                                                 -0.23           -0.41
                                        (0.22)           (0.42)                                                (0.21)          (0.29)
Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                           0.29             -0.10                                               -0.10             -0.22
                                                                            (0.27)           (0.39)                                              (0.25)            (0.33)
R-squared in OLS                         0.27                                0.21                               0.02                              0.01
Number of Observations                    52               52                 45               45                54             54                45                45
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is
average annual growth in GDP per capita from 1970 to 1995, from the World Bank (2003) WDI CD-Rom. The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in
columns 1 through 4, average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the
executive, averaged over the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from
Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS
results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: in both Panels, a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); in Panel A, log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement); and in
Panel B, log population density in 1500.
                                                                                         Table A3
                                                       Regressions with Reduced Form for Origin and IV for Property Rights Institutions
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)                 (6)                  (7)            (8)             (9)             (10)               (11)                  (12)
                                                                                                                   Dependent variable indicated at the top of each column

                                                                  Credit to the    Market               Log number         Cost of registering a                              Credit to the    Market              Log number       Cost of registering a
                                      Log GDP        Investment- private sector capitalization         procedures for         new business         Log GDP       Investment- private sector capitalization        procedures for       new business
                                     per capita in   GDP ratio in as percent of as percent of        registering a new     (percent of GDP per per capita in     GDP ratio in as percent of as percent of       registering a new   (percent of GDP per
                                         1995           1990s         GDP           GDP                   business               capita)             1995           1990s         GDP           GDP                  business             capita)
                                                                                                                                     Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                       1.20            6.02           0.39             0.3               -0.24                   -0.45             1.08            5.55           0.28            0.24               -0.27                 -0.31
 Against Risk of Expropriation          (0.24)          (1.39)         (0.10)          (0.09)             (0.06)                  (0.15)            (0.23)          (1.41)         (0.08)          (0.09)             (0.08)                (0.19)

English Legal Origin                     -0.91           -3.16          -0.13           0.01               -0.32                   0.05               -0.83          -2.67          -0.06           0.03               -0.27                 -0.19
                                        (0.38)          (2.36)         (0.16)          (0.15)             (0.14)                  (0.32)             (0.34)         (2.18)         (0.12)          (0.13)             (0.14)                (0.31)
                                                                                                                         First Stage for Protection Against Expropriation
English Legal Origin                     0.76           0.73            0.70            0.81               0.53                    0.53               0.90           0.90           0.87           0.98               0.83                   0.83
                                        (0.32)          (0.33)         (0.32)          (0.33)             (0.32)                  (0.32)             (0.29)         (0.30)         (0.29)          (0.31)             (0.32)                (0.32)
Log Settler Mortality                    -0.49           -0.54          -0.48           -0.54              -0.72                   -0.72
                                        (0.13)          (0.13)         (0.13)          (0.13)             (0.12)                  (0.12)
Log Population Density                                                                                                                                -0.34          -0.36          -0.34           -0.34              -0.36                 -0.36
                                                                                                                                                     (0.09)         (0.09)         (0.09)          (0.09)             (0.09)                (0.09)
R-Squared in First Stage                 0.27           0.32            0.28            0.30               0.51                    0.51               0.28           0.27          0.28            0.28               0.32                   0.35
Number of Observations                    65             65              66              63                 48                      48                 71             71            72              69                 54                     54

  Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are two stage least squares; cross-sectional data with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variables are: in columns 1 and 7, log GDP per capita in
1995; in columns 2 and 8, investment-GDP ratio; in columns 3 and 9, credit to the private sector as share of GDP; in columns 4 and 10, stock market capitalization as share of GDP; in columns 5 and 11, the log number of procedures required to
register a business; in columns 6 and 12, the cost of registering a business as a percent of GDP per capita. Sources are as in previous tables. All columns have a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by
Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003). The instruments are: in columns 1 through 6, log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per annum with replacement); and in columns 7 through
12, log population density in 1500.
                                                                   Table A4
                           Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: GDP per capita, with alternative instrument
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)
                                                                                 Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
                                                       2SLS, with                                                            2SLS, with                     2SLS, with
                                                     Protect Against                   2SLS, with Protect                   Constraint on                  Constraint on
                                                    Exprop. & Check                    Against Exprop. &                   Exec. & Check                  Exec. & Eviction
                                         OLS            Measure              OLS        Eviction Measure         OLS          Measure             OLS        Measure
                                                                                          OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                        0.64             1.09              0.64              0.97
 Against Risk of Expropriation           (0.08)           (0.22)            (0.09)            (0.18)

Constraint on Executive                                                                                          0.29           0.88             0.31           0.88
                                                                                                                (0.07)          (0.27)           (0.07)        (0.27)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)           0.15             0.44                                                  -0.13          -0.002
                                         (0.09)           (0.18)                                                (0.10)          (0.21)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                           0.28              0.45                                               -0.05        -0.004
                                                                            (0.11)            (0.16)                                             (0.11)        (0.24)
R-Squared in OLS                         0.55                                0.52                               0.27                             0.31
                                                First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                        0.87                                0.59                              0.05                          -0.26
                                                           (0.30)                              (0.30)                            (0.43)                        (0.47)
Log Population Density in 1500                              -0.36                               -0.38                             -0.40                         -0.40
                                                           (0.09)                              (0.08)                            (0.13)                        (0.13)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.35                                0.37                               0.15                         0.16
                                                             First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                        -1.95                               -1.64                             -1.74                         -1.59
                                                           (0.22)                              (0.21)                            (0.21)                        (0.21)
Log Population Density in 1500                              0.07                                -0.01                              0.04                         -0.02
                                                           (0.06)                              (0.06)                            (0.06)                        (0.06)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.62                                0.57                              0.57                          0.54
Number of Observations                    57                57                49               49                 60             60               50             50
  Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is log
GDP per capita (PPP adjusted) in 1995, from the World Bank's WDI on-line. The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in columns 1 through 4,
average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the executive, averaged over
the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from Djankov (2003); in
columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS results. In columns 2,
4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(2003) and Djankov (2003); and log population density in 1500 from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002).
                                                                Table A5
                     Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Investment-GDP ratio, with alternative instrument
                                        (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)
                                                                       Dependent variable is average ratio of investment to GDP in 1990s

                                                      2SLS, with                         2SLS, with                        2SLS, with                     2SLS, with
                                                    Protect Against                    Protect Against                    Constraint on                  Constraint on
                                                      Exprop. &                          Exprop. &                       Exec. & Check                  Exec. & Eviction
                                       OLS          Check Measure          OLS        Eviction Measure         OLS          Measure             OLS        Measure
                                                                                        OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                      3.81              5.80             4.07              4.48
 Against Risk of Expropriation         (0.63)            (1.50)           (0.70)            (1.26)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                        1.00           4.24              0.94          4.82
                                                                                                              (0.51)         (1.77)            (0.57)        (2.02)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)         0.71              1.27                                                 -0.94          -1.34
                                       (0.68)            (1.21)                                               (0.76)         (1.37)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                         1.38              1.10                                               -0.54         -1.42
                                                                          (0.81)            (1.18)                                             (0.93)        (1.78)
R-squared in OLS                       0.43                                0.43                               0.09                             0.06
                                              First Stage for Measure of Institutions ( Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                       0.87                                0.59                             0.05                          -0.26
                                                         (0.30)                              (0.30)                           (0.43)                         (0.47)
Log Population Density in 1500                            -0.36                               -0.38                            -0.40                          -0.40
                                                         (0.09)                              (0.08)                           (0.13)                         (0.13)
R-Squared in First Stage                                   0.35                                0.37                            0.15                           0.16
                                                            First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                      -1.95                               -1.64                            -1.74                          -1.59
                                                         (0.22)                              (0.21)                           (0.21)                         (0.21)
Log Population Density in 1500                             0.07                               -0.01                             0.04                          -0.02
                                                         (0.06)                              (0.06)                           (0.06)                         (0.06)
R-Squared in First Stage                                  0.62                                0.57                             0.57                           0.54
Number of Observations                   57               57                49               49                60             60               50              50
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is
the investment to GDP ratio, in current prices, average over 1990s, from Penn World Tables 6.1. The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in
columns 1 through 4, average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the
executive, averaged over the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure",
from Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we
report OLS results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); and log population density in 1500.
                                                                   Table A6
                            Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Private Credit, with alternative instrument
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)            (6)                 (7)          (8)
                                                                    Dependent variable is credit to the private sector in 1998 as a percent of GDP

                                                        2SLS, with                                                           2SLS, with                      2SLS, with
                                                      Protect Against                  2SLS, with Protect                   Constraint on                   Constraint on
                                                        Exprop. &                      Against Exprop. &                   Exec. & Check                   Exec. & Eviction
                                         OLS          Check Measure          OLS        Eviction Measure         OLS          Measure             OLS         Measure
                                                                                           OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                        0.13             0.25              0.18              0.24
 Against Risk of Expropriation           (0.04)            (0.09)           (0.04)            (0.08)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                          0.06            0.17             0.06           0.18
                                                                                                                (0.02)          (0.07)           (0.03)         (0.08)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)           -0.08             0.01                                                 -0.11           -0.08
                                         (0.04)            (0.07)                                               (0.04)          (0.06)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                          0.002              -0.02                                              -0.08          -0.10
                                                                            (0.05)            (0.07)                                             (0.05)         (0.07)
R-squared in OLS                          0.36                               0.30                                0.23                             0.13
                                                 First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                         0.87                               0.59                             0.05                            -0.26
                                                           (0.30)                              (0.30)                           (0.43)                          (0.47)
Log Population Density in 1500                              -0.36                               -0.38                            -0.40                           -0.40
                                                           (0.09)                              (0.08)                           (0.13)                          (0.13)
R-Squared in First Stage                                     0.35                               0.37                             0.15                            0.16
                                                               First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                        -1.95                               -1.64                            -1.74                           -1.59
                                                           (0.22)                              (0.21)                           (0.21)                          (0.21)
Log Population Density in 1500                               0.07                               -0.01                            0.04                            -0.02
                                                           (0.06)                              (0.06)                           (0.06)                          (0.06)
R-Squared in First Stage                                    0.62                                0.57                             0.57                            0.54
Number of Observations                    57                57                49               49                 60             60                50             50

   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is
credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP in 1998, from the World Bank. The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in columns 4 through 8,
average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); and in columns 5 through 8, constraint on the executive, averaged
over the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check measure", from Djankov (2003); in
columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 we report OLS results. In columns 2,
4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003)
and Djankov (2003); and log population density in 1500 from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002).
                                                               Table A7
                Contracting vs. Property Rights Institutions: Stock Market Capitalization, with alternative instrument
                                          (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)               (7)           (8)
                                                           Dependent variable is stock market capitalization, average 1990-95, as a percent of GDP

                                                      2SLS, with                       2SLS, with                         2SLS, with                     2SLS, with
                                                    Protect Against                  Protect Against                     Constraint on                  Constraint on
                                                      Exprop. &                        Exprop. &                        Exec. & Check                  Exec. & Eviction
                                         OLS        Check Measure         OLS       Eviction Measure         OLS           Measure             OLS        Measure
                                                                                        OLS or Second Stage Regression
Average Protection                       0.10             0.21             0.17            0.22
 Against Risk of Expropriation          (0.04)           (0.09)           (0.05)          (0.09)
Constraint on Executive                                                                                      0.04             0.13             0.05           0.15
                                                                                                            (0.03)           (0.07)           (0.03)         (0.09)
Legal Formalism (Check Measure)          -0.13            -0.08                                              -0.15            -0.14
                                        (0.04)           (0.07)                                             (0.04)           (0.05)

Legal Formalism (Eviction Measure)                                         -0.03           -0.11                                               -0.09          -0.17
                                                                          (0.06)          (0.08)                                              (0.05)         (0.08)
R-squared in OLS                         0.38                               0.24                             0.26                              0.10
                                              First Stage for Measure of Institutions (Protect. Against Expropriation or Constraint on Executive)
English Legal Origin                                       0.89                               0.60                             0.02                           -0.31
                                                         (0.31)                             (0.30)                           (0.44)                          (0.47)
Log Population Density in 1500                            -0.37                              -0.38                            -0.39                           -0.38
                                                         (0.09)                             (0.08)                           (0.13)                          (0.13)
R-Squared in First Stage                                   0.36                               0.37                            0.14                            0.16
                                                           First Stage for Measure of Legal Formalism (Check or Eviction Measure)
English Legal Origin                                      -1.99                              -1.71                            -1.78                           -1.65
                                                         (0.21)                             (0.20)                           (0.20)                          (0.20)
Log Population Density in 1500                             0.08                             0.008                              0.05                          -0.006
                                                         (0.06)                             (0.06)                           (0.06)                          (0.06)
R-Squared in First Stage                                  0.64                               0.62                             0.59                            0.59
Number of Observations                   56               56               48               48                59              59                49            49
   Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country; we use only the excolonies sample. The dependent variable is
the level of stock market capitalization as a percent of GDP in 1990-95, from Beck et al (2003). The measure of institutions used as an independent variable is: in
columns 1 through 4, average protection against the risk of expropriation as used in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); and in columns 5 through 8, constraint
on the executive, averaged over the 1990s, from Polity IV. The measure of legal formalism used as an independent variable is: in columns 1-2 and 5-6, the "check
measure", from Djankov (2003); in columns 3-4 and 7-8, the "eviction measure" from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003). In columns 1, 3, 5, and
7 we report OLS results. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the instruments are: a dummy variable for whether a country has an English legal origin, as classified by Djankov, La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2003) and Djankov (2003); and log population density in 1500 from Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002).
                   Figure 1
              Credit market collapses;
Cd, Legal     higher P does not affect
                                          d P 
                                         C
costs of      investment
contract                                            Cd affects
enforcement                                         investment only
                                                    when cross from one
                                                    region to the other

                          Credit market exists;
                          higher P increases
                          investment



                                     Political constraints, P
                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 2                                                                            .




                                                                                                                                                                                    Res. from Regress Av.Protect.Exprop. on Log Settler Mort.
Res. from Regress Av. Protect. Exprop. on Eng. Leg. Orig.




                                                             4                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GMB
                                                                             USA
                                                                  NZL         CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                  AUS             SGP                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CAN
                                                             2                                 BRA
                                                                                              CHL                       GAB                                                                                                                     2                          GAB                                NZL SGP
                                                                                                                IDN                                                                                                                                                             CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TGO
                                                                                               MEX                                                                                                                                                                    IDN                                     AUS           IND
                                                                                               COL IND                                                           GMB                                                                                            BRA
                                                                             HKG                VEN
                                                                                                MAR
                                                                                                 CRI                                                                                                                                                            CHL                                                                   PNG
                                                                               MYS             URY
                                                                                                PRY                                           CIV
                                                                                                                                              TGO                                                                                                                             GIN                                                 BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TTO                GHA
                                                                                              EGY                                                                                                                                                               MEX                                                                 JAM TZA                    NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COL      CMR                                     HKG
                                                                                               ECU
                                                                                             TUNDZA          BHS        CMR         GIN                                                                                                                          VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CRI                                              MYS
                                                                                              ARG          VNM
                                                                                                             TTO                                                                                                                                                URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PRY
                                                                                                          DOM             PNG                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SLE
                                                                                                             SEN      JAM                                                                                                                                      EGY VNM
                                                             0                ZAF             PER
                                                                                                             PAN                                                                                                                                0                DZADOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TUN   SEN                                                               KEN
                                                                            ETH               BOL                                                                                                                                                              ARG PAN
                                                                                                                                        TZA                                                                                                                              AGO            MLI
                                                                                                HND                     AGO                                                                                                                                                 NER                                     ZAF          LKA
                                                                                              GTM               NIC                                       GHA                                                                                                   PER NIC
                                                                                                SLV
                                                                                              PAK         LKA           KEN       NER                                                                                                                           BOL           MDG                                          PAK
                                                                                            GUY                                                     SLE                                                                                                          HND    COG                                               GUY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MMR
                                                                                  SUR        MMR                      COG                                                                                                                                                 BFA                                                                UGA
                                                                                                                GNB     BFA             MDG                             NGA                                                                          ETH        GTM                                                              BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SLV GNB
                                                                                                          BGD                                                     MLI
                                                             -2                                                                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                                                          HTI
                                                                                                                      ZAR                                                                                                                                SUR              ZAR                                                     SDN
                                                                                                                                        UGA                                                                                                                         HTI

                                                                                                                SDN



                                                             -4                                                                                                                                                                                 -4
                                                                       -2                            0                           2                                              4                                                                        -.5                               0                          .5                                               1
                                                                                    Residuals from Regressing Log Settler Mort. on Eng. Leg. Orig.                                                                                                                        Residuals from Regressing Eng. Leg. Orig. on Log Settler Mort.

                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                                  .
Residuals from Check Measure Formalism on Eng. Legal Orig.




                                                                                                                                                                                    Residuals from Check Measure Formalism on Log Sett. Mort.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VEN
                                                             2                                                                                                                                                                                                   PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2               GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PER    PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARG

                                                                                                VEN                                       TZA                                                                                                                   ECU
                                                                                                PRY
                                                                                               PAK         LKA                                                                                                                                                   HND
                                                                                                             PAN                                                                                                                                                MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAR  NIC
                                                                                              BOL                                                                                                                                                                DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SLV
                                                                                              GTM                                                                                                                                                                     SEN
                                                             1                                PER                                                                                                                                                                         CMR
                                                                                                CRI IND                                                                                                                                                          COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TUN       BFA
                                                                                              ARG          BGD                                                                                                                                                   URY      BEN                                             PAK
                                                                                                                                                                          NGA                                                                        ETH
                                                                                                                            KEN                                                                                                                                 EGY DOM                                                          LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                     IDN     MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                               ECU              NIC                                                                                                                                                                           MLI                                              TZA
                                                                                                HND                                                                                                                                                                                                             USA           BGD
                                                                              USA                               SEN     CMR              UGA               GHA     MLI                                                                                          BRA VNM                                          SGP
                                                                                              MEX
                                                                                               MAR
                                                                                SGP             DZA                     BFA                                                                                                                                                       CIV                            MYS                    KEN
                                                             0                                  SLV
                                                                                              CHL
                                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                MYS                                    JAM
                                                                                                                       BEN                                                                                                                                                                                  AUS CAN
                                                                                                                                  NER MDG                                                                                                                                                                   NZL                   BRB
                                                                               CAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JAM       UGA
                                                                                               COL
                                                                                               URY        DOM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NGA
                                                                                             TUN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GHA
                                                                      AUS                                       TTO
                                                                                                                IDN                                                                                                                                                                                                               TTO
                                                                              ZAF             EGY                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                      NZL                                                                     CIV                                                                                                                                                               HKG
                                                             -1             ETH                                              BLZ                                                                                                                                                                                                         BLZ

                                                                                                           VNM
                                                                                               BRA
                                                                             HKG

                                                             -2                                                                                                                                                                                 -4
                                                                      -2                               0                           2                                            4                                                                         -.5                             0                          .5                                                1
                                                                                        Residuals from Regressing Log. Sett. Mort. on Eng. Leg. Orig                                                                                                                      Residuals from Regressing Eng. Leg. Orig on Log. Sett. Mort.
                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 3
Residuals from Regressing Constraint on Exec on Eng. Leg. Orig.




                                                                       .                                                                                                                                                                                   .




                                                                                                                                                                                       Resid. from Regress Cons. on Exec on Log Settler Mort.
                                                                  4                                                                                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                       MUS           URY
                                                                                                     CHL
                                                                                                     BOL
                                                                                                       CRI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PNG
                                                                                                     ECU                                                                                                                                                                                       MDG    MLI                                          JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CRI                                                                 TTO
                                                                       NZL
                                                                       AUS             USA
                                                                                        ZAF
                                                                                        CAN           COL IND          TTO       JAM PNG                                                                                                                                   URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ECU
                                                                                                       PRY            NIC                                                                                                                                                        NIC                                                      IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAN
                                                                  2                                   BRA
                                                                                                       VEN
                                                                                                                      PAN                      MDG                                                                                                    2         MUS        COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PRY
                                                                                                                  DOM                                                                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                 FJI                                                                                                                                                                                        VENDOM BEN                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                     ARG                                                                                                                                                                             NER
                                                                                                      PAK
                                                                                                       SLV
                                                                                                       HND                       BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AUS
                                                                                                      MEX                                                             MLI                                                                                              ARG                                                           PAK
                                                                                                                  HTI                                                                                                                                                   HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SLV HTI                                                                                    GMB
                                                                                                      GTM          LKA                   NER                                                                                                                                             CAF                                                LKA              GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FJI             BGD
                                                                  0                                                BGD            CAF                                                                                                                 0                    MEX                  CIV
                                                                                         MYS                          GNB                                                                                                                                                  GTM     GNB                                                                              NGA
                                                                                                     PER
                                                                                                    GUY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AGO                                                             TZA
                                                                                                                      SEN                                                                                                                                                          SEN      GIN
                                                                                                                              COG                                                                                                                                          PER                                                      GUY
                                                                                                    TUN
                                                                                                     EGY            LAO
                                                                                                                    VNM         AGO
                                                                                                                                MRT                                                                                                                                               VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IDN       TGO                                                  KEN UGA SLE
                                                                                  ETH                  MAR             IDN                         CIV                                                                                                                                                                        MYS
                                                                                                                                                               GHA                                                                                                                    BDI
                                                                                                       DZA                                    GIN                                                                                                                      EGY            GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TCD
                                                                                         SGP         MMR                          KEN           TZA                                                                                                                    TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MAR
                                                                                   DJI                                           BDI                                  GMB                                                                                                             RWA
                                                                  -2                                                             BFA
                                                                                                                                 CMR
                                                                                                                                 GAB
                                                                                                                                 TCD              TGO
                                                                                                                                                UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2                   DZA                                                       MMR
                                                                                                                                 RWA
                                                                                                                                                         SLE                                                                                                   ETH
                                                                                                            AFG                                                                                                                                                                      ZAR                                      SGP
                                                                                                                              ZAR                                           NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DJI           AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SDN
                                                                                                                        SDN
                                                                  -4                                                                                                                                                                                  -4
                                                                            -2                                  0                           2                                      4                                                                           -.5                                 0                          .5                                         1
                                                                                               Residuals from Regressing Log Settler Mort. on Eng. Leg. Orig.                                                                                                                      Residuals from Regressing Eng. Leg. Orig. on Log Settler Mort.

                                                                       .                                                                                                                                                                                   .
Residuals from Eviction Measure Formalism on Eng. Legal Orig.




                                                                                                                                                                                       Residuals from Eviction Measure Formalism on Log Sett. Mort.
                                                                  2                                                                                                                                                                                                    VEN PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PER

                                                                                                                              PAN                                                                                                                                     BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PRY
                                                                                                              VEN                                                                                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                                             GTM
                                                                                                                     LKA                                                                                                                                              MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MAR
                                                                  1                      ZAF           PAKARG
                                                                                                          PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ECU
                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                                          BOL
                                                                                                            CRI BGD
                                                                                                            PRY                                                                                                                                                        SLVDOM
                                                                                         MYS
                                                                                       HKG
                                                                                         SGP                 MEX                                                             NGA                                                                                      URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COL
                                                                                                              MAR
                                                                                                             CHL                                                                                                                                                     TUN                                                 ZAF PAK LKA
                                                                                       USA                     HND                                                                                                                                                    BRA SEN
                                                                                                             ECU                                 TZA                                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                    KEN                                                                                                               0              EGY
                                                                                                                                                                GHA                                                                                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                                        DOM
                                                                                                              SLV                                UGA                                                                                                                                      CIV                             MYS        BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SGP
                                                                                                                        BRB       JAM                                                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                                           URY
                                                                                                           COL
                                                                                                         TUN            TTO SEN
                                                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                                           BRA                          BLZ
                                                                           AUS                                                                                                                                                                                              VNM                                                            KEN TZA
                                                                                                            EGY                                          CIV                                                                                                                                                                                                 NGA
                                                                  -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AUS               JAM UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TTO
                                                                           NZL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BLZ
                                                                                                                           VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NZL
                                                                  -2
                                                                           -2                                 0                           2                                        4                                                                                 -.5                             0                         .5                                        1
                                                                                               Residuals from Regressing Log. Sett. Mort. on Eng. Leg. Orig                                                                                                                         Residuals from Regressing Eng. Leg. Orig on Log. Sett. Mort.
                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 4




                                                                                                                                                                                       Res. from Check Measure Formalism on Log Pop. Density in 1500 Res. from Regress Av.Protect.Exprop. on Log Pop. Density in 1500
                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
Res. from Regress Av. Protect. Exprop. on Eng. Leg. Orig.




                                                             4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4

                                                                                      USA
                                                                  CAN                                       NZL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NZL           IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                       AUS            SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GMB
                                                             2                        BRA                          CHL         GAB                                                                                                                                                                                      2                          EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CANSGP
                                                                                                                                       MEX   IDN                                                                                                                                                                                          IDN                                                          MYS
                                                                                                                                                   GMB                    IND                                                                                                                                                         GAB   MAR                                                AUS
                                                                                      HKG                             COL                                                                                                                                                                                                               MEX
                                                                                                          VEN                                             MAR                                                                                                                                                                        CHL                                                               BHSJAM
                                                                                     URY                   PRY                  MYS
                                                                                                                                CRI          CIV                                                                                                                                                                                         CIV                                                           TTO
                                                                                             BWA                                             TGO                                                                                                                                                                                         TGOTUN                                                        PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                 EGY                                                                                                                                                 COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CRI DZA                                                    HKG         PAK
                                                                                                                               BHS                                                                                                                                                                                               BRA
                                                                                     ARG                                   CMRTTO
                                                                                                                         MOZ    ECU
                                                                                                                                PNG
                                                                                                                                         GIN   DZA
                                                                                                                                              VNM    TUN                                                                                                                                                                                 GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VNM                                                     BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LKA
                                                                                                                          DOM                 JAM                                                                                                                                                                                  VENECU                                                             MWIGHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CMR                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                                                         SEN                                                                                                                                                                                          MOZSEN                                                          ZMB
                                                             0                                                    ZAF MWI PAN
                                                                                                                            PER                                                                                                                                                                                         0             DOMETH                                                              MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SLE BGD
                                                                                                                    BOLZMB         TZA         ETH                                                                                                                                                                               URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NGA
                                                                                                                             PHL
                                                                                                                           AGO               GHA                                                                                                                                                                                      PER                                                             ZWE
                                                                                                                           HND
                                                                                                                            NIC                        LBY
                                                                                                                       ZWE GTM         KEN                 LKA            PAK                                                                                                                                                          PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ARG BOL
                                                                                                    GUY               NER SLV                SLE MMR                                                                                                                                                                                  AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GTM                                                             GUY
                                                                                              SUR                          COG               NGA                                                                                                                                                                                      SLV                                                                      UGA
                                                                                                                        MDG             GNB
                                                                                                                                         BFA                                                                                                                                                                                         NER GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BFA                                                                    SDN
                                                                                                                                                                         BGD                                                                                                                                                          COG
                                                                                                                         MLI
                                                             -2                                                                HTI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2           MDG

                                                                                                                                ZAR                        UGA                                                                                                                                                                    SUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HTI
                                                                                                                                                                  SDN                                                                                                                                                                 ZAR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SOM
                                                                                                                                 SOM
                                                             -4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                                                       -4                     -2                 0                    2                                          4                                                                                                                                               -.5                            0                           .5                          1
                                                                                    Residuals from Reg. Log Pop Density in 1500 on Eng. Leg. Orig.                                                                                                                                                                                           Residuals from Regressing Eng. Leg. Orig. on Log Pop. Density in 1500

                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
Residuals from Check Measure Formalism on Eng. Legal Orig.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VEN
                                                             2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ARG BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2          GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CRI
                                                                                                          VEN                                                      NPL
                                                                                             BWA           PRY
                                                                                                                               PAN                                                                                                                                                                                                 PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ECU
                                                                                             NAM                   BOL                 TZA                                                                                                                                                                                        MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                                                               GTM                                  LKA    PAK                                                                                                                                                   CHLMEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SLV
                                                                                                                  SWZ          PER                                                                                                                                                                                                MOZ SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             URY NER BFAMAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DZA                                                     BWA
                                                                                                                               CRI VCT                                                                                                                                                                                            MDGBEN
                                                                                    ARG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COL                                                           NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DOM
                                                                                                                                                                           IND                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SWZ TZA    NPL
                                                                                                                                                    NGA                    BGD                                                                                                                                          0                    IDNTUN
                                                                                                                        ZWE PHL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VCT
                                                                                                                           NIC               KEN                                                                                                                                                                                             CIV
                                                                                                                          HND ECU                                                                                                                                                                                                BRA                                                                         LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAK
                                                                                                                        MWI                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ETH
                                                                                                                      MLI CMR GRDMEX         SEN       MAR                                                                                                                                                                                               EGY                                          ZWE
                                                                                                                                             BFA    DZA                                                                                                                                                                                       VNM                                              USA    MWIKEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NGA
                                                             0                         USA
                                                                                                                   CHL
                                                                                                                        MOZ
                                                                                                                           SLV
                                                                                                                                                    GHA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GRD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BGD
                                                                                                                                             BEN          UGA                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                       SGP                             MDG
                                                                                                                     NER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GHA
                                                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                                                              MYS                    JAM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AUS           BRB UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MYS
                                                                                                                     COL DOM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZMB JAM
                                                                                    URY                                 ZMB                                 TUN
                                                                      CAN                                                                    IDN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZAFTTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                 EGY                                                                                                                                    -2
                                                                           AUS                                                        TTO    CIV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BLZ
                                                                                                                   ZAF                              ETH
                                                                                                             NZL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HKG
                                                                                                                                       BLZ         VNM
                                                                                     BRA



                                                             -2                        HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -4
                                                                      -4                      -2                  0                    2                                         4                                                                                                                                                     -.5                            0                          .5                     1
                                                                                 Residuals from Regressing Log. Pop. Density in 1500 on Eng. Leg. Orig                                                                                                                                                                                                Res. from Reg. Eng. Leg. Orig on Log. Pop. Density in 1500
