NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE DURATION OF TRADE
Tibor Besedeš
Thomas J. Prusa
Working Paper 9936
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9936
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

We would like to thank the seminar participants at Rutgers University, Louisiana State University, the
Midwest International Trade Meetings, the NBER ITI group and also Simon Evenett and Roger Klein for
helpful suggestions and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Tibor Besedeš and Thomas J. Prusa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

On the Duration of Trade
Tibor Besedeš and Thomas J. Prusa
NBER Working Paper No. 9936
August 2003
JEL No. F14, F19, C14, C41
ABSTRACT
This paper employs survival analysis to study the duration of US imports. We find that the median
duration of exporting a product to the US is very short, on the order to two to four years. Our results
also indicate that there is negative duration dependence meaning that if a country is able to survive
in the exporting market for the first few years it will face a very small probability of failure and will
export the product for a long period of time. This result holds across countries and industries. We
find that our results are not only robust to aggregation but are strengthened by aggregation. That is,
as we aggregate from product level trade data to SITC industry level trade data the estimated
survival increases. We rank countries by their survival experience and show that our rankings are
strongly correlated with the rankings in Feenstra and Rose (2002), implying that product cycle
followers also experience particularly short duration.
Tibor Besedeš
Louisiana State University
Department of Economics
E.J. Ourso College of Business
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
besedes@lsu.edu
Thomas J. Prusa
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
New Jersey Hall
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
prusa@econ.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
Positive trade theory usually asks questions which address the “who, what, when, and why” of
international trade. One question that is not often addressed is “how long?” When countries
trade, how long do their trade relationships last? Are they exchanging products over long or
short periods of time?
In order to answer these questions we study the duration of trade relationships. To our
knowledge we are the first to do so and several important findings emerge from our analysis.
First, we demonstrate not only that there is a remarkable amount of entry and exit in the US
import market but also that the period of time a country is “in” the market is often fleeting.
We find that some trade relationships are long-lived, by which we mean a country exports
a product for many years. We find, however, that it is far more common to observe shortlived trade relationships wherein a country trades a product for a few years and then stops. In
particular, more than half of all trade relationships are observed for a single year and 85 percent
are observed for fewer than five years.
Second, because our analysis is performed at a highly disaggregated (7-digit) level we show
one must carefully account for censored observations. As we explain censoring issues are more
severe when working at the product level because of reclassifications. Once we account for censoring we can estimate survival and hazard rate functions of exporting to the United States. We
find the median duration that a country exports a product to the US is very short, somewhere between two and four years depending on the censoring approach employed. Moreover, although
duration does vary by source country and region, we show that short-lived relationships characterize trade by most countries. Said differently, we find short relationships are prevalent for both
OECD and non-OECD countries although we find systematically higher survival experience for
OECD trade relationships.

1

Third, we find that our results are not only robust to aggregation but in fact are strengthened
by aggregation. That is, as we aggregate from product level trade data to SITC industry level
trade data the estimated survival decreases. We show that this paradoxical result is related to
the unique censoring problems that are only present when the analysis is done at the product
level. As a result, it is more straightforward to conduct industry level analysis although doing
so makes it somewhat more difficult to interpret what the relationship represents. It should be
noted, however, that the results across SITC aggregations are intuitive with higher aggregations
having longer durations. The aggregation exercise confirms that our main finding — that trade
relationships tend to be quite short — is not an anomaly.
Fourth, our results also indicate that there is negative duration dependence, meaning that
the conditional probability of failure decreases as duration increases. Conditional on observing
a trade relationship surviving the first five years, the hazard rate for the rest of the sample is
just 12 percent. The results suggest the presence of a type of a threshold effect where once a
relationship is established and has survived the first few years it is likely the relationship will
survive a long time.
All things considered, the results in this paper suggest that more is happening at the microlevel than suggested by either existing theory or empirical studies. For instance, according to
the factor proportions theory trade is based on factor endowment differences, and since such
differences change gradually trade patterns are likewise expected to evolve slowly. Unhappiness with this implication spurred the development of trade models with richer trade dynamics
(Krugman, 1979; Dollar, 1990; Grossman and Helpman, 1991). In this literature Vernon’s
(1966) seminal product cycle theory is probably the best known. Vernon’s model generates a
particular pattern for trade relationships. The technological leaders develop and export a product until others learn how to manufacture it and enter the market. As the technology becomes
more and more standardized, other countries will begin to produce and export the product. If
2

these follower countries have relatively low costs, they will eventually take over the market and
push out the leaders. All of these models, however, imply a fairly predictable pattern of trade
dynamics — trade dynamics either evolve slowly or in logical progression from developed to
developing countries; none of the models suggest that short-lived trade relationships would be
the norm.1 None of the models suggest that trade relationships would be as fleeting as implied
by our results.
Until relatively recently there has been little direct evidence of the product cycle.2 Gagnon
and Rose (1995) and Feenstra and Rose (2000) stand out for their use of disaggregated industry
data to look for systematic evidence of trade dynamics. The results from these papers have
different implications for trade dynamics. Gagnon and Rose study the persistence of trade
balances and obtain results that support the view that trade dynamics are gradual. They find that
industries characterized by trade surpluses (deficits) in the early-1960s were extremely likely
to also be characterized by trade surpluses (deficits) 25 years later. Gagnon and Rose conclude
that “there is little evidence of dynamic patterns” in trade (p. 230).
Feenstra and Rose take a different approach toward identifying the product cycle and provide compelling support for Vernon’s hypothesis. Rather the modelling the entire product cycle
dynamics, Feenstra and Rose identify the phenomenon by focusing on a single datum: the date
that a country first exports a product to the United States. Their work is an excellent example of
how one can gain great insight by simplifying the task at hand. Using panel data for US imports,
they find certain countries tend to be first to export a product while others tend to begin to export
at a later date. They also find that the order in which countries first export a good is consistent
with macroeconomic rankings typically associated with technological progress which further
1 In Grossman and Helpman’s (1991) “quality ladder” variant of the product cycle model the leader and follower

exchange dominance of exports of a particular good over time, as leaders re-enter the market for a given good by
innovating and offering a more advanced version.
2 The earlier empirical evidence in support of the product cycle was based on indirect measures (Deardorff, 1984;
Audretsch, 1987; Cotsomitis et al., 1991).

3

supports Vernon’s hypothesis. Feenstra and Rose conclude that “there is strong evidence of
intuitive ordering of countries and commodities, consistent with the product cycle (p. 378).”
Our findings both challenge and complement these earlier results.3 On the one hand, we find
that even though a trade balance perspective may indicate little or no dynamics, each competitor
(supplier) in the marketplace may perceive the market to be very fluid and highly dynamic. In
addition, our approach shows that entry, whether early or late, can be associated with a highly
ephemeral trade relationship. On the other hand, our estimated survival functions do imply that
some countries systematically perform better than others. We then take the next logical step
and use our estimated survival functions to rank each country’s survival experience. We show
that our rankings are consistent with Feenstra and Rose’s rankings. In other words, our results
confirm the notion that there is a product cycle and that leaders not only tend to be the first to the
market (Feenstra and Rose) but also tend to have longer spells of service. The results suggest
that later in the product cycle products become standardized and competitive market pressures
create short-term relationships.
This paper presents, to the best of our knowledge, the first attempt to examine the issue of the
duration of trade relationships. The issue is stimulated in part by the findings of Haveman and
Hummels (2001), Feenstra and Rose, and Schott (2001) who document that in any given year
and for any given product, many countries do not trade, which means there are a lot of zero trade
observations.4 While this is an important realization, none of these previous studies examined
whether a country’s current state (i.e., being “in” or “out” of the market) was a permanent
feature. We show that being in the market is often a transitory phenomenon.5
3 Moenius and Riker (1999)’s findings are also related to this paper. They examine the empirical relevance of the

quality ladders model of Grossman and Helpman and confirm most of the volatility implications of the model.
4 Feenstra and Rose’s approach depends on the fact that many of the zero value observations become positive in
later years.
5 Other research on dynamics of trade has focused on examining the evolution of patterns of industrial specialization over time rather than the dynamics of trade per se (Proudman and Redding, 1998; Redding, 2002).

4

The paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents the data, and offers an example.
We also examine the distribution of the length of trade relationships and discuss some complications such as multiples spells and censoring. Section 3 discusses modeling of duration
and presents estimation techniques. Section 4 presents estimates of survival and hazard rate
functions and discusses differences across countries and products as well as the effects of aggregation. In section 5 we examine the robustness of our results. We show that our findings are
not particularly sensitive to changes in how we measure trade relationships, define failure, or
level of aggregation. In fact, we find that the median duration is often shorter in these alternative
formulations than for our benchmark data. The most significant changes occur when we give
greater weight to relationships with large trade values. While a weighted analysis does increase
duration, we still find that 50 percent of trade weighted relationships are observed for fewer
than five years. In section 6 we relate our findings to Feenstra and Rose’s country rankings.

2. Data
Our analysis is based on US import statistics as compiled by Feenstra (1996).6 From 1972
through 1988 import products were classified according to the seven digit Tariff Schedule of
the United States (TS).7 Since 1989 imports have been classified according to the ten digit
Harmonized System (HS). Given that all products were recoded in 1989, we limit our analysis
to the period 1972-1988 in order to avoid potential concordance issues.8 In simplest terms, for
each commodity and year we can identify all of the countries from whom the United States
purchased. Over the entire period there is a total of about 22,000 different products in the TS
6 The data is available from http://data.econ.ucdavis.edu/international/.
7 We only study imports because there is no concordance between the disaggregated import and export codes. In
addition, the export data is self-reported making it more likely that exports are misreported.
8 Many TS products are mapped into multiple HS codes and vice-versa making impossible to discern actual exits.
See Schott (2001) for more discussion of the TS-HS concordance problem.

5

data. On average, in each year we observe import trade for about 10,000 products sourced from
about 160 countries.

Trade relationships and spells of service
We are interested in studying the length of time until a country ceases to export a product to the
US, an event that we will refer to as a “failure.” As a result calendar time is not as important
as analysis time, which measures the length of time that a country exports a product to the US.
Hence, for each product and country we use the annual data to create spell data. By this we
mean that if we observe trade in product i from country c from 1976–1980, we would say that
the ci th trade relationship has a spell length of five.
Most of our analysis is based on the most disaggregated data available, 7-digit TS data,
which means our analysis is at the product level, not the industry level. Inferences are based
on trade in tangible products rather than aggregate summaries. Until relatively recently such
disaggregated data was not widely available and empirical studies were based on industry classifications, such as the Standard International Trade Classification (SITC). We chose to base our
benchmark results on the 7-digit TS data primarily because it does the best job of measuring
trade in a specified product. For instance, the TS data reports information on more than 30 different types of ball bearings, differentiating by specialized application (e.g., automobiles), size,
and chemistry. By contrast, if we were to perform our analysis using SITC classifications (as
we do later in our robustness checks) we would aggregate all of these ball bearing codes along
with other similar, or perhaps not so similar, products to create spells of service. For instance,
the dozens of ball bearings codes map into a single SITC category “Ball, roller or needle roller
bearings” (4 digit code=7491). Further aggregation is possible, say to “Non-electric machinery
parts” (3 digit code=749) or “Industrial machinery” (2 digit code=74), but doing so makes it
increasingly difficult to interpret the results since each classification includes highly disparate
6

products.
For duration analysis we believe that using highly disaggregated data is imperative. First,
the more aggregated is the data, the more the analysis identifies industry trends rather than
competitive dynamics at the product level. The fact that country c in industry j has a long
duration tells us little about the duration of commodity trade or underlying trade dynamics. For
instance, suppose we observe three countries exporting “Industrial machinery” and that each has
a long trade duration. This might lead us to surmise that the dynamics among these countries are
very similar. This need not be the case. For instance, country c1 might be uniformly superior:
every product it sells could have a long duration. On the other hand, country c2 might be
a dismal failure: the success (i.e., long duration) of one product could hide a multitude of
failures (short-lived spells). Finally, country c3 could be a classic example of Vernon’s product
cycle: the observed long duration at the industry level could reflect a progression from simpler
products (say, ball bearings) to very complicated products (say, engines). If nothing else, the
more aggregated is the data the more cautious we should be interpreting the results; a less
munificent view might be that aggregated data makes it impossible to measure dynamics.
Second, if the products are too broadly defined, we cannot expect to see any source countries
exit the data. For instance, at the extreme if we aggregate all imports from each country, we
will never observe any exit since the United States purchases some product from each source
country every year. Simply put, higher aggregations can hide a great deal of dynamics and
competition in the import market.
For each product we create a panel of countries which export the product to the US. Table 1
provides an example of what the dataset looks like for a representative product, “Milled Corn
(TS=1312000).” The “X”s in the table indicate years in which each country exports the product
to the US. As shown, there are countries that export corn every year, such as Canada and Portugal. This pattern illustrates a spell of length 17 years. Another dozen or so countries have one
7

spell. Mexico begins exporting corn in 1974, South Korea in 1976, and Peru in 1984, and all
three service the US market in every year after entry. The remaining countries with one spell
all export corn for just one year.
There are several countries with two spells. The United States imports corn from Venezuela
in every year but 1981. Ecuador exports corn in 1973 and 1974 (the first spell, length 2) and
then services the US market for the second time starting in 1979 and continuing through 1988
(the second spell, length 10). The Dominican Republic also has two spells, but both of length 1.
Colombia and Italy each have three spells, both starting with two short ones (of length 3 and
1, and 1 and 2, respectively), before entering the US market for the third time (1981 and 1980,
respectively) and staying for the remainder of time. Of the remaining countries most have very
short spells, with the exception of the Netherlands whose first spell is five years long. However,
its remaining four spells are all just one year long.
Once we think of the data in terms of spells our data set has 693,963 observations (see
Table 2). The observations have a median (mean) spell length of 1 (2.7) years. We will discuss
how aggregation affects our results in more detail in section 5, but we note here that Table 2
also includes statistics when we use the more aggregated SITC industry classification system
to construct trade relationships.9 We have 157,850 observations when we use the 5-digit SITC
classification, 90,035 observations when we use the 4-digit level and just 2,484 observations at
the 1-digit level. As expected, when we aggregate the data our ability to observe entry and exit
diminishes and the mean spell length increases, from 2.7 years in the TS data to 3.9 years in the
5-digit SITC data to 8.4 years in the 1-digit SITC data.
In Figure 1 we plot the distribution for each observed spell length. On the x-axis we plot
the observed spell length. On the y-axis we plot the percentage of observations whose observed
spell of service is greater than a given length. In the benchmark 7-digit TS data, more than half
9 SITC imports are also reported in Feenstra (1996).

8

of all spells are just one year long. About 70 percent of the spells are observed for two or fewer
years. About 80 percent of the spells are observed for three or fewer years. On the opposite
side of the spectrum less than two percent of all spells are observed for all 17 years. Simply
put, there is a plethora of short spells. In Figure 1 we also plot the distribution for alternative
measures of trade relationships; these other distributions will be discussed later in the paper.

Multiple spells
Looking at Table 1, one sees that some trade relationships re-occur or have multiple spells of
service. That is, a country will service the market, exit, then re-enter the market, and then
almost always exit again. As it turns out, about a quarter of trade relationships experience
multiple spells of service. About two-thirds of those trade relationships with multiple spells
experience just two spells; less than one percent of trade relationships with multiple spells have
more than three spells. All told we have 495,763 trade relationships as compared with 693,963
spells of service.
We will begin by treating multiple spells as independent. While this assumption is made
primarily in the interest of simplicity in section 5 we explore alternatives and find our results
are likely not overly sensitive to this assumption. To get a sense of why this is the case, it is
instructive to look at the distribution of spells when we exclude multiple spells. First let’s restrict
the analysis to those trade relationships with just a single spell. As reported in Table 2, these
observations have a median (mean) spell length of 1 (3.2) years; thus, the median is exactly
the same as the benchmark data (all 7-digit TS observations) and the mean is just a half a year
longer. In Figure 1 we show the entire distribution. In both cases we see that more than half of
all spells are just one year long and about 75 percent of the spells are observed for fewer than
four years; further, in both distributions only about 5 percent of the spells are observed for 10
or more years.
9

Alternatively, we can restrict the analysis to just the first spell of a trade relationships. This
alternative includes those relationships with just a single spell and also the first spell of those
relationships with multiple service spells. As was the case in the first comparison, the distribution is very similar to the benchmark. This similarity among these distributions suggests that
the independence assumption is a reasonable starting place.

Censoring
Once we begin to think of the data in terms of spells it becomes apparent that we need to
account for censoring in our analysis. By this we mean that we often do not know whether a
trade relationship ends because of failure or for some other reason. In practice this means that
we are uncertain about the beginning and/or ending date for some trade relationships.
As it turns out, censoring is pretty common in US import data — about half of the trade
observations are censored and about 20 percent of spells are censored at one year. The censoring
problem comes in two flavors. First, we have no information on trade relationships for the years
before the beginning (pre-1972) and after the end of our sample (post-1988). As seen in Table 1
we observe that the US imported corn from the Philippines in 1972 and that this relationship
was observed for exactly one year. This trade relationship may have begun in 1972 or it may
have begun in some prior year. The most appropriate interpretation is that this relationship had
a duration of at least one year. Similarly, we also observe that the US imported corn from Peru
from 1984 to 1988. Unfortunately, our data does not continue beyond 1988 and hence we cannot
be sure how long that spell ultimately lasted. Once again, the most appropriate interpretation
is that this relationship had a duration of at least five years. About 10 percent of spells are
observed in 1972, while about 22 percent are observed in 1988.10 This first type of censoring is
typical in survival studies and is incorporated in all of our subsequent analysis.
10 Remember, less than two percent of all spells are observed both in 1972 and 1988.

10

The second type of censoring is somewhat unique and stems from the fact that our analysis
is done at the product level. US Customs revises product definitions for the tariff codes on an
ongoing basis, sometimes splitting a single code into multiple codes and other times combining
multiple codes into fewer codes. Unfortunately, information does not exist to allow us to map
the old TS codes into the new TS codes. When a code is changed we no longer observe trade
in the old product code. But, is this due to the end of a relationship or does it simply mean
that trade stopped due to the redefinition? Throughout much of our analysis we choose to be
cautious and classify all such “exits” as censored, which means that we interpret reclassified
relationships as having duration of at least x years (where x is the number of years where trade
in the original code was observed).
An analogous problem exists for the new codes. When a code is changed we begin to
observe trade in the new product code. But, is this really the beginning of a new relationship
or does it simply reflect the redefinition? Once again for much of our analysis we choose to be
cautious and assume the relationship had a duration of at least y years (where y is the number
of years where trade in the new code was observed). About 20 percent of the spells are censored
due to reclassification. This second type of censoring is a peculiar characteristic of our particular
application; it is incorporated into what we refer to as our benchmark estimates.
The issue is that our decision to interpret all product code changes as being censored is very
conservative — certainly some of the new codes were truly measuring new products and some
of the obsolete codes were measuring products that were no longer traded. In other words, in
our benchmark data we have probably classified some spells as being censored when they were
truly associated with either an entry or an exit. If more information were available we would
be able to identify such births and deaths.11 Unfortunately, this additional information does
11 Xiang (2002) uses the changes in the verbal description of 4-digit SIC industry codes to identify new products. Even using relatively aggregated industry data (about 450 industries) Xiang describes a time-consuming and
painstaking process.

11

not exist. This means that our benchmark results will overstate the true duration of the typical
trading relationship.
An alternative that we explore is to classify these product code changes as indicating entry
and exit. It should be noted, however, that this alternative classification scheme will undoubtedly understate the true duration. As a result, the “true” duration will lie somewhere between
these two approaches toward censoring.

3. Modeling Duration
Duration models
Let T denote the time to a failure event. Since time in our analysis is discrete we assume T is a
discrete random variable taking on values ti , i = 1, 2, . . . , n with probability density function
p(ti ) = Pr(T = ti ), i = 1, 2, . . . , n where t1 < t2 < · · · < tn . The survival function for a
random variable T is given by
S(t) = Pr(T > t) =



p(ti ).

ti >t

The hazard function is
h(ti ) = Pr(T = ti | T ≥ ti ) =

p(ti )
, i = 1, 2, . . . , n
S(ti−1 )

where S(t0 ) = 1. The survival and hazard functions are related through the following expression12
S(t) =


[1 − h(ti )].
ti <t

12 Keifer (1988) provides a good survey of duration models, while Hosmer and Lemeshow (1998), Lancaster
(1990), and Lee (1992) provide good introductions to survival analysis.

12

Nonparametric estimation
The two functions of interest in this paper are the survivor and hazard functions. To estimate
them we will assume we have n independent observations denoted (ti , ci ), i = 1, 2, ..., n,
where ti is the survival time and ci is the censoring indicator variable C (taking on a value of
1 if failure occurred, 0 otherwise) of observation i. Assume there are m ≤ n recorded times
of failure. Denote the rank-ordered survival times as t(1) < t(2) < ... < t(m) . Let n i denote the
number of subjects at risk of failing at t(i) and let di denote the number of observed failures.
The Kaplan-Meier product limit estimator of the survivor function is then

S(t) =

 n i − di
,
ni
t
(i)≤t

with the convention that 
S(t) = 1 if t < t(1) . The Kaplan-Meier estimator is robust to censoring
and uses information from both censored and non-censored observations. The standard error of
the Kaplan-Meier estimator is given by Greenwood’s formula
V
ar{
S(t)} = 
S 2 (t)


i|ti ≤t

di
.
n i (n i − di )

However, when calculating confidence intervals the asymptotic variance of ln[ln −
S(t)] is used
instead:




σ S2 (t)

=

di
n i (n i −di )
.

{ ln( ni (ndi i−di ) )}2

The hazard function is estimated by taking the ratio of subjects who die in a given year to
the number of subjects alive in that year,
di

h(t) = .
ni

13

4. Empirical Results
7-digit TS data
We begin by examining the benchmark 7-digit TS data dataset. In Table 3 we report the distribution of the Kaplan-Meier estimated survival time. Begin by looking under the columns labelled
“TS7-benchmark.” The row “Total” shows the overall distribution of survival time. The other
rows report the Kaplan-Meier estimates for particular regions and industries.
First note the difference between Kaplan-Meier estimated survival time and the spell lengths
reported in Table 2: the Kaplan-Meier estimates are significantly longer. The difference, of
course, is that the Kaplan-Meier estimator accounts for censoring while the spell lengths reported in Table 2 do not; this comparison highlights the importance of accounting for censoring
when working with product level data.
The second important finding involves how sharply the risk of failure falls. The analysis
indicates that the risk of failure is quite high in the early years, but then rapidly falls once a trade
relationship survives a threshold duration. The 25th percentile of the distribution is one year,
which means that after the first year, more than 25 percent of the spells fail. The median duration
is just four years, indicating that a considerable number of observations fail over the following
three years. After about four or five years, however, failure becomes a lot less common: the
75th percentile spans the whole data set (which we denoted by a period). In other words, more
than 50 percent of the observations fail within the first four years, but over the next 13 years
less than one quarter of the observations fail. This suggests that countries exporting to the US
face a large conditional probability of failure in the early stages of their trade relationship and a
much smaller conditional probability once they have survived a few years.
The estimated overall survival function, 
S(t) is graphed in Figure 2 together with the 95%
confidence interval. The confidence interval is very tight (imperceptible), which is not sur14

prising given the size of the data set used. The survival function is downward sloping with
a decreasing slope. The estimated survival function suggests that the hazard rate should be a
decreasing function and this is confirmed in Figure 3 where we present the estimated hazard
function. As shown, the probability of failing in the first year is 33 percent. The hazard rate
between year one and five is an additional 30 percent. The hazard rate for the remaining twelve
years is just 12 percent.
Figures 2 and 3 indicate that after a large decrease in the probability of survival over the first
few years, the survival function levels off and decreases very little. Both the survival and hazard functions indicate that there is negative duration dependence, meaning that the conditional
probability of failure decreases as duration increases. This result indicates the presence of a
type of a threshold effect. In other words, it appears that once a relationship is established and
has survived the first few years it is likely the relationship will survive a long time. This finding
is similar to that documented by Pakes and Ericson (1998) for retail trade establishments.13
It is somewhat surprising that the Kaplan-Meier estimate of probability of exporting a product for more than 17 years is so high (0.41) given that we previously showed that less than two
percent of all trade relationships span the entire sample (Figure 1). These seemingly inconsistent findings are explained by the prevalence of censoring when using the product level data.
Many of the relationships that are observed to end are censored and thus in our benchmark
results we do not classify them as failures.
The impact of censoring due to product codes changes can be identified if we estimate the
Kaplan-Meier survival function using the modified censoring approach discussed above. Under
this alternative scheme we consider all changes in TS codes as indicating births and deaths
which means we will observe much more entry and exit in the data. We report the results
13 Pakes and Ericson interpret their results as supporting Jovanovic’s (1982) theory of learning.

15

in Table 2 and Figure 4.14 In Table 3 we see that under this modified censoring scheme the
median duration falls to just two years as compared with four years in the benchmark data; the
75th percentile is just six years under modified censoring. In other words, at least 75 percent
of the spells fail within six years. In Figure 4 we depict the Kaplan-Meier survival function
for both the benchmark 7-digit TS data and for the modified censoring data. As expected, the
hazard rate is substantially higher during the first years under modified censoring; by year four
the survival rate is about 20 percentage points smaller under the modified censoring scheme.15
Nevertheless, as was the case with the benchmark data, the hazard rate falls sharply after about
four or five years and there is little additional failure. Overall, we find that the probability of
exporting a product for more than 17 years under modified censoring is only 0.18 — less than
half of that of the benchmark data — but still considerably higher than the observed two percent
of trade relationships that span the entire sample.

Region and industry survival functions
In Table 3 we also report statistics broken out by individual regions and industries for both the
benchmark and modified censoring data. For all regions we observe that a substantial fraction
of trade relationships quickly end in failure: the 25th percentile of the distribution is one to
two years for all regions. There are differences across regions in the severity of the initial
wave of failures with Northern regions tending to outperform Southern regions. When using
the benchmark data we find that the Northern regions (as represented by Canada, Asia, and
Western Europe) have a median duration of at least six years; of this set, Canada has by far the
longest median survival time, which spans the whole data set. In other words, less than half of
14 Recall that in this modified scheme products traded in 1972 or 1988 are still classified as censored.
15 As we showed previously, there is a connection between the hazard function and the survival function: when
the probability of survival decreases significantly the hazard rate is large; when the probability of survival decreases
slightly the hazard rate is small.

16

the observations on Canadian trade end in failure within the our 17 year sample.
Quite a different story emerges for the Southern regions. Using the benchmark data, the
Southern regions have a median duration of no more than two years — half of all trade relationships from these regions will fail within two years.16 We also point out that the difference
between Northern and Southern regions is also observed under the modified censoring scheme,
where once again the Northern regions have uniformly higher median survival times.
In Figure 5 we use the benchmark data and estimate the survival functions for individual
regions. As one can see the shapes of the survival functions are similar and all reflect the basic
dynamics described above. For each region there is a significant probability of failure in the first
four or five years of the relationship, but thereafter the hazard falls substantially. Nevertheless,
survival varies substantially across source region. In the case of Canada about 60 percent of
trade relationships survive 10 or more years. By contrast, in the case of Africa only 20 percent
of trade relationships survive 10 or more years.
The results clearly suggest that duration can broadly be thought of as a North versus South
story, with Northern sources having longer median survival times. This insight can be drawn
more sharply by estimating the Kaplan-Meier survival functions for OECD and non-OECD
countries separately. We present the results in Figure 6. On average, the estimated survival
for OECD countries is about 10 percentage points higher than for non-OECD countries. Thus
while the survival pattern is qualitatively similar across regions, Northern countries clearly fare
better.
When we look at survival functions by industry we again see broadly similar trends — a
wave of initial failures which are followed by a significant decrease in hazard. As seen in Table 3
and depicted in Figure 7 the 25th percentile of the distribution is one year for every industry.
16 The category “Other” contains the following countries that we did not assign to any region: Bermuda, Greenland, St. Pierre Miquelon, and Unknown Partner.

17

Looking at the benchmark data, with the exception of two industries the median survival time
is three years or less. In other words, in most industries more than half of all observations fail
within two years.
In two key industries, Machinery (SITC 7) and Miscellaneous Manufactures (SITC 8), the
estimated duration is far longer, more than 11 years. An explanation for the distinct difference
between these two industries and the others lies at least in part to the apparently high prevalence
of product reclassification censoring that occurs in these two industries. Evidence of this can be
found when we look at the distribution under our modified censoring scheme where we observe
that these two industries have a median survival time of two years, the same as all but one
industry (whose median survival time is one year). The higher than average incidence of product
codes changes might reflect that these two industries are characterized by the most innovation
and shortest product cycles; a dynamism which results in numerous TS codes changes. If
this is the case, then the modified censoring scheme probably does a better job capturing the
actual dynamics as the code changes probably reflect true entry and exit (i.e., births and deaths).
On the other hand, the high incidence of code changes might reflect other factors that are not
associated with economically meaningful entry and exit. For instance, the code changes might
simply be a way to mitigate the impact of GATT negotiated tariff reductions or expand the scope
of the Multifibre Agreement. In this case, the benchmark censoring scheme is probably more
appropriate, implying that these two industries really are outliers. A resolution of this issue is
beyond the scope of this paper but certainly merits further analysis.

5. Robustness of results
The results indicate that trade relationships are quite short: estimated median survival is between
two and four years. We now examine whether our findings are robust to how we measure trade

18

relationships and spells.

Aggregation concerns — SITC level analysis
We begin by exploring whether our finding is possibly due to the highly disaggregated nature
of our data. Perhaps 30 different ball-bearing codes represents an overly fine parsing of the data
that leads us to observe excessive entry and exit.17 If so, a trade relationship might be better
measured using SITC industry classifications.
To address this concern we also calculated spells of service using SITC industry (revision 2)
definitions ranging from the 1-digit to the 5-digit level. As mentioned above, summary statistics
for the SITC classifications are given in Table 2 where we show that the median observed spell
length is two or fewer years in the 1-digit SITC through the 4-digit SITC data. The distribution
of duration time based on the Kaplan-Meier estimates are presented in Table 3; the estimates
themselves are depicted in Figure 4.
A number of interesting insights are gained by examining trade relationship using industrylevel data. First, note that within the SITC classifications aggregation works exactly as expected.
Higher levels of aggregation are associated with longer survival times. As depicted in Figure 4
the survival function for the 4-digit SITC lies above the 5-digit SITC, the 3-digit SITC lies above
the 4-digit SITC, and so on. Nevertheless, although aggregation creates longer survival times
the estimated survival times remain remarkably brief. There remains a large number of short
spells of service until the data is fairly highly aggregated. In particular, as shown in Table 3, the
median survival time is two years for the 3-digit, 4-digit, and 5-digit SITC data.
Second, in comparison with the median survival time for the 7-digit TS benchmark data the
brevity of duration times for the SITC data is somewhat surprising. Specifically, despite the
17 It is not obvious that the TS classification system is too fine. To the contrary, Schott (2000) presents evidence

that the TS categories may be too broad.

19

higher degree of aggregation the 2-digit through 5-digit SITC data all have a shorter median
survival time than the benchmark 7-digit TS data. As depicted in Figure 4 only the 1-digit SITC
data has a higher survival function than the 7-digit TS benchmark.
This result seemingly implies that aggregation from products to industries lowers survival.
Taken at face value, this is an odd result. This unusual finding, however, has a completely
logical explanation. The SITC classification system (revision 2) is unchanged throughout our
sample. As a result only the first type of censoring (which is driven by the beginning and
end of our sample) is present in the SITC analysis. In other words, it is more appropriate
to compare results based on the SITC classifications with the 7-digit TS modified censoring
data. As shown in Figure 4 when we do that comparison we get the expected result: survival
experience for product level data is lower than for the 5-digit SITC industry level data and
aggregation increases estimated survival time.
In effect, the SITC data shows that both approaches toward handling censoring in the 7-digit
TS data are imperfect. In an ideal world we would be able to truly identify all births, deaths, and
censored product changes. But, since we cannot do so we are left with two imperfect measures:
(i) the 7-digit TS benchmark data which overstate the “true” survival experience (since all product code changes are censored) and (ii) the modified censoring data which understate the “true”
survival experience (since all product code changes are interpreted as births and deaths).
Moreover, given that survival experience at the product-based level must be shorter than at
the 5-digit SITC industry level, the results shown in Figure 4 indicate that the true 7-digit TS
survival experience indeed lies between our two measures. In effect, the SITC results imply that
the “true” median survival experience at the 7-digit TS level is two to four years and probably
is closer to two years. In either case, the evidence is clear: duration is very brief.

20

Multiple Spells
As mentioned, about a quarter of trade relationships experience multiple spells of service. In
the above analysis we have assumed that duration is independent of spell number. We now
investigate whether this assumption biases our findings.
To check the sensitivity of our results, we considered several alternative approaches toward
the issue of multiple spells. First, we simply limited our analysis to only those relationships with
a single spell. In Figure 1 we plotted the distribution for trade relationships with a single spell.
And as discussed above there is very little difference between the distributions for single spell
and all 7-digit TS data — under this alternative formulation about half the observations have a
spell length of just one year and more than 75 percent of the spells last three or fewer years. The
Kaplan-Meier estimated survival function for the single spell data is depicted in Figure 8. The
survival function for the single spell data has a similar pattern as the benchmark data, namely
high hazard in the first few years followed by a levelling off of the survival function. Overall,
however, the single spell data exhibits significantly higher survival: about 21 percentage points
higher than the benchmark data in year 17.
The similarity of spell length distributions (Figure 1) sharply contrasts with the differences
in the Kaplan-Meier estimates (Figure 8). This suggests that the censoring approach taken in
the benchmark data plays a role. Specifically, censoring is more common in the single spell
data which shifts up the Kaplan-Meier estimates. Moreover, as we discussed in the preceding
section, analysis based on the SITC data indicates that the benchmark data overstates the amount
of censoring in the data and that the modified censoring approach may yield a more appropriate
measure of true survival experience. To get a sense of the magnitude we re-estimate the single
spell data using the modified censoring approach and present the Kaplan-Meier estimates in
Figure 8. As shown, the median survival time is now 3 years as compared with 2 years when

21

all observations are included. While the single spell data has a higher survival experience, the
effect is not as great as in the benchmark approach: about 7 percentage points higher than the
benchmark data in year 17.
A second approach we explored was to limit the analysis to only first spells. This alternative
includes those relationships with just a single spell and also the first spell of those relationships
with multiple service spells. Since the results are generally similar to the single spell results
they will not be explicitly discussed.
Another way we addressed the issue of multiple spells was to consider the possibility that
some of the reported multiple spells are due to measurement error. Specifically, if the time
between spells is short, it may be that the gap is mis-measured and that interpreting the initial
spell as “failing” is inappropriate. In this case, it may be more appropriate to interpret the
two spells as one longer spell. To allow for such misreporting, we assume that a one-year gap
between spells is an error, and hence merge the individual spells and adjust the duration length
accordingly. Gaps of two or more years are assumed to be accurate and no merging is done.
The spell length distribution for this gap-adjusted data is depicted in Figure 1. As seen
this adjusting for this potential type of measurement error shifts the distribution but short spells
remain the norm. In Table 2 we report the summary statistics for the gap-adjusted data. In
comparison with the benchmark 7-digit TS data, the average spell length is longer by about a
half year.
The Kaplan-Meier estimated survival function for the gap-adjusted data is depicted in Figure 8. As expected, the survival function exhibits less early failure and more failure in later
times. For example, after two years the survival function for the benchmark data is 0.57 as
compared with 0.66 in the gap-adjusted data. By contrast, the hazard rate for the last twelve
years is just 12 percent in the benchmark data but 14 percent in the gap-adjusted data. As was
the case with the single spell and first spell alternatives we find that using the modified censoring
22

approach reduces the difference between the gap-adjusted and 7-digit TS data.
Taken together, these results suggest that the independence assumption likely leads to an
under-estimate of duration although our analysis indicates that the magnitude of the bias is
fairly small for most scenarios. In particular, if one believes the modified censoring approach
best captures the true survival experience, the independence assumption does not appear to have
a significant impact under any of these scenarios.

Trade Weighted Analysis
The final issue we explore involves putting more weight on the higher valued trade relationships.
Our benchmark dataset — and in fact all of the preceding analysis — is unweighted. Small and
large trade value relationships receive the same weight. If short spells involve small values
and long spells involve large values, an unweighted distribution might overstate the brevity of
spells. To examine this issue, we also compute a weighted distribution where each observation
is weighed by the value of trade in the first year of the relationship. This alternative formulation
de-emphasizes the low-value spells and gives more importance to the high-value spells.
In Figure 1 we plot the spell length distribution under this weighted alternative. Comparing
it with the benchmark data we observe a significant shift in the distribution, far greater than any
of the other alternatives. In the benchmark data, more than half the observations are observed
for just a single year. In the weighted analysis, only about 15 percent of the data is observed for
a single year This clearly suggests that lower value trade relationships tend to be shorted lived.
Nevertheless, even under the weighted scheme there remain a surfeit of short spells — more
than 50 percent of the spells are observed for four or fewer years.
In Figure 8 we present the Kaplan-Meier estimated survival function for the weighted 7digit TS data. The impact on survival is far greater than under any of the alternatives previously
considered. In particular, the impact on duration is more significant than aggregating to the
23

1-digit industry level or restricting ourselves to single spell relationships.

6. Duration and the product cycle
Feenstra and Rose (2000) rank countries according to the first year they export a product to the
US. They find that the order in which countries first export a product to the US is consistent
with macroeconomic rankings typically associated with technological progress. In other words,
they find that the rankings are consistent with the product cycle.
We use duration methodology to compute country rankings. In other words, rather than
base the rankings on the first year of export, we rank countries on their survival experience. In
what follows, we report countries ranked according to the probability of exporting a product for
more than four years (
S(4)). We note, however, that given that the estimated survival functions
rarely cross, the country rankings are not sensitive to what spell length we use.18 In Table 4 we
report countries rank using the 7-digit TS benchmark data, the 7-digit TS modified censoring
data, and also the 5-digit SITC industry classification. We also reproduce the rankings reported
by Feenstra and Rose.
The rankings based on estimated survival are similar for all definitions of trade relationships.
As reported in Table 5 the pairwise correlations are about 0.90. Nevertheless, there are a couple
of anomalies in the rankings based on the 7-digit TS benchmark data. Most notably, Macao has
the 10th best survival experience, far higher than for our other two survival rankings or Feenstra
and Rose. Sri Lanka, Indonesia, and Haiti are also ranked implausibly high. Trade from each
of these countries appears to experience a high incidence of product code reclassifications as
their rankings drop sharply under the other survival calculations. These results provide further
evidence that censoring is a significant hurdle for analysis at the product level.
18 The rankings would be virtually the same if we ranked the estimated survival functions in any year.

24

Overall, the results based on survival experience are quite supportive of those found by
Feenstra and Rose. As seen in Table 5 the pairwise rank correlations between the two rankings
from Feenstra and Rose (2000), goods and country based, and the rankings based on survival
are high. The highest correlation is between Feenstra and Rose’s ranking our ranking based on
the 5-digit SITC data. This is likely due to the fact that their analysis is also performed at the
5-digit SITC level. Both rankings based on the 7-digit TS data are slightly less correlated with
Feenstra and Rose and of the two, the benchmark data is somewhat more highly correlated.
An interesting lesson can be learned by having both Feenstra and Rose and our rankings.
Feenstra and Rose show that developed countries tend to be the first in the market. Our results
show that these same countries tend to successfully sell their products for a much longer duration than do the followers. Taken together, these results highlight an often overlooked value to
being a leader. Namely, as a unique product becomes standardized and production moves to the
South, competition among the followers is often fierce. As a result, exports in one year are no
guarantee of further sales.

7. Conclusion
The type of highly dynamic trade patterns evidenced in this paper are unanticipated given implications from standard theoretical models and existing empirical work. Our results indicate
that typical trade relationships are more fragile than previously thought — or at least, than has
been previously discussed in the literature. In particular, we have never seen a discussion that
trade relationships may systematically last only a year or two.
This paper is the first one to ask the question of how long trade relationships last. The surprising findings shed light on entry and exit in foreign markets. The results of this paper are not
important just for the understanding of dynamics of international trade, but are also important

25

for policy makers. Different policies can have important impacts on trade relationships, from
creating them to extending them to ending them. The length of trade relationships adds another
dimension to what policy makers must pay attention to.
The results indicate that most trade relationships are very short. We also show that the
phenomena are not driven by the highly disaggregated nature of the data set. Aggregating the
data results in significantly longer durations only at very high aggregation levels. While the
actual duration increases with aggregation, the relative survival experience of countries and
industries is not affected by aggregation. There is evidence that the product cycle theory can
explain at least some features of the duration of trade as the countries with longest survival
times are those who are conventionally defined as technological leaders.
Future work should focus on identifying and discriminating among potential explanations.
The product cycle is a reasonable starting point but there are others. Insights and lessons from
industrial organization literature are likely to be helpful. For instance, Ericson and Pakes (1995,
1998) develop a dynamic model of market entry and exit with some implications which are
observed in this paper. They show that firms are more likely to die in the early years of their
lives than later on, a finding we show is true for import trade relationships.19 Alternatively, our
findings could be consistent with a search model where the domestic buyers are searching for
the best partners in other countries.

19 Another potentially interesting starting point is the model developed by Asplund and Nocke (2003).

26

References
[1] Audretsch, D.B. (1987), “An empirical test of the industry life-cycle,” Welwirtschaftliches
Archiv 123:297–307.
[2] Asplund, M. and V. Nocke (2003), “Firm Turnover in Imperfectly Competitive Markets,”
mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
[3] Cotsomitis, J., C. DeBresson, and A. Kwan (1991) “A reexamination of the technology
gap theory of trade,” Welwirtschaftliches Archiv 127:792–99.
[4] Deardorff, Alan V. (1984), “Testing Trade Theories and Predicting Trade Flows,” in R.
Jones and P. Kenen (eds.) The Handbook of International Economics, Vol. I (Amsterdam:
North-Holland).
[5] Gagnon, Joseph and Andrew Rose, (1995) “Dynamic Persistence of Industry Trade Balances: How Pervasive is the Product Cycle?”, Oxford Economic Papers, 47:229-48.
[6] Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
[7] Feenstra, R.C. (1996), “US Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances,” NBER Working Paper 5515.
[8] Feenstra, R.C. and A.K. Rose (2000), “Putting Things in Order: Trade Dynamics and
Product Cycles,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 82:369-82.
[9] Haveman, J. and D. Hummels (2001), “Alternative Hypotheses and the Volume of Trade:
Evidence on the Extent of Specialization,” mimeo, Department of Economics, Purdue
University.
[10] Hosmer, D.W. and S. Lemeshow (1998), Applied Survival Analysis: Regression Modeling
of Time to Event Data, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
[11] Jovanovic, B. (1982) “Selection and the evolution of industry,” Econometrica, 50:649-70.
[12] Keifer, N.M. (1988), “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions,” Journal of Economic Literature 26:646-79.
[13] Kendall, M. and J. Dickinson Gibbons (1990), Rank Correlation Methods, fifth edition,
New York: Oxford University Press.
[14] Lancaster, T. (1990), The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

27

[15] Lee, E.T. (1992), Statistical Methods for Survival Data Analysis, New York: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.
[16] Moenius, J. and D. Riker (1999), “Trade Barriers and the Volatility of Comparative Advantage,” mimeo, Department of Economics, UCSD.
[17] A. Pakes and R. Ericson (1998), “Empirical Implications of Alternative Models of Firms
Dynamics,” Journal of Economic Theory, 79:1-45.
[18] Proudman, J. and S. Redding (1998), “Persistence and Mobility of International Trade,”
Chapter 2 in Openness and Growth, Bank of England, 1998.
[19] Rauch, J.E. (1999), “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 48:7-35.
[20] Redding, Stephen (2002), ”Specialization Dynamics,” Journal of International Economics, 58:299-334.
[21] Schott, P. (2000), “Do Countries Specialize?”, mimeo, Yale University, mimeo.
[22] Vernon, Raymond (1966) “International Trade and International Investment in the Product
Cycle,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 80, no. 2, May.

28

Figure 1 - Distribution of Spell Lengths
100

TS7
TS7 (Trade Weighted)
TS7 (Single Spell)
TS7 (First Spell)
TS7 (Adjusted Gap)
SITC5

90
80

% observations

70
60
50
TS7 (Trade Weighted)
TS7 (Adjusted Gap)

40
30
20

SITC5

10

TS7

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Length of spell

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Figure 2 - Survival Function with 95% Confidence Interval
7-digit TSUSA 1972-1989
1.0

Probability of survival

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Time

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Figure 3 - Overall Hazard Function
7-digit TSUSA 1972-1989

0.4

Hazard rate

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Time

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Figure 4 - Survival Functions for TS and SITC Based Data,
with Modified Censoring
1.0

Probability of survival

0.8

1-digit SITC

0.6
7-digit TSUSA
2-digit SITC

0.4

3-digit SITC
4-digit SITC
5-digit SITC

7-digit TSUSA, Mod Cens

0.2

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Time

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Figure 5 - Survival Functions for Regions
7-digit TSUSA 1972-1989
1.0

Probability of survival

0.8

0.6

Canada

Asia
Western Europe

0.4
South America
Middle East
Oceania
Eastern Europe
Africa

0.2

Other

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Time

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Figure 6 - Survival Functions for OECD and Non-OECD Countries
7-digit TSUSA 1972-1989
1.0

Probability of survival

0.8

0.6
OECD

0.4

Non-OECD

0.2

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Time

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Figure 7 - Survival Functions for 1-digit SITC Industries
7-digit TSUSA 1972-1989
1.0

Probability of survival

0.8

0.6
SITC=7
SITC=8

SITC=1
SITC=6
SITC=5
SITC=9
SITC=0
SITC=3
SITC=2
SITC=4

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Time

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Figure 8 - Survival Functions for Alternative Treatments of
7-digit TSUSA Data
1.0

Probability of survival

0.8

Trade Weighted

Single Spell

0.6
First Spell
Adjusted Gap
Benchmark

0.4
Single Spell, Mod Cens
First Spell, Mod Cens

0.2

Modified Censoring

Adjusted Gap, Mod Cens

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Time

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Table 1 - Examples of data

X X X X X X
X X X X X X
X X X X
X X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X X X
X X
X
X

X X X
X

X
X
X
X X X X
X
X

X
X X X X X
X X X X X
X X X X X X X X
X X X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X X X X X
X X
X X X X X X X
X X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X X
X X

X X
X X

X
X X
X X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X

# Spells

Canada
Portugal
Mexico
South Korea
Peru
Kenya
Honduras
St Kitts Nev
Hong Kong
Philippines
Belgium-Lux.
Greece
Spain
East Germany
Venezuela
Ecuador
Japan
Argentina
Guatemala
Dominican Rp
India
China
Colombia
Italy
United Kingdom
Thailand
Taiwan
Germany
El Salvador
France
Netherlands
Brazil

No. Years In

1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988

CORN (1312000)

17
17
15
13
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
16
12
4
3
2
2
2
2
12
12
5
4
3
3
3
5
9
7

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
5
5

Table 2 - Summary Statistics

Observed
Spell Length (years)
Mean
Median

Total Number
of Observations

Benchmark data
TS7

2.7

1

693,963

Industry-level aggregation
SITC5
SITC4
SITC3
SITC2
SITC1

3.9
4.2
4.7
5.5
8.4

1
2
2
2
5

157,441
98,035
43,480
15,257
2,445

TS7 Alternatives
TS7 - Trade Weighted
TS7 - First Spell
TS7 - One Spell Only
TS7 - Gap Adjusted

6.1
2.9
3.2
3.3

4
1
1
2

693,963
495,763
365,491
593,450

Table 3 - Distribution of Kaplan-Meier estimated survival time

Percentiles of distribution

Product Level Data
TS7-benchmark
TS7-mod. censoring
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%

Total

1

4

.

1

2

6

Regions
Canada
Asia
Western Europe
South America
Eastern Europe
Oceania
Africa
Middle East
Other

2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

.
9
6
2
2
2
2
2
1

.
.
.
.
.
.
6
.
2

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1

.
7
9
4
3
4
2
3
1

SITC (rev 2) 1-digit industries
0-Food
1-Beverages/Tobacco
2-Crude Materials
3-Mineral Fuels
4-Animal and Vegetable Oils
5-Chemicals
6-Manufactured Materials
7-Machinery
8-Miscellaneous Manufactures
9-Other

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
3
2
2
2
3
3
.
11
2

.
.
9
.
7
.
.
.
.
.

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2

6
6
5
6
4
7
6
8
5
.

Table 3 - Distribution of Kaplan-Meier estimated survival time

25%

SITC5
50%

75%

Total

1

2

Regions
Canada
Asia
Western Europe
South America
Eastern Europe
Oceania
Africa
Middle East
Other

10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

SITC (rev 2) 1-digit industries
0-Food
1-Beverages/Tobacco
2-Crude Materials
3-Mineral Fuels
4-Animal and Vegetable Oils
5-Chemicals
6-Manufactured Materials
7-Machinery
8-Miscellaneous Manufactures
9-Other

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Percentiles of distribution

Industry-level Aggregation
SITC3
25%
50%
75%

25%

SITC4
50%

75%

25%

SITC2
50%

75%

25%

SITC1
50%

75%

.

1

2

.

1

2

.

1

3

.

2

.

.

.
2
4
2
2
2
1
1
1

.
.
.
8
5
.
3
4
1

.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

.
3
8
2
2
2
1
1
1

.
.
.
13
8
.
4
4
2

.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

.
3
.
2
3
2
2
1
1

.
.
.
.
.
.
6
4
2

.
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1

.
7
.
4
.
3
2
2
1

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3

.
2
.
2
13
2
1
1
1

.
.
.
.
.
.
7
.
8

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3

.
.
10
8
6
.
.
.
.
.

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
6

.
.
.
10
7
.
.
.
.
.

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
6

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

4
4
3
2
2
3
4
3
5
6

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

2
1
3
1
1
1
5
2
.
.

.
8
.
3
3
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

Table 4 - Country rankings
Country
Japan
Germany
Canada
United Kingdom
Italy
Taiwan
France
Hong Kong
South Korea
Macao
China
Switzerland
Sri Lanka
Mexico
Indonesia
Spain
Philippines
Thailand
Sweden
Singapore
Austria
Haiti
Portugal
Netherlands
Malaysia
India
Dominican Rp
Brazil
Israel
Denmark
Belgium-Lux.
Mauritius
Costa Rica
Turkey
Falkland Isl
Poland
Bangladesh
Fm Yugoslavia
Ireland
Finland
Romania
Australia
Pakistan
Norway
Morocco
Greece
Nepal
Guatemala
Colombia
Jamaica
Uruguay
Hungary

TS7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

Kaplan-Meier Survival
TS7 - Mod. Censoring
3
1
2
4
6
7
5
9
8
62
13
10
63
11
43
15
27
23
12
29
19
55
25
14
39
22
46
18
20
16
17
56
68
32
69
38
49
34
30
31
79
21
41
24
66
50
105
54
37
47
73
52

SITC 5 digit
4
2
1
3
6
9
5
16
13
43
15
10
52
8
34
14
29
25
12
28
17
42
26
7
36
23
40
19
20
18
11
47
50
31
117
33
91
30
22
24
58
21
44
27
45
38
82
51
35
56
64
41

Feenstra-Rose
Goods Based
Country Based
4
4
3
3
1
1
2
2
8
6
13
13
5
5
17
14
18
20
71
70
11
25
10
10
73
73
6
7
46
52
14
12
33
31
32
34
12
11
28
30
20
17
61
39
34
24
7
8
39
41
24
19
38
37
15
16
22
21
19
15
9
9
70
110
49
54
47
50
149
150
37
32
107
90
40
33
25
23
26
26
50
45
16
18
57
48
23
22
62
62
43
35
110
89
52
47
36
29
51
44
69
65
45
49

Table 4 - Country rankings
Country
Ecuador
Cyprus
Lebanon
Barbados
Honduras
Chile
Argentina
Peru
El Salvador
New Zealand
Egypt
Bolivia
Czechoslovakia
Venezuela
Guyana
South Africa
Algeria
Nicaragua
Trinidad-Tobago
Belize
Tunisia
Panama
Reunion
Zimbabwe
St Kitts Nev
Malta
Bahrain
Paraguay
Iceland
Untd Arab Em
Afghanistan
Cote D'Ivoire
Oman
Fiji
Cambodia
Kenya
Malawi
Ghana
Congo
Bahamas
Untd Rp Tanzania
Angola
Albania
St Pierre Miqu
Zaire
Fm USSR
Madagascar
Seychelles
Ethiopia
Bulgaria
Neth Antilles
East Germany

TS7
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104

Kaplan-Meier Survival
TS7 - Mod. Censoring
57
114
28
109
53
26
33
67
98
44
36
83
45
35
93
87
59
94
64
81
122
90
75
51
92
121
88
76
89
70
141
71
142
58
125
86
60
61
48
95
40
78
77
74
42
84
65
85
72
116
107
108

SITC 5 digit
57
65
32
86
62
48
39
55
63
37
59
66
54
49
88
46
105
71
72
93
84
73
126
53
70
78
121
79
95
122
83
61
135
74
129
60
80
81
76
98
69
111
109
92
75
68
67
77
102
103
116
89

Feenstra-Rose
Goods Based
Country Based
54
56
87
83
78
59
84
72
60
64
35
57
27
28
44
46
67
55
31
36
56
75
88
77
41
43
30
38
82
78
21
27
101
104
86
58
59
63
95
92
102
99
53
53
123
148
91
123
48
69
112
71
94
131
114
82
68
74
74
98
111
76
72
102
118
128
105
111
148
144
64
67
136
135
97
80
120
120
65
61
124
88
133
109
108
124
135
142
106
103
29
42
117
106
99
133
146
97
66
86
63
66
42
40

Table 4 - Country rankings
Country
Guinea
Iraq
Sierra Leone
Djibouti
Cameroon
Liberia
Mongolia
Nigeria
Rest America Nes
Togo
Kuwait
Myanmar (Burma)
Sudan
Qatar
Zambia
Senegal
Mozambique
Syrn Arab Rp
Burkina Faso
Benin
Saudi Arabia
Jordan
Iran
Bermuda
Kiribati
Surinam
Papua N.Guinea
Uganda
New Caledonia
Gabon
Central Afr. Rep.
Greenland
Mali
French Guiana
Rwanda
Liby Arab Jm
Laos P.Dem.R
Mauritania
Guadeloupe
Vietnam
Gibraltar
St.Helena
Fm Dem Yemen
Fm Yemen
Gambia
Niger

TS7
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150

Kaplan-Meier Survival
TS7 - Mod. Censoring
100
82
91
112
103
106
99
80
137
111
126
102
120
115
101
117
97
124
134
96
118
140
133
127
128
119
110
104
135
123
113
139
130
138
132
129
149
146
152
143
155
150
148
147
154
151

SITC 5 digit
104
113
108
133
97
119
138
85
132
90
136
114
115
137
123
99
94
110
101
87
106
134
118
130
120
112
107
96
128
125
100
144
124
141
127
145
149
150
140
139
147
148
142
143
146
131

Feenstra-Rose
Goods Based
Country Based
92
140
139
96
116
117
150
149
100
114
109
94
89
145
83
81
128
141
143
143
119
115
115
119
126
138
121
136
131
121
113
129
85
95
103
68
144
134
147
122
55
84
75
113
76
51
96
93
80
127
90
108
129
105
138
116
93
101
77
125
142
147
127
91
98
118
122
132
145
139
125
100
130
107
141
130
104
87
137
85
79
60
134
126
81
79
132
137
140
146
58
112

Table 5 - Pairwise rank correlations of country rankings
TS7
Benchmark

TS7
Modified Censoring

SITC
5 digit

Feenstra-Rose
Goods Based

TS7
Benchmark

1

TS7
Modified Censoring

0.8792
(0.0000)

1

SITC 5 digit

0.9032
(0.0000)

0.913
(0.0000)

1

Goods Based

0.7568
(0.0000)

0.7391
(0.0000)

0.8272
(0.0000)

1

Country Based

0.766
(0.0000)

0.7341
(0.0000)

0.8404
(0.0000)

0.9089
(0.0000)

*p-values are reported in parentheses below the correlations

Feenstra-Rose
Country Based

1

