NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN THE PROCESS OF AGING
DURING THE TWENTIETH CENTURY:
FINDINGS AND PROCEDURES OF THE
EARLY INDICATORS PROJECT
Robert W. Fogel
Working Paper 9941
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9941
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

This paper was prepared for the RAND Summer Institute on Demography, Economics, and Epidemiology
of Aging Tenth Anniversary Gala of the NIA. P30 Program, July 11–12, 2003, Santa Monica, CA. I have
benefited from the comments and criticisms on an earlier draft by Amy Aiseirithe, Dawn Alley, Javier
Birchenall, Peter Blanck, Dora Costa, Lance Davis, Bernard Harris, Elaine Heisler, Max Henderson, Kwangsun Lee, Robert Margo, Robert Mittendorf, Douglass North, Louis Nguyen, Georgeanne Patmios, Robert
Pollak, Melissa Ptacek, Nevin Scrimshaw, Kenneth Sokoloff, Chen Song, Dejun Su, Richard Suzman, James
Tanner, Werner Troesken, Sven Wilson, and E. A. Wrigley. The Early Indicators project is funded by NIA
grant P01 AG10120.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Robert W. Fogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Changes in the Process of Aging During the Twentieth Century:
Findings and Procedures of the Early Indicators Project
Robert W. Fogel
NBER Working Paper No. 9941
August 2003
JEL No. I10, I12, J11, J14
ABSTRACT
The program project Early Indicators of Later Work Levels, Disease and Death investigates how
socioeconomic and environmental factors in early life can shape health and work levels in later life.
Project researchers have approached this problem by creating a life-cycle sample that permits a
longitudinal study of the aging of Union Army veterans, the first cohort to reach age 65 during the
twentieth century. Comparing Union Army data with data from NHANES and NHIS has shown that
age-specific prevalence rates of specific chronic diseases and disabilities were much higher in the
century before World War II among both young and old than today. Moreover, the number of
comorbidities at each age has fallen sharply. Also, the average age at onset of chronic diseases was
more than a decade later at the end of the twentieth century than at the beginning. The implications
of these findings for several issues in health economics are discussed.
Robert W. Fogel
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rwf@cpe.uchicago.edu

Changes in the Process of Aging during the Twentieth Century:
Findings and Procedures of the Early Indicators Project
The results to date of the program project called Early Indicators of Later Work Levels,
Disease and Death have exceeded expectations in 1986, when we began our work on it, because
so many of the findings were unanticipated. The original aim was to create a life-cycle sample
that would permit a longitudinal study of the aging of Union Army veterans. Born mainly
between 1830 and 1847, these veterans were the first cohort to turn age 65 during the twentieth
century. It was possible to create the life-cycle sample by linking together information from
about a dozen sources, including the manuscript schedules of censuses between 1850 and 1910;
regimental, military, and medical records; public health records; Union Army pension records;
surgeons’ certificates giving the results of successive examinations of the veterans from first
pension application until death; death certificates; daily military histories of each regiment in
which the veterans served; and rejection records of volunteers.
The original plan was to draw a random sample of 39,300 recruits from the regular
regiments of the army. Since that sample produced too few black veterans, we subsequently
enlarged the sample by drawing about 6,000 veterans from the black regiments. All told, the
completed sample consists of about 45,300 observations. It takes about 15,000 variables to
describe the complete life-cycle history of each veteran.
The program project was funded by NIA in 1991 and has been extended by competitive
applications in 1994 and 2001, each time for 5 years. About 80 percent of the effort during the
first two grant periods was devoted to creating the life-cycle sample, and about 20 percent for
analysis. Under the current award about 20 percent is for the extension of the sample, 10 percent
for outreach (to make this complex data set more accessible to investigators outside of the
program project), and about 70 percent for data analysis.

1

When the Early Indicators project began, it was led by a team of 7 senior investigators
and 4 consultants. Of these, 4 were primarily economists, one was a demographer, one was a
specialist in biological anthropology, and 5 were physicians. The large team of physicians
reflected the central role assigned to biomedical issues and their interaction with socioeconomic
factors. The biomedical group has been headed by Nevin Scrimshaw who was trained in biology,
medicine, public health, and epidemiology. He has been the principal investigator and consultant
in several major field studies concerned with the effectiveness of public health and nutritional
interventions on morbidity and mortality. He not only greatly influenced our approach to
biomedical issues, but profoundly influenced the entire strategy of the project. Two other
physicians deeply involved in the shaping of the strategy were Irwin H. Rosenberg, a
gastroenterologist and head of the U.S.D.A. Human Nutrition Center on Aging at Tufts
University, and J. M. Tanner of London University, a specialist in pediatric endocrinology,
human growth, and the use of anthropometric measures as indexes of nutritional status and
general health.
The output of the project has been substantial. So far the project has produced 74
published papers, 5 books, and 6 Ph.D. dissertations. Another 5 papers have been accepted for
publication. Dora Costa’s book, The evolution of retirement: An American economic history,
1880–1890, won the Paul A. Samuelson prize for 1998 awarded by TIAA/CREF. Three more
dissertations are in progress. There are about 40 working papers completed or in progress. So far
11 manuals for data users have been published and CD-ROMs containing data have been
distributed.
Many of the findings of the Early Indicators project were unanticipated, and they
significantly altered our research strategy as we proceeded. Of these unanticipated findings,

2

perhaps the most surprising was the discovery that chronic diseases began earlier in the life cycle
and were more severe at the beginning of the twentieth century than at the end of it. This finding
was surprising because leading epidemiologists and demographers writing in the 1980s and early
1990s found what appeared to be credible evidence that the extension of life expectancy had
brought with it worsening health (Verbrugge 1984 and 1989; Alter and Riley 1989; Riley 1989.
Cf. Riley 1990a and 1990b; Riley 1997; Riley and Alter 1996; Wolfe and Haveman 1990;
Verbrugge and Jette 1994; Waidmann, Bound and Schoenbaum 1995). By the early 1990s that
proposition had evolved into the “Theory of the Health or Epidemiological Transition,” a gloss
on an idea originally proposed by A. R. Omran, not to describe the change in the pattern of
morbidity, but to describe the change in the pattern of mortality: from mainly deaths due to acute
diseases to mainly deaths due to chronic diseases (Omran 1971; Murray and Chen 1992, 1993a
and 1993b).
Questions about the Feasibility of the Research Design
At the time that we began the preliminary research into constructing a longitudinal
sample of aging based on Union Army veterans, there were no laptops that could be carried into
archives and no commercial software for the management of the databases as large as the one we
contemplated (15,000 variables on close to 40,000 observations), even on mainframes. There
was no previous experience with creating longitudinal aging samples based on micro-data
constructed by linking together information on particular individuals from a dozen or more
different data sets covering nearly the whole life cycle of these individuals. Moreover, the
desired data for our project were deposited in archives, especially in Washington, D.C. and in
Utah, that were not accustomed to the traffic we created.

3

Critics of the project found the undertaking highly dubious. They felt we were pushing
computers and sampling techniques beyond their capacity, and in a sense we were. Fortunately,
the advances in both computer hardware and software were so rapid that we were not ahead of
this technology but at its leading edge, continually modifying analytical techniques and research
design to take maximum advantage of the rapidly evolving technology.
Organizing the Data Retrieval and Processing
Still another challenge was organizational. We had to create a network of data retrievers,
inputters, checkers, and programmers capable of putting the data we needed into machinereadable form with accuracy, efficiency, and at a low enough cost to make the enterprise viable.
That organizational feat was accomplished by Larry T. Wimmer of Brigham Young University.
He exploited the talent of students at his university who, because of their interest in constructing
their own family genealogies, were already familiar with archival research. He created a training
program to introduce successive teams of students to the specific skills needed for work in the
records of the U.S. National Archives and the microfilm holdings of the Family History Library
in Salt Lake City. For much of the first 10 years of the project Wimmer was supervising about 75
data retrievers, inputters, coordinators, programmers, and analysts. Because of the tightness and
efficiency of the operation, Wimmer was able to keep the cost of transforming the data into
machine readable form remarkably low, thus contradicting the forecasts of critics who thought
that the cost of the Early Indicators project would exceed acceptable bounds.
Evaluating Sample Selection and Other Biases
Perhaps the most formidable obstacle to the design of the Early Indicators project
pertained to the reliability and range of applicability of the synthetic longitudinal sample we
aimed to base on the military and pension records of the Union Army. Prior to 1991 it was

4

widely doubted that a useful prospective sample on aging for either an extinct or a living cohort
could be created synthetically, given the numerous risks of failure. Much of the skepticism was
focused on the pension records that were said to be corrupted by agents who sought pensions for
bogus veterans and by pension physicians who were bribed to report non-existent disabilities.
Census records, it was said, were more reliable and preferable.
Where the quality of census and pension records can be compared, as in the case of
variables that appear in both, such as name, place of birth, and age, the pension records are far
superior. Census records are subject to frequent name misspellings, often because the census
taker put down a variant spelling. Age and place of birth are often in error in the census because
the respondent did not know the place of birth of all residents in the household, or because of
spelling errors for small European principalities. Census records also suffer from age heaping
and poor memory. In the pension records, by contrast, numerous documents are provided to
support claims on name, age, and place of birth, including birth records, baptismal records,
enlistment and discharge papers, marriage certificates, affidavits by neighbors and company
officers, and death certificates.1
The contention that there would be a void of information in the Union Army and pension
records between ages 25 and 65 (between discharge from the Union Army and enrollment in the
pension) also turned out to be wrong. About 80 percent of all of the medical examinations of the
veterans pertains to those ages. There are frequent listings by both age and date of occupation,
residence, and health conditions during these ages.2
Sample selection biases due to linkage failure turned out to be far less severe than critics
conjectured. Logit and OLS regressions were run to identify factors that affected the odds of
linking recruits to the various censuses, military and pension records. The eleven behavioral

5

variables used as predictors are attributes obtained from the recruits sample. The main finding of
these regressions is that being foreign born was the principal nonrandom factor accounting for
the failure of linkage to the 1850 and 1860 censuses. In linking to the 1900 and 1910 censuses,
being a foreigner is much less important in explaining linkage failure than in the prewar case.
The discrepancy is due primarily to the fact that about two-thirds of the foreign-born recruits
arrived in the U.S. after June 1, 1850 and about 7 percent arrived after June 1, 1860 and hence
were not covered by the census.3 In the case of the pension records, “died during the war” and
being a deserter are the principal reasons for nonrandom linkage failure.4
The predictability of the factors that explain linkage failure indicates that biases
introduced by censoring can be corrected by reweighting subsamples having the relevant
characteristics (this applies to subgroups overrepresented as well as those underrepresented).
However, tests revealed that reweighting had very little effect on estimates of key parameters.
Several other tests of the representativeness of the linked sample were undertaken. One of
these concerned the wealth distribution of all adult males (age 20 and over) in the households to
which the recruits were linked in the 1860 census. The distribution was lognormal and not
significantly different from Lee Soltow’s (1975) random sample of the wealth of northern males
age 20 and over in 1860.
The most difficult problems of inference related to screening problems stem from the
varying date of entry into the pension records. The governing principle in dealing with such data
is that individuals are not at risk for most purposes until they applied for the pension. Life tables
constructed on this principle for the period circa 1900 are similar to the mortality schedules
constructed from the death registration data but are somewhat lower, as is to be expected, since

6

the areas covered by death registration in 1900 were still concentrated in the high-mortality
locations (Preston, Keyfitz and Schoen 1972; Preston and Haines 1991).
The Prehistory of the Early Indicators Project
Given the widespread doubts about the feasibility of the Early Indicators project, it is
worth considering how it ever got off the ground. The answer to that question lies in the
prehistory of this project, which covers the period between 1955 and 1985. Those three decades
produced a group of economists, well trained in the new mathematical models and statistical
techniques of their discipline, who were focused on the explanation for modern, long-term
economic growth. This group of economists, who came to be called “cliometricians,” sought to
exploit the potentialities of the newly developed high speed computers, typified by the IBM 650
mainframe computer, which began to be installed at leading research universities across the
country at deep discounts if the universities would agree to offer courses to students and faculty
in how to use them (Ceruzzi 2003).
I was exposed to a one-week course in how to program the 650 at Columbia University in
the spring of 1957, as were many other cliometricians about that time. Such exposure was not
enough to master the art, but it awakened in us the realization that a new era was at hand, in
which mountains of microdata sets that were lying unexploited in various archives could now be
put to use in the quest for empirically well-founded answers to the sources of American
economic growth during the previous 150 years, and in the future.
In the mid-1960s, William N. Parker of Yale University and Robert A. Gallman of the
University of North Carolina, with the aid of a group of their graduate students, sought to
retrieve information from one of these mountains of neglected data: the “manuscript schedules”
of the U.S. decennial census of 1860. These were the original sheets of paper that the census

7

takers carried around to each household, farm, and business together with instructions from
Washington on how to fill them out. Since there were over 6,000,000 of these schedules
collected for the 1860 census, Parker and Gallman decided to draw a random sample of about
5,000 of the farm households with which they were concerned, thus initiating the problem of
how to design random samples of archival data.
They initiated still another problem. The focus of their research was the study of the
institution of slavery and the comparative analysis of the operation of free farms and large slave
plantations in the cotton-producing counties of the South. That objective required them to link
together information from three of the six schedules that constituted the 1860 census. Other
investigators sought to link plantations to the same information in both the 1850 and 1860
censuses (Menn 1964a and b; Wilcox 1992; cf. Foust 1968). Thus began the process of creating
synthetic, longitudinal data sets by linking together information from several sources over space
and time.5
Another aspect of the prehistory was the discovery of a large number of genealogies that
could be used to recreate the vital statistics of the United States, going back to early colonial
times. The U.S. death registration system did not begin until 1890 and at first embraced only 10
states. It did not become national until the 1930s. National trends in mortality rates prior to 1890
were unknown, except for the inaccurate, but usable, data collected by the decennial censuses
between 1850 and 1900. Trends prior to 1850 were a void, with leading historical demographers
at odds with each other’s conjectures based on isolated fragments of information.
There are both published and unpublished genealogies. The published genealogies consist
of volumes that attempt to describe all the descendants of a particular patriarch down to current
times. A ten-generation book, if complete, could have well over 50,000 individuals in it. Many of

8

these volumes are on deposit in the Library of Congress, the Newberry Library in Chicago, and
the Family History Library in Salt Lake City. It has been estimated that at least 60,000 of these
volumes are in existence for the United States covering over 100 million individuals (Fogel et al.
1978; Fogel 1993).
There are also large numbers of unpublished genealogies, many of which exist only in the
households of individual genealogists and are difficult to access. However, a large collection of
these unpublished genealogies are on deposit at the Family History Library in Utah, which is a
part of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Mormons).6
Work with both published and unpublished genealogies demonstrated that they were
representative of the living population when proper attention was given to a variety of selection
biases, many of which were novel and peculiar to genealogies.7 Moreover, the information in the
genealogies not only made it possible to calculate the mean odds of dying at each stage in the life
cycle for particular cohorts, but to run regressions that made the odds of dying (nqx) at any age
interval, period or cohort a function of such variables as birth order, parents’ and grandparents’
age at death, ages of death of collateral kin, mother’s age at birth, extent of geographic mobility,
the number of generations that ancestors of the family were located within the United States, and
SES variables that could be treated both immediately and intergenerationally.8
Yet another aspect of the prehistory is our introduction to the uses of anthropometric
data. In 1974 Stanley Engerman and I published Time on the Cross, in which we used data from
probate records to calculate the ages of slave women at their first birth. The exercise yielded an
average figure of 22 years. Since the standard sources suggested that slave women were
generally fecund in their mid-teens, and since slaves were not using contraception, we
conjectured that most slave women must have abstained from sexual intercourse for 6 or 7 years,

9

probably until, or in contemplation of, marriage. That analysis was challenged by critics who
argued that the use of probate records biased the calculated age of first birth upward by at least 4
years. They also argued that slaves could not have become menarcheal until at least age 18.
Since (according to J. M. Tanner) Norwegian girls did not become menarcheal until age 17, they
argued that U.S. slaves could not have done so until at least a year later because their diets were
so much worse that the diets of Norwegian girls.9
Engerman and I were aware of both upward and downward biases when using probate
records (which were cross-sectional) to calculate the mean age at first birth. In grappling with the
issues raised by the critics, we worked out a theoretical argument to show that upward and
downward biases would tend to cancel out. We sent Ansley Coale a letter with our results, asking
for his assessment of it. Coale passed our letter on to James Trussell, then a young assistant
professor in the Office of Population Research at Princeton, who became interested in our
problem. Since he would be spending 1975–76 at the London School of Tropical Medicine
working with William Brass, a leading mathematical demographer, while I was visiting at
Cambridge University, Trussell suggested that we get together after we had both settled in.
Early that fall, Trussell came up to Cambridge and gave me what I can only describe as a
brilliant lecture on the singulate mean, a statistic invented by J. Hajnal to eliminate types of
biases that arise when using cross-sectional data to estimate the mean age of marriage in a cohort
of women, which Trussell extended to the fertility schedule. Working with Richard Steckel
(Trussell and Steckel 1978), and using data drawn from both probate and plantation records,
Trussell estimated that the mean age of marriage was about 21 years.
When Trussell reported the good news, he added that there was a problem because the
age of menarche was still open, but that it could be estimated from information on weight by age

10

or height by age. Engerman and I had collected thousands of observations on height by age from
the coastwise manifests of U.S. Customs as a byproduct of our work on the internal slave trade.
We had been wondering for years what we might do with such data. At the suggestion of Richard
Wall of the Cambridge Group, Engerman had written a note for Local Population Studies using
the cross-sectional data from a subsample of the coastwise manifests to represent the growth
profiles in height of male and female slaves. When I showed the profiles to Trussell, he
recommended that we show them to James Tanner, who had shown that the mean age of
menarche of a population could be estimated by constructing the age-for-height curve from
cross-sectional data. He had also shown that the age of menarche followed the peak in the
teenage growth spurt by about one year. When we showed Tanner our sample, he suggested that
the peak of the teenage growth spurt was probably about thirteen or fourteen, but warned that a
large sample would have to be collected before the issue could be settled.
Thus began our research on the use of anthropometric data to estimate the nutritional
status and health of populations between 1720 and 1937. A project on “Secular Trends in
Nutrition, Labor Welfare, and Labor Productivity” was established at NBER and by mid-1984
about 400,000 observations on height by age, covering 16 different populations, were in
machine-readable form. The data on height by age were integrated with genealogical data to
analyze the contribution of secular trends in nutrition to the secular decline in mortality.10
Consequently, when the issue arose of creating a life-cycle sample based on the veterans
of the Union Army, the task seemed to be a logical extension of the types of synthetic data sets
that cliometricians had been working with for some time and employing research designs and
methods that were familiar to them. The principal break with the past stemmed from the copious
medical histories of both acute and chronic diseases that were available in the military and

11

pension records. Although the medical data required cliometricans to undertake crash courses in
epidemiology and medical history, it was apparent that physicians would have to play a central
role in the design and execution of the project from the start. Once the appropriate research team
was assembled, we were ready to go and confident that we could manage the challenges of the
project. And we were thrilled by the prospect of reconstructing and analyzing the burden of
diseases that afflicted the first American cohorts to reach age 65 in the twentieth century.
A Principal Finding
The main accomplishment to date has been the accurate description of the burden of
chronic diseases and disabilities that afflicted males aged 50 and over during the opening
decades of the twentieth century and the last decade or two of the nineteenth century.11 Of
course, the array of diseases that afflicted Americans was known to the physicians who treated
them, and toward the end of nineteenth century this knowledge was codified in pathology books
that medical students had to read. However, not much was known about the frequency of these
conditions across the population since nationally representative statistics on civilian health were
not collected in the United States until the introduction of the National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS) in the 1960s.12
Prior to that time quantitative evidence on health came mainly from the information on
cause of death in death certificates. However, the diseases that cause most deaths, even when
reported accurately, are merely a subset of the disease burden of the living and poorly reflect the
chronic conditions and disabilities of the living. Such diseases as arthritis, hernias, and dementia
rarely appeared on death certificates but they sharply reduced capacity to work and undermined
the quality of life for many aging veterans before World War II. Consequently, reliance on death
certificates distorted the characterization of the chronic disease burdens of the living and the

12

changes in these burdens over the course of the twentieth century. It was one factor that
promoted the view, since shown to be incorrect, that for middle aged and elderly workers the
duration of chronic conditions was shorter in a time when deaths were due primarily to infectious
diseases rather than chronic diseases (cf. Harris 1997).
The Prevalence and Severity of
Chronic Diseases and Disabilities
The Union Army data reveal the ubiquity of chronic health conditions during the century
before World War II. Not only was the overall prevalence rate of these diseases much higher
among the elderly than today, but they afflicted the teens, young adults and middle ages to a
much greater extent than today. This fact is brought out by Table 1, which shows that more than
80 percent of all males aged 16–19 in 1861 and more than 70 percent of men ages 20–24 were
examined for the Union Army. These examinees were overwhelmingly volunteers (less than 4
percent were drafted), who presumably thought they were fit enough to serve. Yet disability rates
were higher than today. Even among teenagers more than one out of six was disabled, and
among men aged 35–39, more than half were disabled. Despite their relatively young ages,
cardiovascular diseases (mainly rheumatic) accounted for 11 percent of the rejections; hernias
another 12 percent; eye, ear, and nose diseases 7 percent; tuberculosis and other respiratory
diseases 7 percent; tooth and gum diseases 8 percent. Most of the other rejections were due to
orthopedic conditions and general debility (Lee 2001).
These findings about the early onset of chronic diseases cast new light on the debate
about the effect of increased longevity on the prevalence rates of chronic diseases. Those who
argued that the effect of increased longevity was to increase the average duration of chronic
disease assumed no delay in the average age of onset of these diseases. They were also
influenced by cross-sectional evidence that showed some increases in disability rates during the

13

1970s and 1980s, despite the continuing decline in mortality rates (Riley 1990 and 1991; Wolfe
and Haveman 1990). It seemed plausible that various health interventions and environmental
changes served to reduce the severity of diseases and thus delayed death without providing cures,
as has been the case with AIDS.
However, as Table 2 shows, there has been a significant delay in the onset of chronic
diseases during the course of the twentieth century. Men age 50–54 were 24 percent more likely
to be free of all chronic conditions in 1994 than a century earlier. At age 60–64, white males
today are two-and-a-half times more likely to be free of chronic diseases than their counterparts a
century ago. Further light is shed on the issue by considering specific diseases (see Table 3).
Arthritis began 11 years later among men who turned 65 between 1983 and 1992 than those
turned age 65 between 1895 and 1910. The delay in the onset of a chronic condition was about 9
years for heart diseases, about 11 years for respiratory diseases (despite much higher rates of
cigarette smoking), and nearly 8 years for neoplasms.13
Union Army veterans who endured poor health did not typically die quickly. Veterans
who lived to be at least age 50, and who entered the pension system before age 51, lived an
average of 24 years past age 50. Moreover, at their last examination on or before age 51, their
average degree of disability was 58 percent, where 100 percent indicates complete incapacity for
manual labor. Between age 50 and 60 disability ratings (controlled for age at death) continued to
rise sharply, and then increased at a decreasing rate. It is worth noting that of the veterans who
lived to be age 50, about 29 percent lived to be age 80 or more. For these “Old Old,” the level of
disability for manual labor averaged between 85 and 100 percent for a decade or more. Indeed,
some survived with such high levels of disability for as much as a quarter of a century
(Helmchen 2003). As Table 4 shows, survivors usually acquired more and more comorbidities as

14

they aged.14 Those who lived past age 85 had twice as many comorbidities as those who died by
age 55.
Consideration of the sweep of the twentieth century puts the debate over the relationship
between the increase in life expectancy and the change in the burden of chronic disease among
the elderly in a new perspective. It now appears that the decline in morbidity rates paralleled the
decline in mortality rates. Indeed, the delay in the onset of chronic disabilities between 1900 and
the 1990s for those who lived to age 50 was greater than the increase in life expectancy at age 50
over the same periods. The average delay in the onset of chronic conditions over the century was
more than 10 years (Helmchen 2003).15 However, the average increase in male life expectancy
was about 6.6 years (Bell, Wade, and Goss 1992).
Measuring and Explaining the Decline in the
Burden of Chronic Diseases during the Twentieth Century
Several investigators in the Early Indicators project have begun the difficult task of
constructing a comprehensive index of the change in the burden of chronic diseases at ages 50
and over during the twentieth century. One approach to this problem involves the creation of an
index based on the number and particular combination of comorbidities. Initial analysis of the
correlation of such an index with the degree of disability that surgeons assigned to pensioners is
promising (Canavese and Linares 2003).
Comorbidities of chronic diseases are also one of the main determinants of the rate of
deterioration in health today, predicting both the rate of decline in functional capacity and in
longevity. According to one scale of comorbidities, an increase in one unit of a comorbidity
index is the equivalent of being a decade older (Landi et al. 1999; Penninx et al. 1999; Stuck et
al. 1999; Kazis et al. 1998; Charlson et al. 1994). It thus seems likely that functional forms
relating a comorbidity index to both functional capacity and longevity can be estimated and the

15

way in which these functions have shifted over the course of the twentieth century can be
described. These functional forms can also be used to forecast advances in health and longevity
during the twenty-first century.

Explaining Changes in
Specific Chronic Conditions
and in Functional Limitations
One important step in the formulation of a global measure of change in the burden of
chronic diseases is the explanation for the decline in specific conditions. Dora Costa (2000) has
estimated the impact of public health and socioeconomic status factors at late developmental and
young adult ages on risks of incurring chronic conditions at middle and late ages. Significant
predictors included mortality rates in counties of enlistments, infectious diseases experienced
during the Civil War, and being a prisoner of war. She focused on a set of chronic conditions for
which clinical diagnoses were essentially the same in the early 1900s as today (such as lower
back pain, joint problems, decreased breath or adventitious sounds, irregular pulse, and valvular
heart disease). This procedure permitted her to estimate how much of the observed decline in the
prevalence rates of comparable conditions was due to the reduction in specific risk factors.
Prevalence rates for 1971–1980 were computed from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES).
She found that elimination of exposure to specific infectious diseases during
developmental and young adult ages explained between 10 and 25 percent of the declines in the
specified chronic diseases of middle and late ages between 1900–1910 and 1971–1980.
Occupational shifts were also important, accounting for 15 percent of the decline in joint

16

problems, 75 percent of the decline in back pains, and 25 percent of the decline in respiratory
diseases.
Costa (2002) pushed this line of analysis further by documenting the decline in functional
limitations among U.S. men between ages 50 and 74 over the course of the twentieth century. A
central issue is the factoring of the decline in functional limitations among three processes: the
decline in the prevalence rates of specific chronic diseases, the reduction in the debilitating
sequelae of these diseases, and the influence of new medical technologies that relieve and control
the sequelae. Her analysis turned on five functional limitations: difficulty walking, difficulty
bending, paralysis, blindness in at least one eye, and deafness in at least one ear. Prevalence rates
of these limitations among men aged 50–74 were computed for the Union Army, NHANES
(1988–1994) and NHIS (1988–1994).
On average these five functional limitations declined by about 40 percent during the
course of the twentieth century. Using probit regressions, Costa attributed 24 percent of the
decline to reduction in the debilitating effect of chronic conditions and 37 percent to the reduced
rates of chronic conditions.
The Significance of Changes in Body Size
The contribution of improvements in body size as measured by stature, BMI, and other
dimensions have run through the research of the Early Indicators project like a red line. The
discovery of correlations in time series going back to the colonial period between changes in
stature and changes in life expectancy for the U.S. were reported first in 1986, although it was
known as early as 1978.16 Pursuit of a variety of issues called attention to the significance of
changes in body size to the long-term decline in chronic conditions and mortality. For example,
Diane Lauderdale and Paul Rathouz (1999) sought to investigate the impact of unhealthy

17

environments on genetic component of height. They hypothesized that an unhealthy environment
might attenuate the effects of genotype. To test that hypothesis they constructed a sample of
brothers who served in the Union Army. Their analysis showed that brothers from unhealthy
counties had both higher variances in height and lower covariance in the heights of siblings than
was expected from standard equations for measuring genetic influences in the heights of siblings.
Study of the likelihood of developing specific diseases while in the service also pointed to the
importance of stature. For example, short recruits were more likely to develop tuberculosis while
in service than taller ones (Lee 1997; Birchenall 2003).
The Gould Sample
In 1995 Dora Costa discovered a sample of 23,000 recruits who were, for scientific
reasons, more intensively examined than the typical recruit (Costa, forthcoming). Benjamin A.
Gould, a leading astronomer and one of the founders of the National Academy of Sciences, who
was in charge of the project, collected information on waist and hip circumference, lifting
strength, vital capacity of lungs, height, weight, shoulder breadth, and chest circumference. The
sample covered whites, blacks, and Native Americans. Costa linked a subsample of 521 white
recruits who survived to 1900 to their pension records. She also compared the Union Army
soldiers with soldiers measured in 1946–47, 1950, and 1988.
Over a span of one hundred years men in the military became taller and heavier, but their
waist-hip and chest-shoulder ratios were unchanged. But the height increased by 5 cm and the
BMIs of men aged 31–35 increased from 23 to 26. Controlling for BMI and age, the waist-hip
and chest-shoulder ratios (both measures of abdominal fat) were significantly greater in the
Gould sample than in the 1950 and 1988 samples.

18

Using an independent competing risk hazard model to estimate the effect of changes in
body shape on the risk of death from cerebrovascular and ischemic heart disease at older ages,
she found that a low waist to hip ratio increased mortality by 4.4 times relative to the mean and
controlling for BMI, while a high waist-hip ratio increased mortality risk by 2.9 times.
Substituting the characteristics of soldiers in 1950, who reached age 65 or over during the late
1980s, into her regression model produced a 15 percent decline in all cause mortality above age
64, implying that changes in frame size explain about 47 percent of the total decline in all cause
mortality at older ages between the beginning and the end of the twentieth century.
The Implication of Changes
in the Body Size of Women
Changes in the body builds of women have had a far-reaching effect on the reduction of
perinatal and infant death rates since 1800.17 The impact of the improved builds of women is
illustrated by Figure 1. The lines on this graph are normal approximations of the frequency
distributions of birth weights. Birth weight is represented on the vertical axis, and the horizontal
axis represents z-scores (deviations of birth weight from the mean measured in units of the
standard deviations). Hence, the cumulative frequency distribution is represented by a straight
line. The lowest line represents the distribution of United States nonwhites in 1950. They had a
mean birth weight of 3218 grams and, as indicated by Figure 1, about 13 percent of the neonates
weighed less than 2501 grams at birth. The second line is the distribution of birth weights for
lower-class women in Bombay (Jayant 1964). Figure 1 indicates the mean birth weight in this
population was just 2525 grams. In this case nearly half (46 percent) of the births were below the
critical level, although the women in the sample were not the poorest of the poor.
The third curve is the probable distribution of the birth weights of the children of
impoverished English workers about 1800 (Fogel 1986). The distribution of the birth weights in

19

this class around 1800 probably had a mean of 2276 grams, which is about 249 grams (about half
a pound) below the average in the deliveries of the lower-class women in Bombay. It follows
that about 79 percent of the births among impoverished English workers around 1800 were at
weights below 2501 grams.18
The implication of this distribution of birth weights is revealed by Table 5. Column 2
represents the actual schedule of neonatal death rates by weight for nonwhite United States males
in 1950, and column 3 gives the actual distribution of their birth weights.19 The product of these
two columns yields an implied neonatal death rate of 26.8 per 1,000, which, of course, was also
the actual death rate. If, however, this United States population had had the distribution of the
birth weights of the impoverished English workers of 1800, their neonatal death rates would
have been 173.0 per thousand (see col. 3). The implication of Table 5 is that improvements in
nutrition sufficient to shift the mean birth weight from 2276 grams to 3128 grams would have
reduced the infant death rate by 83 percent.
Figure 1 reflects an important intergenerational influence on heath before the era of
cesarean sections and of neonatal intensive care units. Malnourished mothers were small in
stature and had small pelvic cavities, and they produced small children because of deficiencies in
their diet and exposure to disease during pregnancy. As a result, the birth weight that minimized
perinatal deaths was about 700 grams below that of the nonwhite U.S. women referred to in
Figure 1. In other words, a condition for surviving the birth process was such a low birth weight
that the neonate was at very high risk of dying shortly after birth. The escape from that dilemma
is now almost universal in rich nations. Poor women accumulated biological capital at an
intergenerational rate that was rapid enough to shift the birth weight of their children to a range
that is about 1.7 times what it was two centuries ago. This means that less than 8 percent of all

20

births in the United States and other rich nations are now below 2501 grams (Martin et al. 2002;
Graafmans et al. 2002; Wilcox et al. 1995).20
The Theory of Technophysio Evolution
Recognition of environmentally induced changes in human physiology during the
twentieth century that had a profound impact on the process of aging did not become apparent
until mid-1993. The key finding was that prevalence rates in the main chronic diseases among
Union Army veterans age 65 and older were much higher in 1910 than among veterans of World
War II of the same ages during the mid-to-late 1980s. That finding was first set forth in a 1993
working paper (Fogel, Costa and Kim 1993) and was elaborated and subsequently characterized
as a “theory of technophysio evolution” in Fogel 1994, Fogel 1997, Fogel and Costa 1997, Pope
and Wimmer 1998, Fogel 1999, Fogel 2000, and Fogel 2002. The theory of technophysio
evolution arose out of intense discussion among the senior investigators, consultants, and
research assistants during 1993–1994, with the physicians providing much of the intellectual
leadership. This theory points to the existence of a synergism between technological and
physiological improvements that has produced a form of human evolution that is biological but
not genetic, rapid, culturally transmitted, and not necessarily stable. The process is still ongoing
in both rich and developing countries.
Interpretation of the Theory
Unlike the genetic theory of evolution through natural selection, which applies to the
whole history of life on earth, technophysio evolution applies only to the last 300 years of human
history, and particularly to the last century.21 Despite its limited scope, technophysio evolution
appears to be relevant to forecasting likely trends over the next century or so in longevity, the
age at onset of chronic diseases, body size, and the efficiency and durability of vital organ

21

systems (Fogel and Costa 1997). It also has a bearing on such pressing issues of public policy as
the growth in populations, in pension costs, and in health care costs.
The theory of technophysio evolution rests on the proposition that during the last 300
years, particularly during the last century, human beings have gained an unprecedented degree of
control over their environment—a degree of control so great that is sets them apart not only from
all other species, but also from all previous generations of Homo sapiens. This new degree of
control has enabled Homo sapiens to increase its average body size by over 50 percent, to
increase its average longevity by more than 100 percent, and to greatly improve the robustness
and capacity of vital organ systems.22
Implications of Technophysio Evolution
for Analysis and Measurement
Technophysio evolution implies that some theoretical propositions that underlie some
current economic models are misspecified. For example, it is frequently assumed that individuals
are born with a specific amount of health capital that depreciates over time. It is also assumed
that the rate of depreciation depends on gross investments in health and on the level of health
technology (which is assumed to be both exogenous to the individual and independent of the date
of birth—i.e., neglects cohort effects) (cf. Grossman 1972; Wagstaff and Dardanoni 1986;
Wagstaff 1986). While these assumptions greatly simplify estimating procedures, they are
inconsistent with accumulating evidence that successive birth cohorts are experiencing later
onset of chronic diseases and disabilities, lower age-specific prevalence rates, and less severe
conditions (Crimmins, Reynolds, and Saito 1999; Larson 1999; Jette et al. 1998; Freedman and
Martin 1998).
The theory of technophysio evolution implies that individuals’ initial endowments of
health capital increased over the course of the twentieth century. This implication has been

22

supported by recent research which has demonstrated that the curve of age-specific prevalence
rates of chronic diseases has been shifting outward over the course of the twentieth century at
what appears to be an increasing rate (Manton, Corder and Stallard 1997; Reynolds, Crimmins,
and Saito 1998; Crimmins, Reynolds, and Saito 1999; Costa 2000 and 2002; Waidmann and Liu
2000; Manton and Gu 2001; Cutler 2001; Freedman, Martin, and Schoeni 2002).23
If the theory of technophysio evolution is correct, some of the assumptions currently used
by health economists and others to measure and analyze the contribution of health interventions
to improvements in life expectancy are misleading. In the standard models, endowments of
individuals at birth are assumed to be the same, regardless of the year of birth. Without
investments in improving health capital, different birth cohorts are assumed to experience the
same average rates of decline in their original health endowments (i.e., no allowance is made for
the slower average rates of decline in the untreated endowments of different “vintages” of health
capital). Another problem is that a single health technology is presumed to exist that is
exogenous to the individual.
The assumption that the endowment of human physiological capacity is fixed, so that
medical intervention can only slow down the rate of deterioration in the original endowment,
means that ways of forecasting future improvement in human physiology are sometimes
neglected and possible paths of increase in health endowments play little role in forecasting
future health care costs or longevity.24
The theory of technophysio evolution implies that health endowments in a given
population change with the year of birth. It also points to complex interactions between date of
birth and the outcome of exposures to given risk factors. Hence, not all improvements in the
outcome of exposure to health risks between, say, 1970 and 1990 are due to health interventions

23

during that period. Improvements in life expectancy may depend only partly on the more
effective medical technologies of those years. It could also reflect the improved physiologies
experienced by later birth cohorts that are due to improved technologies in food production,
public health practices, personal hygiene, diets, and medical interventions put into place decades
before 1970, and hence cannot be attributed exclusively, perhaps even primarily, to health inputs
between 1970 and 1990.25
The same set of considerations applies to efforts to explain the decline in disabilities
during the twentieth century. The discovery that the average age of onset of disabilities is more
than a decade later today than it was in 1900, focuses attention on factors that might have
improved the health endowments of successive cohorts or might have slowed down rates of
depreciation before remedial medical interventions became necessary.26
The theory of technophysio evolution is also useful in circumstances where the standard
models of health capital provide a useful first approximation. Improvements in health capital by
date of birth have income effects that would lead individuals to make greater investments in
health services. They also have substitution effects because they reduce the relative price of an
additional year of life expectancy. Life at late ages becomes relatively more attractive, holding
prices constant, because the later onset of chronic disabilities and a slower natural rate of
deterioration in health increases the discounted present value of a year of consumption at late
ages.
Endogenous Treatment Technology
The theory of technophysio evolution also suggests the need for a reconsideration of
which health variables are endogenous and which are exogenous to individuals and families. For
one thing, it implies that health technology is not static but in constant flux. Moreover, there is

24

not just one useful technology available to the individuals at any point in time but many
coexisting technologies of different vintages, and the rate of production of new technologies is
accelerating. Hence, individuals may create their own unique technologies by the way they string
together choices from among current and future technologies. For example a person with a given
degree of osteoarthritis may choose to first treat the condition with over-the-counter antiinflammatory drugs, then shift to oral prescription drugs while waiting for improvements in
surgical techniques and new plastics to emerge that reduce costs, increase the degree of success
of an operation, and increase the durability of joint replacement. Such a string of choices defines
an endogenous technology of treatment. Individuals thus create wide-ranging, person-specific
technologies among which they can choose by the numerous permutations of strings of options.
Finally, the effectiveness of the numerous alternative technologies is not independent of
the date of birth of a cohort. There are numerous studies indicating that the effectiveness of given
treatments varies by physiological capacities which vary not only by age for a given cohort, but
also across cohorts of different vintages. Race, ethnicity, gender, and nutritional status are
significant variables in explaining the outcome of given health risks and the responses to
different health interventions (Johnson 2000; Ferraro, Farmer, and Wybraniec 1997; Mendes de
Leon et al. 1997; Davis et al. 1992 and 1994; Ostchega et al. 2000; Scrimshaw 1993, 1995, and
1997).
The point is not merely that a more complicated theory is needed, which recognizes the
importance and implications of technologically based improvements in human physiology, some
of which begin in utero, but that the increasing availability of longitudinal datasets, including the
Union Army sample, is making it possible to estimate the critical change in the variables and

25

parameters of dynamic models over time (cf. Parker 2000; Dasgupta 1993 and 1998; Manton and
Land 2000a and b).

*

*

*

I am keenly aware that in this paper I have neglected several important lines of research
in the Early Indicators project. These include a series of papers by Chulhee Lee on the factors
that influenced the health and mortality of soldiers during the war, and the effect of wartime
stress on subsequent health and labor force participation (Lee 1997, 1998, 1999a and b; 2003a, b,
and c). There has also been a series of studies of specific diseases and disabilities, some of which
are still at the working paper stage (Birchenall 2003; Wilson 2003; Wilson, Burton, and Howell
2003). One of the most promising new lines of research focuses on the impact of improved water
supplies and other public health policies between 1880 and World War II on health and mortality
(Troesken 2002, 2003, 2004; Troesken and Beeson 2003). The way in which politics and
ideology affected the construction of Union Army pension law and the application of pension
policy has been examined in a series of papers by Peter Blanck and Chen Song (2001, 2002,
2003; Blanck, Linares, and Song 2002). I hope to remedy the defects in today’s report in a
subsequent paper that will be presented to a conference on “Disparities in Chronic Disease and
Disability” in November.

26

Notes
1.

On such variables such as wealth of parental households in 1850 and 1860, number of
months unemployed in 1900 and 1910, and persons living in the veterans’ households,
the census records are superior, since this information is not contained in the pension
records. That is why we linked the manuscript schedules of the census to the pension
records.

2.

Congress established the Union Army pension system in July 1862, providing pensions to
soldiers who incurred permanent disabilities while in service. The amount of the pension
depended on the degree of disability. All recruits, regardless of age, who served at least
90 days and were honorably discharged, could apply. In June 1890, Congress extended
the pension to any veteran who was disabled, even if the disability was unrelated to war
service. In 1904, by Executive Order, persons aged 62 were declared to be 50 percent
disabled in their ability to perform manual labor. Thereafter, age alone made veterans
eligible for pensions, although the amount of the pension still varied with the degree of
disability (Glasson 1918).

3.

The behavioral factors do not explain much of the variation in the odds of linking in
either the prewar or the postwar censuses. The chi-square and R-square values are
especially low in the postwar census, with the behavioral factors accounting for less than
3 percent of the variation in the probability of making a link.

4.

Deserters were in most cases ineligible for a pension and many soldiers who died during
the war had no dependent who was eligible. The foreign dummy is also significant in part
because many of the foreigners who died during the early post-war years had no eligible

27

dependents or served behind the front and so were less likely to incur war-related
disabilities. However, those who survived to be eligible under the pension law of 1890
were as likely to be linked to pension records as natives.
5.

These enterprises turned out to be highly successful, providing insights into processes
that had heretofore been obscure, and promoting many new studies that successfully
exploited these sources and analytical techniques. They also promoted new skills in
sampling design, in analyzing sample selection biases, and in methods of correcting these
and other biases by reweighting and by use of simulation models to estimate probable
ranges of error and their impact on particular analytical issues.

6.

The LDS genealogies, which are called “family histories,” consist of three generations,
but they can be linked together to construct large genealogies.

7.

For example, persons outside the family line cannot be brought into the sample until
marriage, because they are not at risk to die before marriage. When such caveats are
heeded, it is possible to draw cross sections of persons alive in 1860 or 1870 from a
sample of genealogies and compare these distributions of selected characteristics with the
distributions of the same characteristics in the censuses. Such comparisons revealed that
the genealogies produced representative cross sections when tested against such variables
as wealth, household size, and age distributions.

8.

This experience with genealogies provides the inspiration for future projects we are
planning and influenced the conception of the new Project 7, “The Effect of Family on
Adult Health and Welfare,” led by Clayne Pope. It was submitted as part of the
application for a competitive supplement last January. A project utilizing the genealogies
has been in the planning for more than a decade. Much expertise has been accumulated in

28

the utilization of this source of evidence. (See Wimmer and Pope 1975; Pope 1986, 1992;
cf. Wimmer 2003.)
9.

In fact, the figure of 17.0 for Norwegian girls was revised in subsequent publications,
when better data had become available, to about 15.5 years; see Tanner 1981.

10.

Because of the limitations of space I have omitted a number of important developments
in quantitative history between 1955 and 1985. More complete surveys are presented in
Fogel and Elton 1983, Fogel 1992, Bogue 1983, and Jensen 1984, among other places.

11.

We are exploring the possibility of drawing a representative sample of the hospital
records to measure the burden of the chronic diseases of women at the beginning of the
twentieth century.

12.

Of course, the Public Health Service had long collected information on notifiable
(contagious) diseases.

13.

Since current diagnostic techniques make it possible to diagnose heart disease and
neoplasms sooner in the development of these diseases than used to be the case c. 1910,
the figures given in the text should be considered lower bounds on the delay in the onset
of these conditions.

14.

Comorbidity: the coexistence of two or more disease processes.

15.

The delay in the average age of onset in chronic diseases can be decomposed into two
parts: (1) the shift in the age-specific disease schedule; (2) the change in the distribution
of ages due to the increase in life expectancy and the decline in the fertility rate. We
have not yet completed this decomposition. However, preliminary estimates indicate that
the contribution of the change in the age distribution was small.

29

16.

For reviews of earlier work dealing with the use of height, BMI and other anthropometric
measures as indexes of changes in health and the standard of living over time, see Steckel
1995; Komlos and Cuff 1998.

17.

For information on what is known about change in body size, and in rates of development
of women over time and differences over space in recent decades, see Tanner 1981;
Eveleth and Tanner 1976 and 1990; Friedman 1987; and John 1988 and 1992.

18.

Tanner (1982) estimated that the Marine Society boys were 62 inches at maturity.
Compared with the British military recruits of the same birth cohorts, the mature
graduates of the Marine Society were about 5 inches shorter (Floud, Wachter and
Gregory 1990, Table 4.1), suggesting that they belonged to the shortest 10 percent of the
British laboring classes. It is likely that the women of this class were less than 59 inches.
In populations this stunted, the differential in mean heights between men and women is in
the range of 3 to 5 inches (cf. Friedman 1982; Eveleth and Tanner 1976, Tables 77, 78,
44, 45).

19.

The distribution of birth weights is not strictly normal because it is a convolution of two
distributions: a main distribution of full-term babies and a smaller distribution of preterm
babies. Hence in fitting normal approximations of birth weights it is common to discard
the small distribution of preterm babies (Wilcox and Russell 1983; Wilcox et al. 1995;
Graafmans et al. 2002). The weight distribution displayed in column 3 of Table 5 is
estimated from the fitted normal curve, and it differs slightly from the original data as
follows:

30

Birth Weight (g)

Fitted Distribution

Original Distribution

1,500 or less

0.012

0.012

1,500–2,000

0.014

0.015

2,001–2,500

0.051

0.055

2,501–3,000

0.182

0.188

3,001–3,500

0.351

0.356

3,501–4,000

0.260

0.253

4,001–4,500

0.087

0.082

4,501 or more

0.046

0.040

I am grateful to Dr. Kwang-sun Lee for providing the comparison. As he pointed
out in his letter of July 7, 2003, the difference in the two distributions is so small that it
does not affect the thrust of my discussion of Table 5.
20.

However, obstructed labor is still a serious problem for small women in poor countries,
where it kills many mothers and children (Rush 2000).

21.

Costa and Fogel limit technophysio evolution to the last 300 years for two reasons. It was
not until about 1700 that changes in technology permitted population growth far in excess
of previous rates. Moreover, after 1700 body weight and stature increase to
unprecedented levels. See Figure 1 in Fogel and Costa 1997.

22.

Although a considerable body of empirical evidence has accumulated indicating that a
“good” environment both speeds up biological development at young ages and delays the
onset of chronic conditions at middle and late ages, there is as yet no agreed upon theory
about the cellular and molecular processes that explains these observations.

23.

Costa has noted that the annual rate of decline in functional limitations between 1900 and
1980 was substantially below the rate of decline since 1980. That point is important

31

because it bears on forecasts of the likely improvements in functional limitations during
the twenty-first century.
Another question arises: How much of the total decline in the burden of disease
and functional limitation that occurred in the United States during the twentieth century
took place before 1980 and how much since then? A reliable answer to that question
requires new data sets that will provide a more detailed picture of the temporal pattern of
changes in the burden of chronic disabilities for cohorts who turned age 65 between 1915
and 1980 than we now have. An illustration of what that division might be is suggested
by Costa’s estimate that functional limitation declined at 0.6 percent per annum between
1900 and 1980, and Manton and Gu’s estimate that during the 1980s and 1990s the
average rate of decline in disability was 1.7 percent per annum. Together these estimates
suggest a total decrease of 56 percent in the burden of disability after age 65. About twothirds of the decline took place before 1980 and one-third after 1980.
This computation illustrates some of the problems that will need to be overcome
in the measuring and explaining the decline in disabilities during the twentieth century.
The measure of functional limitations needs to be consistent over the century (Costa and
Manton and Gu used different measures of disability). There is also an issue of how to
define the severity of different sets of conditions in different social and economic
contexts. It is likely that several alternative indexes will have to be constructed, involving
issues similar to those encountered in the construction of indexes of prices over long
periods.
24.

Among the exceptions are Rosenzweig and Schultz 1988 and Dasgupta 1993.

32

25.

Much recent research indicates that waiting time to the onset of chronic diseases is a
function of exposure to insults in utero and infancy. See Barker 1998; Scrimshaw 1997.

26.

Although I have focused on new technology for treatment much has been done to prevent
early onset of chronic diseases by promoting better nutritional habits and lifestyles.

33

References
Alter, George and James C. Riley. 1989. “Frailty, sickness, and death: Models of morbidity and
mortality in modern populations,” Population Studies 43(1): 25–45.
Bell, Felicitie C., Alice H. Wade, and Stephen C. Goss. 1992. Life Tables for the United States
Social Security Area 1900–2080. Actuarial Study No. 107. Baltimore: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration, Office of the Actuary.
Birchenall, Javier A. 2003. “Airborne diseases: Tuberculosis in the Union Army.” Paper
presented at the Joint Meeting of the Early Indicators of Later Work Levels, Disease, &
Death Program Project and Cohort Studies groups, National Bureau of Economics, 25–26
April 2003, Cambridge, MA.
Blanck, Peter D., Claudia Linares, and Chen Song. 2002. “Evolution of disability in late 19th
century America: Civil War pensions for Union Army veterans with musculoskeletal
conditions,” Behavioral Sciences and the Law 20(6): 681–697.
Blanck, Peter D. and Chen Song. 2001. “‘With malice toward none; with charity toward all’:
Civil War pensions for native and foreign-born Union Army veterans,”Transnational Law
and Contemporary Problems 11(1): 1–75.
Blanck, Peter D. and Chen Song. 2002. “Civil War pension attorneys and disability politics,”
University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 35(1&2): 137–217.
Blanck, Peter D. and Chen Song. 2003. “‘Never forget what they did here’: Civil War pensions
for Gettysburg Union Army veterans and disability in nineteenth century America,” William
and Mary Law Review 44(): 1109–71.
Bogue, Allan G. 1983. Clio and the Bitch Goddess: Quanitification in American Political
History. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
Canavese, Paula and Claudia Linares. 2003. Alternative measures to the total disability rates,
surgeon’s certificates data. CPE Working Paper Series #2003-2.
Ceruzzi, Paul E. 2003. A History of Modern Computing, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Charlson, M., T. P. Szatrowski, J. Peterson, and J. Gold. 1994. “Validation of a combined
comorbidity index,” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 47(11): 1245–1251.
Costa, Dora L. 2000. “Understanding the twentieth-century decline in chronic conditions among
older men,” Demography 37(1): 53–72.
Costa, Dora L. 2002. “Changing chronic disease rates and long-term declines in functional
limitation among older men,” Demography 39(1): 119–137.

34

Costa, Dora L. Forthcoming. “The measure of man and older age mortality: Evidence from the
Gould Sample,” Journal of Economic History.
Crimmins, Eileen M., Sandra L. Reynolds, and Yasuhiko Saito. 1999. “Trends in health and
ability to work among the older working-age population,” Journals of Gerontology 54B(1):
S31–S40.
Cutler, David M. 2001. “The reduction in disability among the elderly,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA 98(12): 6546–6547.
Dasgupta, Partha. 1993. An Inquiry into Well-Being and Destitution. Oxford: Clarendon.
Dasgupta, Partha. 1998. “The economics of poverty in poor countries.” Working paper,
STICERD, London School of Economics Discussion Papers Series.
Davis, Maradee A., John M. Neuhaus, Deborah J. Moritz, and Mark R. Segal. 1992. “Living
arrangements and survival among middle-aged and older adults in the NHANES I
Epidemiologic Follow-Up Study,” American Journal of Public Health 82(3): 401–406.
Davis, Maradee A., John M. Neuhaus, Deborah J. Moritz, David Lein, John D. Barclay, and
Suzanne P. Murphy. 1994. “Health behaviors and survival among middle-aged and older
men and women in the NHANES I Epidemiological Follow-Up Study,” Preventive Medicine
23(3): 369–376.
Eveleth, Phyllis B. and J. M. Tanner. 1976. Worldwide Variation in Human Growth. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Eveleth, Phyllis B. and J. M. Tanner. 1990. Worldwide Variation in Human Growth, 2d ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ferraro, Kenneth F., Melissa M. Farmer, and John A. Wybraniec. 1997. “Health trajectories:
Long-term dynamics among black and white adults,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior
38(1): 38–54.
Floud, Roderick, Kenneth Wachter, and Annabel Gregory. 1990. Height, health and history:
Nutritional status in the United Kingdom, 1750–1980. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Fogel, Robert William. 1986. “Nutrition and the decline in mortality since 1700: Some
preliminary findings,” in Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, eds. Stanley L.
Engerman and Robert E. Gallman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 439–555.
Fogel, Robert William. 1992. “Introduction: Notes on the art of empirical research in the social
sciences during an age of plunging costs in data processing,” in Without Consent or Contract,
vol. 2, Evidence and Methods, eds. Robert William Fogel, Ralph A. Galantine, and Richard
L. Manning. New York: W. W. Norton, pp. 1–41.

35

Fogel, Robert William. 1993. “New sources and new techniques for the study of secular trends in
nutritional status, health, mortality, and the process of aging,” Historical Methods 26(1): 5–
43.
Fogel, Robert William. 1994. “Economic growth, population theory, and physiology: The
bearing of long-term processes on the making of economic policy,” American Economic
Review 84(3): 369–395.
Fogel, Robert William. 1997. “Economic and social structure for an ageing population,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 353B(1356): 1905–1917.
Fogel, Robert William. 1999. “Catching up with the economy,” American Economic Review
89(1): 1–21.
Fogel, Robert William. 2000. The Fourth Great Awakening and the Future of Egalitarianism.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fogel, Robert William. 2002. “Auxology and economics,” in Human Growth from Conception to
Maturity, eds. G. Gilli, L. M. Schell, and L. Benso. London: Smith-Gordon, pp. 1–11.
Fogel, Robert William and Dora L. Costa. 1997. “A theory of technophysio evolution, with some
implications for forecasting population, health care costs, and pension costs,” Demography
34(1): 49–66.
Fogel, Robert William, Dora L. Costa, and John M. Kim. 1993. “Secular trends in the
distribution of chronic conditions and disabilities at young adult and late ages, 1860–1988:
Some preliminary findings.” Paper presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER) Summer Institute, Economics of Aging Program, 26–28 July, Cambridge, MA.
Fogel, Robert William and Geoffrey R. Elton. 1983. Which Road to the Past? Two Views of
History. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Fogel, Robert William, Stanley L. Engerman, James Trussell, Roderick Floud, Clayne L. Pope,
and Larry T. Wimmer. 1978. “The economics of mortality in North America, 1650–1910: A
description of a research project,” Historical Methods 11(2): 75–108.
Fogel, Robert William, Michael Haines, Clayne L. Pope, Irwin H. Rosenberg, Nevin S.
Scrimshaw, James Trussell, and Larry T. Wimmer. 1991. “Aging of Union Army men: A
longitudinal study, 1830–1940.” Program Project proposal submitted to the National Institute
on Aging. Typescript, University of Chicago.
Foust, James D. 1968. The Yeoman Farmer and Westward Expansion of U.S. Cotton Production.
Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms.
Freedman, Vicki A. and Linda G. Martin. 1998. “Understanding trends in functional limitations
among older Americans,” American Journal of Public Health 88(10): 1457–1462.

36

Freedman, Vicki A., Linda G. Martin, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2002. “Recent trends in disability
and functioning among older adults in the United States,” JAMA 288(24): 3137–3146.
Friedman, Gerald C. 1982. “The heights of slaves in Trinidad,” Social Science History 6(4):
482–515.
Glasson, William Henry. 1918. Federal Military Pensions in the United States. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Graafmans, W. C., J. H. Richardus, G. J. Borsboom, L. Bakketeig, J. Langhoff-Roos, P. Bergsjo,
A. Macfarlane, S. P. Verloove-Vanhorick, J. P. Mackenbach, and the EuroNatal working
group. 2002. “Birth weight and perinatal mortality: A comparison of ‘optimal’ birth weight
in seven Western European countries,” Epidemiology 13(5): 569–574.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the concept of health capital and the demand for health,” Journal
of Political Economy 80(2): 223–255.
Harris, Bernard. 1997. “Growing taller, living longer? Anthropometric history and the future of
old age,” Ageing and Society 17(5): 491–512.
Helmchen, Lorens. 2003. Changes in the age at onset of chronic disease among elderly
Americans, 1870–2000. Typescript, Center for Population Economics, University of
Chicago.
Jayant, K. 1964. “Birth weight and some other factors in relation to infant survival: A study on
an Indian sample,” Annals of Human Genetics 27(3): 261–267.
Jensen, Richard J. 1984. “Historiography of American Political History,” in Encyclopedia of
American Political History: Studies of the Principal Movements and Ideas, vol. 1, ed. J. P.
Greene. New York: Scribner’s.
Jette, Alan M., Susan F. Assmann, Dan Rooks, Bette Ann Harris, and Sybil Crawford. 1998.
“Interrelationships among disablement concepts,” Journals of Gerontology 53A(5): M395–
M404.
John, A. Meredith. 1988. The Plantation Slaves of Trinidad, 1783–1816: A Mathematical and
Demographic Inquiry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
John, A. Meredith. 1992. “Logistic models of slave child mortality in Trinidad,” in Without
Consent or Contract: Conditions of Slave Life and the Transition to Freedom, Technical
Papers, vol. 2, eds. Robert William Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman. New York: W. W.
Norton, pp. 413–434.
Johnson, Nan E. 2000. “The racial crossover in comorbidity, disability, and mortality,”
Demography 37(3): 267–283.
Kazis, L. E., D. R. Miller, J. Clark, K. Skinner, A. Lee, W. Rogers, A. Spiro the 3rd, S. Payne, G.
Fincke, A. Selim, and M. Linzer. 1998. “Health-related quality of life in patients served by

37

the Department of Veterans Affairs: Results from the Veterans Health Study,” Archives of
Internal Medicine 158(6): 629–632.
Komlos, John and Timothy Cuff, eds. 1998. Classics in Anthropometric History. St. Katharinen,
Germany: Scripta Mercaturae Verlag.
Landi, F., G. Zaccala, G. Gambassi, R. A. Incalzi, L. Manigrasso, F. Pagano, P. Carbonin, and R.
Bernabei. 1999. “Body mass index and mortality among older people living in the
community,” Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 47(9): 1072–1076.
Larson, James S. 1999. “The conceptualization of health,” Medical Care Research and Review
56(2): 123–136.
Lauderdale, Diane S. and Paul J. Rathouz. 1999. “Evidence of environmental suppression of
familial resemblance: Height among U.S. Civil War brothers,” Annals of Human Biology
26(5): 413–426.
Lee, Chulhee. 1997. “Socioeconomic background, disease, and mortality among Union Army
recruits: Implications for economic and demographic history,” Explorations in Economic
History 34(1): 27–55.
Lee, Chulhee. 1998. “Long-term unemployment and retirement in early-twentieth-century
America,” Journal of Economic History 58(3): 844–56.
Lee, Chulhee. 1999a. “Farm value and retirement of farm owners in early-twentieth-century
America,” Explorations in Economic History 36(4): 387–408.
Lee, Chulhee. 1999b. “Selective assignment of military positions in the Union Army:
Implications for the impact of the Civil War,” Social Science History 23(1): 67–97.
Lee, Chulhee. 2001. “Exposure to disease during growing ages and service,” in Early Indicators
of Later Work Levels, Disease, & Death, program project proposal submitted to the N. I. A.
Typescript, Center for Population Economics, University of Chicago.
Lee, Chulhee. 2003a. “Prior exposure to disease and later health and mortality: Evidence from
Union Army medical records,” in Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle:
Evidence from the Past, ed. Dora L. Costa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER,
pp. 51–87.
Lee, Chulhee. 2003b. “Labor market status of older males in the United States, 1880–1940,”
Social Science History (forthcoming).
Lee, Chulhee. 2003c. “Health and economic mobility of Union Army recruits, 1860–1870.”
Paper presented at the NBER Early Indicators of Later Work Levels, Disease, and Death and
Cohort Studies Groups Joint Meeting, Boston, 25–26 April.

38

Manton, Kenneth G., Larry Corder, and Eric Stallard. 1997. “Chronic disability trends in elderly
United States populations: 1982–1994,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA 94(6): 2593–2598.
Manton, Kenneth G. and XiLiang Gu. 2001. “Changes in the prevalence of chronic disability in
the United States black and nonblack population above age 65 from 1982 to 1999,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 98(11): 6354–6359.
Manton, Kenneth G. and Kenneth C. Land. 2000a. “Active life expectancy estimates for the U.S.
elderly population: A multidimensional continuous-mixture model of functional change
applied to completed cohorts, 1982–1996,” Demography 37(3): 253–265.
Manton, Kenneth G. and Kenneth C. Land. 2000b. “Multidimensional disability/mortality
trajectories at ages 65 and over: The impact of state dependence,” Social Indicators Research
51(2): 193–221.
Martin, J. A., B. E. Hamilton, S. J. Ventura, F. Menacker, M. M. Park, and P. D. Sutton. 2002.
“Births: Final data for 2001,” National Vital Statistics Reports 51(2): 1–103.
Mendes de Leon, Carlos F., Laurel A. Beckett, Gerda G. Fillenbaum, Dwight B. Brock,
Laurence G. Branch, Denis A. Evans, and Lisa F. Berkman. 1997. “Black-white differences
in risk of becoming disabled and recovering from disability in old age: A longitudinal
analysis of two EPESE populations,” American Journal of Epidemiology 145(6): 488–497.
Menn, Joseph Karl. 1964a. The Large Slaveholders of Louisiana, 1860. New Orleans, LA:
Pelican.
Menn, Joseph Karl. 1964b. The large slaveholders of the deep South, 1860. Ph.D. diss.,
University of Texas.
Murray, Christopher J. L. and Lincoln C. Chen. 1992. “Understanding morbidity change,”
Population and Development Review 18(3): 481–503.
Murray, Christopher J. L. and Lincoln C. Chen. 1993a. “Understanding morbidity change: Reply
to Riley,” Population and Development Review 19(4): 812–815.
Murray, Christopher J. L. and Lincoln C. Chen. 1993b. “In search of a contemporary theory of
understanding mortality change,” Social Science and Medicine 36(2): 143–155.
Ostchega, Yechiam, Tamara B. Harris, Rosemarie Hirsch, Van L. Parsons, and Raynard Kington.
2000. “The prevalence of functional limitations and disability in older persons in the US:
Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III,” Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society 48(9): 1132–1135.
Omran, Abdel R. 1991. “The epidemiological transition: A theory of the epidemiology of
population change,” Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 49(4): 509–538.

39

Parker, Philip M. 2000. Physioeconomics: The basis for long-run economic growth. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Penninx, B. W., S. Leveille, L. Ferrucci, J. T. van Eijk, and J. M. Guralnik. 1999. “Exploring the
effect of depression on physical disability: Longitudinal evidence from the established
populations for epidemiologic studies of the elderly,” American Journal of Public Health
89(9): 1346–1352.
Pope, Clayne L. 1986. “Native adult mortality in the U.S.: 1770–1870,” in Long-Term Changes
in Nutrition and the Standard of Living, ed. Robert William Fogel. Bern: International
Economic History Association, pp. 76–85.
Pope, Clayne L. 1992. “Adult mortality in America before 1900: A view from family histories,”
in Strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American Economic History, eds. Claudia Goldin
and Hugh Rockoff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 267–296.
Pope, Clayne L. and Larry T. Wimmer. 1998. “Ageing in the early twentieth century,” American
Economic Review 88(2): 217–221.
Preston, Samuel H. and Michael Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late NineteenthCentury America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Preston, Samuel H, Nathan Keyfitz, and Robert Schoen. 1972. Causes of Death: Life Tables for
National Populations. New York: Seminar Press.
Reynolds, Sandra L., Eileen M. Crimmins, and Yasuhiko Saito. 1998. “Cohort differences in
disability and disease presence,” Gerontologist 38(5): 578–590.
Riley, James C. 1989. Sickness, Recovery and Death: A History and Forecast of Ill Health. Iowa
City, IA: University of Iowa Press.
Riley, James C. 1990a. “Long-term morbidity and mortality trends: Inverse health transitions,” in
What We Know about Health Transition: The Cultural, Social and Behavioural Determinants
of Health, The Proceedings of an International Workshop, Canberra, May 1989. Canbera:
Health Transition Centre, Australian National University.
Riley, James C. 1990b. “The risk of being sick: Morbidity trends in four countries,” Population
and Development Review 16(3): 403–432.
Riley, James C. 1997. Sick, Not Dead: The Health of British Workingmen during the Mortality
Decline. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Riley, James C. and George Alter. 1996. “The sick and the well: Adult health in Britain during
the health transition,” Health Transition Review 6(suppl.): 19–44.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and T. Paul Schultz. 1988. “The stability of household production
technology: A replication,” Journal of Human Resources 23(4): 535–549.

40

Rush, David. 2000. “Nutrition and maternal mortality in the developing world,” American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 72(1 Suppl.): 212S–240S.
Scrimshaw, Nevin S. 1993. “Malnutrition, brain development, learning and behavior.” The
Twentieth Kamla Puri Sabharwal Memorial Lecture presented at Lady Irwin College, New
Delhi, India, 23 November 1993.
Scrimshaw, Nevin S., ed. 1995. Community-Based Longitudinal Nutrition and Health Studies:
Classical Examples from Guatemala, Haiti and Mexico. Boston: International Nutrition
Foundation for Developing Countries (INFDC).
Scrimshaw, Nevin S. 1997. “More evidence that foetal nutrition contributes to chronic disease in
later life,” BMJ 315(7112): 825–826.
Soltow, Lee. 1975. Men and Wealth in the United States 1850–1870. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Steckel, Richard H. 1995. “Stature and the standard of living,” Journal of Economic Literature
33(4): 1904–1940.
Stuck, A. E., J. M. Walthert, T. Nikolaus, C. J. Bula, C. Hohmann, and J. C. Beck. 1999. “Risk
factors for functional status decline in community-living elderly people: A systematic
literature review,” Social Science & Medicine 48(4): 445–469.
Tanner, J. M. 1981. A History of the Study of Human Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Tanner, J. M. 1982. “The potential of auxological data for monitoring economic and social wellbeing,” Social Science History 6(4): 571–581.
Troesken, Werner. 2002. “The limits of Jim Crow: Race and the provision of the water and
sewerage services in American cities, 1880–1925,” Journal of Economic History 62(3): 734–
72.
Troesken, Werner. 2003. Lead water pipes and infant mortality in turn-of-the-century
Massachusetts. NBER Working Paper No. 9549.
Troesken, Werner. 2004. Water, race, and disease. Cambridge: MIT Press, in press.
Troesken, Werner and Patricia E. Beeson. 2003. “The significance of lead water mains in
American cities: Some historical evidence,” in Health and labor force participation over the
life cycle, ed. Dora L. Costa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 181–201.
Trussell, James and Richard Steckel. 1978. “The age of slaves at menarche and their first birth,”
Journal of Interdisciplinary History 8(3): 477–505.
U.S. National Office of Vital Statistics. 1954. “Weight at birth and its effect on survival of the
newborn in the United States, early 1950,” Vital Statistics Special Report 39(1).

41

Verbrugge, Lois M. 1984. “Longer life but worsening health? Trends in health and mortality of
middle-aged and older persons,” Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly Health and Society
62(3): 475–519.
Verbrugge, Lois M. 1989. “Recent, present, and future health of American adults,” Annual
Review of Public Health 10: 333–361.
Verbrugge, Lois M. and Alan M. Jette. 1994. “The disablement process,” Social Science &
Medicine 38(1): 1–14.
Wagstaff, Adam. 1986. “The demand for health: Theory and applications,” Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health 40(1): 1–11.
Wagstaff, Adam and Valentino Dardanoni. 1986. “The demand for health: A simplified
Grossman model/A note on a simple model of health investment,” Bulletin of Economic
Research 38(1): 93–100.
Waidmann, Timothy, John Bound, and Michael Schoenbaum. 1995. “The illusion of failure:
Trends in self-reported health of the U.S. elderly,” Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 73(2):
253–287.
Waidmann, Timothy A. and Korbin Liu. 2000. “Disability trends among elderly persons and
implications for the future,” Journals of Gerontology 55B(5): S298–307.
Wilcox, A., R. Skjaerven, P. Buekens, and J. Kiely. 1995. “Birth weight and perinatal mortality:
A comparison of the United States and Norway,” JAMA 273(9): 709–711.
Wilcox, A. J. and I. T. Russell. 1983. “Birthweight and perinatal mortality: II. On weightspecific mortality,” International Journal of Epidemiology 12(3): 319–25.
Wilcox, Nathaniel T. 1992. “The overseer problem: A new data set and method,” in Without
Consent or Contract, vol. 2, Evidence and Methods, eds. Robert William Fogel, Ralph A.
Galantine, and Richard L. Manning. New York: W. W. Norton, 84–108.
Wilson, Sven E. 2003. “The prevalence of chronic respiratory disease in the industrial era: The
United States, 1895–1910,” in Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle:
Evidence from the Past, ed. Dora L Costa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER,
pp. 147–180.
Wilson, Sven E, Joseph Burton, and Benjamin Howell. 2003. Work disability among non-elderly
adult males: The United States, 1893–2001. Typescript, Brigham Young University.
Wimmer, Larry T. 2003. “Reflections on the Early Indicators project: A partial history,” in
Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past, ed. Dora
L. Costa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

42

Wimmer, Larry T. and Clayne L. Pope. 1975. “The Genealogical Society Library of Salt Lake
City: A source of data for economic and genealogical historians,” Historical Methods
Newsletter 8(2): 51–58.
Wolfe, Barbara L. and Robert Haveman. 1990. “Trends in the prevalence of work disability from
1962 to 1984, and their correlates,” Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 68(1): 53–80.

43

Table 1
The Share of Northern White Males of Military Age Unfit for
Military Service in 1861

Percentage of
Cohort
Examined

Percentage of
Examinees Who
Were Rejected

16–19

80.9

16.0

20–24

70.4

24.5

25–29

52.3

35.8

30–34

41.0

42.9

35–39

41.6

52.9

Age

Source: Fogel et al. 1991.

44

Table 2
The Increase in the Proportion of White Males without Chronic
Conditions during the Twentieth Century

Proportion without Chronic Conditions
Age Interval

1890–1910

c. 1994

50–54

0.33

0.41

55–59

0.21

0.29

60–64

0.10

0.25

65–69

0.03

0.14

Source: Helmchen 2003.

45

Table 3
Average Age of Onset of Some Chronic
Conditions among American Males
near the Beginning and near the
End of the Twentieth Century

Condition

Men Born
1830–1845

Men Born
1918–1927

Heart disease

55.9

65.4

Arthritis

53.7

64.7

Neoplasm

59.0

66.6

Respiratory

53.8

65.0

Source: Helmchen 2003.

46

Table 4
Average Number of Comorbidites among Veterans Who
Lived To Be at Least Age 50
Percentage of
Veterans Who
Lived To at Least
Age 50, Who Died
in Interval

Average Number of
Comorbidities at
Last Examination
before Death

50–54

3.9

4

55–59

6.4

5

60–64

9.8

6

65–69

14.0

6

70–74

18.3

7

75–79

19.1

7

80–84

15.5

7

85-89

9.0

8

90-94

3.4

8

95 or over

0.7

7

Average Age of
Death

Source: Helmchen 2003.

47

Table 5
Effects of a Shift in the Distribution of Birthweights on the Neonatal
Death Rate, Holding the Schedule of Death Rates
(by Weight) Constant

Weight
(grams)
(1)

Neonatal
Death Rate of
Singleton
Nonwhite
U.S. Males
in 1950
(per 1,000)
(2)

Distribution of
Birthweights of
Singleton Nonwhite
U.S. Males in 1950
( x = 3,128 g;
σ = 572 g)
(3)

Distribution of
Birthweights in a
Population with
x = 2,276 g
σ = 399 g
(4)

1,500 or less

686.7

0.0117

0.1339

1,501–2,000

221.3

0.0136

0.2421

2,001–2,500

62.1

0.0505

0.3653

2,501–3,000

19.7

0.1811

0.2198

3,001–3,500

10.7

0.3510

0.0372

3,501–4,000

12.1

0.2599

0.0017

4,001–4,500

13.0

0.0865

—

4,501 or more

23.2

0.0456

—

Implied
neonatal death
rate
(per 1,000)

26.8

173.0

Possible infant
death rate
(per 1,000)

48.9

288.3

Source: Cols. 2 and 3: U.S. National Office of Vital Statistics 1954; Col. 4: see Fogel 1986, nn.
21, 23, 24, and 26.

48

Figure 1
The Percentage of Male Births with Weights below 2,501 Grams in
Two Modern Populations and of Poor English Workers
during the Early Nineteenth Century

49

