NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOMPLETE CONTRACTS AND THE PRODUCT CYCLE
Pol Antràs
Working Paper 9945
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9945
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Marios Angeletos, Gene Grossman, and Jaume Ventura for invaluable
guidance, and to Richard Baldwin, Lucia Breierova, Francesco Franco, Gordon Hanson, Elhanan Helpman,
Simon Johnson, Giovanni Maggi, Marc Melitz, and Roberto Rigobon for their helpful comments and
suggestions. I have also benefited from suggestions by seminar participants at Harvard, the NBER and the
CIAR meeting in Santiago de Compostela. The first draft of this paper was written while visiting the
International Economics Section at Princeton University, whose hospitality is gratefully aknowledged. I have
also benefited from financial support from the Bank of Spain. All remaining errors are my own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Pol Antràs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle
Pol Antràs
NBER Working Paper No. 9945
August 2003
JEL No. D23, F12, F14, F21, F23, L22, L33
ABSTRACT
The incomplete nature of contracts governing international transactions limits the extent to
which the production process can be fragmented across borders. In a dynamic, general-equilibrium
Ricardian model of North-South trade, the incompleteness of international contracts is shown to lead
to the emergence of product cycles. Because of contractual frictions, goods are initially
manufactured in the North, where product development takes place. As the good matures and
becomes more standardized, the manufacturing stage of production is shifted to the South to benefit
from lower wages. Following the property-rights approach to the theory of the firm, the same force
that creates product cycles, i.e., incomplete contracts, opens the door to a parallel analysis of the
determinants of the mode of organization. The model gives rise to a new version of the product cycle
in which manufacturing is shifted to the South first within firm boundaries, and only at a later stage
to independent firms in the South. Relative to a world with only arm's length transacting, allowing
for intrafirm production transfer by multinational firms is shown to accelerate the shift of production
towards the South, while having an ambiguous effect on relative wages. The model delivers
macroeconomic implications that complement the work of Krugman (1979), as well as
microeconomic implications consistent with the findings of the empirical literature on the product
cycle.
Pol Antràs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 230
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
pantras@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

In an enormously influential article, Vernon (1966) described a natural life cycle for the typical
commodity. Most new goods, he argued, are initially manufactured in the country where
they are first developed, with the bulk of innovations occurring in the industrialized, highwage North. Only when the appropriate designs have been worked out and the production
techniques have been standardized is the locus of production shifted to the less developed
South, where wages are lower. Vernon emphasized the role of multinational firms in the
international transfer of technology. In his formulation of a product’s life cycle, the shift
of production to the South is a profit-maximizing decision from the point of view of the
innovating firm.
The “product cycle hypothesis” soon gave rise to an extensive empirical literature that
searched for evidence of the patterns suggested by Vernon.1 The picture emerging from this
literature turned out to be much richer than Vernon originally envisioned. The evidence
indeed supports the existence of product cycles, but it has become clear that foreign direct
investment by multinational firms is not the only vehicle of production transfer to the South.
In particular, the literature has identified several instances in which technologies have been
transferred to the South through licensing, subcontracting, and other similar arm’s length
arrangements. More interestingly, several studies have pointed out that the choice between
intrafirm and market transactions is significantly aﬀected by both the degree of standardization of the technology and by the transferor’s resources devoted to product development.2
In particular, overseas assembly of relatively new and unstandardized products tends to be
undertaken within firm boundaries, i.e., through foreign direct investment, while innovators
seem more willing to resort to licensing and subcontracting in standardized goods with little
product development requirements.
The product cycle hypothesis has also attracted considerable attention among international trade theorists eager to explore the macroeconomic and trade implications of Vernon’s
insights. Krugman (1979) developed a simple model of trade in which new goods are produced
in the industrialized North and exchanged for old goods produced in the South. In order to
concentrate on the eﬀects of the product cycle on trade flows and relative wages, Krugman
1

See Gruber et al. (1967), Hirsch (1967), Wells (1969), and Parry (1975) for early tests of the theory.
See, for instance, Davidson and McFetridge (1984, 1985), Mansfield et al. (1979), Mansfield and Romeo
(1980), Vernon and Davidson (1979), and Wilson (1977). These studies will be discussed in more detail in
section 4 below.
2

1

(1979) specified a very simple form of technological transfer, with new goods becoming old
goods at an exogenously given Poisson rate. This “imitation lag,” as he called it, was later
endogenized by Grossman and Helpman (1991a,b) using the machinery developed by the
endogenous growth literature.3 In particular, Grossman and Helpman (1991a,b) developed a
model in which purposeful innovation and imitation gave rise to endogenous product cycles,
with the timing of production transfer being a function of the imitation eﬀort exerted by firms
in the South. As the empirical literature on the product cycle suggests, however, the bulk of
technology transfer is driven by voluntary decisions of Northern firms, which choose to undertake oﬀshore production within firm boundaries or transact with independent subcontractors
or licensees.4
In this paper, I provide a theory of the product cycle that is much more akin to Vernon’s
(1966) original formulation and that delivers implications that are very much in line with
the findings of the empirical literature discussed above. In the model, goods are produced
combining a hi-tech input, which I associate with product development, and a low-tech input,
which is meant to capture the simple assembly or manufacturing of the good. As in Grossman
and Helpman (1991a,b), the North is assumed to have a high enough comparative advantage
in product development so as to ensure that this activity is always undertaken there. My
specification of technology diﬀers, however, from that in Grossman and Helpman (1991a,b)
in that I treat product development as a continuously active sector along the life cycle of a
good. The concept of product development used here is therefore quite broad and is meant
to include, among others, the development of ideas for improving existing products, as well
as their marketing and advertising. Following Vernon (1966), this specification of technology
enables me to capture the standardization process of a good along its life cycle. More specifically, I assume that the contribution of product development to output (as measured by the
output elasticity of the hi-tech input) is inversely related to the age or maturity of the good.
Intuitively, the initial phases of a product’s life cycle entail substantial testing and re-testing
of prototypes as well as considerable marketing eﬀorts to make consumers aware of the ex3

See Jensen and Thursby (1987), and Segerstrom et al. (1990) for related theories of endogenous product
cycles.
4
Grossman and Helpman (1991b) claimed that their model generated realistic predictions about the evolution of market shares and the pattern of trade in particular industries. Indeed, as they point out, purposeful
imitation by low-wage countries has been an important driving force in the transfer of production of microprocessors from the United States and Japan to Taiwan and Korea. Nevertheless, based on recent studies, I
will argue below that even in the case of the electronics industry, the spectacular increase in the market share
of Korean exports might be better explained by technology transfer by foreign-based firms than by simple
imitation by domestic firms in Korea .

2

istence of the good. As the good matures and production techniques become standardized,
the mere assembly of the product becomes a much more significant input in production.
Following Vernon (1966) and contrary to Grossman and Helpman (1991a,b), I allow Northern firms to split the production process internationally and transact with manufacturing
plants in the South.5 With no frictions to the international fragmentation of the production
process, I show that the model fails to deliver a product cycle. Intuitively, provided that
labor is paid a lower wage in the South than in the North, manufacturing will be shifted to
the South even for the most unstandardized, product-development intensive goods. Vernon
(1966) was well aware that his theory required some type of friction that delayed oﬀshore
assembly. In fact, he argued that in the initial phase of a product’s life cycle, overseas production would be discouraged by a low price elasticity of demand, the need for a thick market for
inputs, and the need for swift and eﬀective communication between producers and suppliers.
This paper will instead push the view that what limits the international fragmentation of
the production process is the incomplete nature of contracts governing international transactions. Building on the seminal work of Williamson (1985) and Grossman and Hart (1986), I
show that the presence of incomplete contracts creates hold-up problems, which in turn give
rise to suboptimal relationship-specific investments by the parties involved in an international
transaction. The product development manager of a Northern firm can alleviate this type of
distortions by keeping the manufacturing process in the North, where contracts can be better
enforced. In choosing between domestic and overseas manufacturing, the product development manager therefore faces a trade-oﬀ between the lower costs of Southern manufacturing
and the higher incomplete-contracting distortions associated with it. This trade-oﬀ is shown
to lead naturally to the emergence of product cycles: when the good is new and unstandardized, Southern production is very unattractive because it bears the full cost of incomplete
contracting (which aﬀects both the manufacturing and the product development inputs in
production) with little benefit from the lower wage in the South. Conversely, when the good
is mature and requires very little product development, the benefits from lower wages in the
South fare much better against the distortions from incomplete contracting, and the good is
5

There is a recent literature in international trade documenting an increasing international disintegration
of the production process. A variety of terms have been used to refer to this phenomenon: the “slicing of the
value chain”, “international outsourcing”, “vertical specialization”, “global production sharing”, and many
others. Feenstra (1998) discusses the widely cite example of Nike. In 1994, Nike employed around 2,500
U.S. workers in management, design, sales, and promotion, while leaving manufacturing in the hands of some
75,000 workers in Asia. Interestingly, Nike subcontracts most parts of its production process, so that the
production plants in Asia are not Nike aﬃliates and their 75,000 workers are not Nike employees.

3

produced in the South.
The model developed in section 2 focuses first on the profit-maximizing choice of location
by a single Northern product development manager. In section 3, I embed this choice in
a general-equilibrium, dynamic Ricardian model of North-South trade with a continuum of
industries that standardize at diﬀerent rates. The model solves for the timing of production
transfer for any given industry, as well as for the time path of the relative wage in the
two countries. In spite of the rich heterogeneity in industry product-cycle dynamics, the
cross-sectional picture that emerges from the model is very similar to that in the Ricardian
model with a continuum of goods of Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson (1977). In contrast
to the exogenous cross-industry and cross-country productivity diﬀerences in their model,
comparative advantage arises here from a combination of the Northern productivity advantage
in product development, the continuous standardization of goods, and the incompleteness of
contracts in international transactions. I also show how these same forces bring about an
equilibrium wage in the North that exceeds that in the South.
I next study the eﬀect of an acceleration of technological change in the North on the world
distribution of income. I show that Krugman’s (1979) result that increased technological
change widens the wage diﬀerential greatly depends on technological change taking the form
of the introduction of new products into the economy. If, instead, technological change takes
the form of an increase in the rate at which goods standardize, the converse result is shown to
apply and relative wages move in favor of the South. Section 3 concludes with an analysis of
the welfare implications of a shift from a steady-state equilibrium with incomplete contracts
to a steady-state equilibrium with complete contracts. This improvement in the contracting
environment in international transactions is shown to unambiguously increase welfare in the
South, while having an ambiguous eﬀect on Northern welfare. I discuss the relationship
between this result and Helpman’s (1993) analysis of the welfare eﬀects of a tightening of
intellectual property rights in models of imitation.
Following the property-rights approach to the theory of the firm (Grossman and Hart,
1986, Hart and Moore, 1990), the same force that creates product cycles in the model, i.e.,
incomplete contracts, opens the door to a parallel analysis of the determinants of ownership
structure, which I carry out in section 4. As in Grossman and Hart (1986), I associate
ownership with the entitlement of some residual rights of control. When parties undertake
noncontractible, relationship-specific investments, the allocation of these residual rights has

4

a critical eﬀect on each party’s ex-post outside option, which in turn determines each party’s
ex-ante incentives to invest. Ex-ante eﬃciency (i.e., transaction-cost minimization) is shown
to dictate that residual rights be controlled by the party whose investment contributes most
to the value of the relationship. In terms of the model, the attractiveness for a Northern
product-development manager of integrating the transfer of production to the South is shown
to be increasing in the output elasticity of product development, and thus decreasing in the
maturity of the good at the time of the transfer.
As a result, a new version of the product cycle emerges. If the threshold maturity at
which manufacturing is shifted to the South is low enough, production will be transferred
internally to a wholly-owned foreign aﬃliate in the South, and the Northern firm will become
a multinational firm. In that case, only at a later stage in the product life-cycle will the
product development manager find it optimal to give away the residual rights of control,
and assign assembly to an independent subcontractor in the South, an arrangement which
is analogous to the Northern firm licensing its technology (hi-tech input). For a higher
maturity of the good at the time of the transfer, the model predicts that the transfer to
the South will occur directly at arm’s length, and multinationals will not arise. Solving for
the general equilibrium with multinational firms, I show that, relative to a world with only
arm’s length transactions, allowing for intrafirm production transfer by multinational firms
accelerates the shift of production towards the South, while having an ambiguous eﬀect on
relative wages. Furthermore, provided that its eﬀect on relative wages is small enough, the
emergence of multinational firms is shown to be welfare improving for both countries. I
discuss several cross-sectional and time-series implications of the model and relate them to
the empirical literature on the product cycle. For instance, the model is shown to be useful
for understanding the evolution of the Korean electronics industry after the Korean War.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 develops a simple dynamic
model that shows how the presence of incomplete contracts gives rise to product cycles.
For simplicity, I initially abstract from the choice of ownership structure by allowing only
arm’s length production transfers to the South. In section 3, I embed this simple model
in a general-equilibrium model of North-South trade and study the eﬀects of incomplete
contracting on relative wages and the speed of production transfer. In section 4, I allow for
intrafirm production transfers and describe the richer product life-cycle that emerges from
it, both in partial and in general equilibrium. Section 5 oﬀers some concluding comments.

5

2

Incomplete Contracts and the Life Cycle of a Product

This section develops a simple model in which a product development manager decides how
to organize production of a particular good, taking the behavior of other producers as well
as wages as given. I will first analyze the static problem, and then show how a product cycle
emerges in a simple dynamic extension in which the good gets standardized over time.

2.1

Set-up

Consider a world with two countries, the North and the South, and a single good y produced
only with labor. I denote the wage rate in the North by wN and that in the South by
wS . Consumer preferences are such that the unique producer of good y faces the following
iso-elastic demand function:
y = λp−1/(1−α) ,

0<α<1

(1)

where p is the price of the good and λ is a parameter that the producer takes as given.6
Production of good y requires the development of a special and distinct hi-tech input
xh , as well as the production of a special and distinct low-tech input xl . As discussed in
the introduction, the hi-tech input is meant to comprise research and product development,
marketing, and other similar skill-demanding tasks. The low-tech input is instead meant to
capture the mere manufacturing or assembly of the good. Specialized inputs can be of good
or bad quality. If any of the two inputs is of bad quality, the output of the final good is zero.
If both inputs are of good quality, production of the final good requires no additional inputs
and output is given by:
z
y = ζ z x1−z
h xl ,

0 ≤ z ≤ 1,

(2)

where ζ z = z −z (1 − z)−(1−z) .
The unit cost function for producing the hi-tech input varies by country. In the North,
production of one unit of a good-quality, hi-tech input requires the employment of one unit
of Northern labor. The South is much less eﬃcient at producing the hi-tech input. For
simplicity, the productivity advantage of the North is assumed large enough to ensure that
xh is only produced in the North. Meanwhile, production of one unit of good-quality, lowtech input also requires labor, but the unit input requirement is assumed to be equal to 1 in
both countries. Finally, production of any type of bad-quality input can be undertaken at
6

This demand function will be derived from preferences in the general-equilibrium model.

6

a positive but negligible cost. Both the hi-tech and the low-tech inputs are assumed to be
freely tradable.
There are two types of producers: a research center and a manufacturing plant. A research
center is defined as the producer of the hi-tech input. It follows that the research center
will always locate in the North. The research center needs to contract with an independent
manufacturing plant for the provision of the low-tech input.7 As discussed in the introduction,
I allow for an international fragmentation of the production process. Before any investment
is made, a research center decides whether to produce a hi-tech input, and if so, whether to
obtain the low-tech input from an independent manufacturing plant in the North or from one
in the South. Upon entry, the manufacturer makes a lump-sum transfer T to the research
center.8 Ex-ante, there is large number of identical, potential manufacturers of the good, so
that competition among them makes T adjust so as to make the chosen manufacturer break
even.9 The research center chooses the location of manufacturing to maximize its ex-ante
profits, which include the transfer.
Investments are assumed to be relationship-specific. The research center tailors the hitech input specifically to the manufacturing plant, while the low-tech input is customized
according to the specific needs of the research center. In sum, the investments in labor
needed to produce xh and xl are incurred upon entry and are useless outside the relationship.
The setting is one of incomplete contracts in situations of international production sharing.
In particular, it is assumed that only when both inputs are produced in the same country can
an outside party distinguish between a good-quality and a bad-quality intermediate input.10
Hence, the manager of the research center and that of a Southern manufacturing plant cannot
sign an enforceable contract specifying the purchase of a certain type of intermediate input
for a certain price. If they did, the party receiving a positive payment would have an incentive
to produce the bad-quality input at the negligible cost. It is equally assumed that no outside
7

In section 4, I allow the research center to obtain the low-tech input from an integrated manuacturing
plant.
8
For the purposes of this paper it is not necessary to specify which of the two types of firms produces the
final good. When y is produced by the manufacturing plant, this transfer T can be interpreted as a lump-sum
licensing fee for the use of the hi-tech input.
9
This assumption simplifies the description of the industry equilibrium in section 3. For the results in the
present section, it would suﬃce to assume that no firm is cash-constrained, so that the equilibrium location
of manufacturing maximizes the joint value of the relationship.
10
This can be interpreted as a physical constraint imposed on the outside party, which might not be able to
verify the quality of both inputs when these are produced in distant locations More generally, the assumption is
meant to capture broader contractual diﬃculties in international transactions, such as ambiguous jurisdiction,
language conflicts, or, more simply, weak protection of property rights in low-wage countries.

7

party can verify the amount of ex-ante investments in labor. If these were verifiable, the
managers could contract on them, and the cost-reducing benefit of producing a bad-quality
input would disappear. For the same reason, it is assumed that the parties cannot write
contracts contingent on the volume of sale revenues obtained when the final good is sold.
The only contractible ex-ante is the transfer T between the parties.11
When the research center chooses to transact with a manufacturing plant in the North,
the fact that labor investments are not contractible is irrelevant because the parties can
always appeal to an outside party to enforce quality-contingent contracts. In contrast, when
the low-tech input is produced by a plant in the South, no enforceable contract will be signed
ex-ante and the two parties will bargain over the surplus of the relationship after the inputs
have been produced. At this point, the quality of the inputs (and therefore also the ex-ante
investments) are observable to both parties and thus the costless bargaining will yield an
ex-post eﬃcient outcome. I model this ex-post bargaining as a Generalized Nash Bargaining
game in which the research center obtains a fraction φ > 0 of the ex-post gains from trade.
Because the inputs are tailored specifically to the other party in the transaction, if the two
parties fail to agree on a division of the surplus, both are left with nothing.
As I will show below, when the production process is fragmented internationally, the
incompleteness of contracts will lead to underinvestment in both the product development
and manufacturing inputs. Furthermore, the underprovision of product development will
be more severe the lower is φ, i.e., the lower the bargaining power of the research center
manager. In order to simplify the derivation of some of the results below, it is useful to
assume that the product development input is suﬃciently distorted. This is ensured by the
following assumption:
Assumption 1: φ ≤ 3/4.
If the transaction between the research center and the manufacturing plant is interpreted
as a licensing arrangement, Assumption 1 is consistent with available evidence: “the empirical
evidence on licensing convincingly shows that licensors on average can appropriate less than
half of the surplus associated with the license transaction” (Caves, 1996, p. 167).
This completes the description of the model. The timing of events is summarized in
11

I take the fact that contracts are incomplete as given. Aghion et al. (1994), Nöldeke and Schmidt
(1995) and others, have shown that allowing for specific-performance contracts may lead to eﬃcient ex-ante
relationship-specific investments. Nevertheless, Che and Hausch (1997) have identified conditions under which
specific-performance contracts do not lead to first-best investment levels and may actually have no value.

8

Figure 1: Timing of Events

t0

t1

t2

Choice of where xh
and xl are produced
Ex-ante transfer T

xh and xl produced

t3

Generalized Nash
bargaining

Final good produced and sold

Figure 1.

2.2

Firm Behavior

As discussed above, the North has a suﬃciently high productivity advantage in producing
the hi-tech input to ensure that xh is produced there. The decision of where to produce
the low-tech input is instead nontrivial. In his choice, the manager of the research center
compares the ex-ante profits associated with two options, which I analyze in turn.
A. Manufacturing by an Independent Plant in the North
Consider first the case of a research center who decides to deal with an independent manufacturing plant in the North. In that case, the two parties can write an ex-ante qualitycontingent contract that will not be renegotiated ex-post. The initial contract stipulates
production of good-quality inputs in an amount that maximizes the research center’s ex-ante
profits, which from equations (1) and (2), and taking account of the transfer T , are given by
α(1−z) αz
xl

πN = λ1−α ζ αz xh

− wN xh − wN xl . It is straightforward to check that this program

yields the following optimal price for the final good:
pN (z) =

wN
.
α

Because the research center faces a constant elasticity of demand, the optimal price is equal
to a constant mark-up over marginal cost. Ex-ante profits for the research center are in turn
equal to

µ

wN
π (z) = (1 − α) λ
α
N

¶−α/(1−α)

.

(3)

B. Manufacturing by an Independent Plant in the South
Consider next the problem faced by a research center that decides to transact with a plant in
9

the South. As discussed above, in this case the initial contract only stipulates the transfer T .
The game played by the manager of the research center and that of the manufacturing plant
is solved by backwards induction. If both producers make good-quality intermediate inputs
and the firms agree in the bargaining, the potential revenues from the sale of the final good
α(1−z) αz
xl .

are R = λ1−α ζ αz xh

In contrast, if the parties fail to agree in the bargaining, both

are left with nothing. The quasi-rents of the relationship are therefore equal to sale revenues,
i.e., R. Generalized Nash bargaining leaves the research center manager with a fraction φ of
these quasi-rents, while the manufacturing plant manager in the South receives the remaining
fraction 1 − φ. Because φ is assumed to be in (0, 1), both parties receive strictly positive expost revenues from producing a good-quality input and bad-quality inputs are never produced.
Rolling back in time, the research center manager sets xh to maximize φR − wN xh . The

manufacturing plant simultaneously chooses xl to maximize (1 − φ) R − wS xl . Combining

the first-order conditions of these two programs yields the following optimal price for the final
good:

¡ N ¢1−z ¡ S ¢z
w
w
p (z) =
.
1−z
αφ
(1 − φ)z
S

If contracts were also complete for international transactions, the research center would in¡ ¢1−z ¡ S ¢z
stead set a price equal to wN
w
/α. Incomplete contracting therefore inflates the
optimal mark-up by a factor that is inversely related to φ1−z (1 − φ)z . Notice that when z is

low, the distortion is relatively higher, the lower is the bargaining power of research centers
φ. Conversely, if production of y requires mostly the low-tech input (z high), the distortion
is relatively higher, the higher is φ. Setting T so as to make the manufacturing plant break
even leads to the following expression for the research center’s ex-ante profits:
Ã ¡ ¢1−z ¡ ¢z !−α/(1−α)
wN
wS
.
πS (z) = (1 − α (φ (1 − z) + (1 − φ) z)) λ
αφ1−z (1 − φ)z

2.3

(4)

The Equilibrium Choice

From comparison of equations (3) and (4), it follows that the low-tech input will be produced
in the South only if A (z) ≤ ω ≡ wN /wS , where
A(z) ≡

µ

1−α
1 − α (φ (1 − z) + (1 − φ) z)

¶(1−α)/αz

φ−(1−z)/z
.
1−φ

(5)

It is straightforward to show that limz→0 A(z) = +∞ and that A (z) > 1 for all z ∈ [0, 1]. This
implies that (i) for high enough product-development intensities of final-good production,
10

manufacturing is assigned to a manufacturing plant in the North; and (ii) unless the wage
in the North is higher than that in the South, manufacturing by an independent plant in
the South will never be chosen. Intuitively, the benefits of Southern assembly are able to
oﬀset the distortions created by incomplete contracting only when the manufacturing stage is
suﬃciently important in production or when the wage in the South is suﬃciently lower than
that in the North. To make matters interesting, I assume that ω is high enough to ensure
that πN (zc ) < πS (zc ) for some zc ∈ (0, 1):
Condition 1: There exists a zc ∈ (0, 1) such that A (zc ) < ω.12
Figure 2 depicts the profit-maximizing choice of location as a function of z. Assumption
1 ensures that the A(z) curve is decreasing in z for all z ∈ [0, 1], while by Condition 1,

A(1) < ω.13 It follows that:

Lemma 1 Under Assumption 1 and Condition 1, there exists a unique threshold z̄ ∈ (0, 1)

such that the low-tech input is produced in the North if z < z̄ ≡ A−1 (ω), while it is produced

in the South if z > z̄ ≡ A−1 (ω), where A(z) is given by equation (5) and ω is the relative
wage in the North.
Proof. See Appendix A.1.

From direct inspection of Figure 2, it is clear that an increase in the relative wage in the
North reduces the threshold z̄. Intuitively, an increase in ω makes Southern manufacturing
relatively more profitable and leads to a reduction in the measure of product-development
intensities for which the whole production process stays in the North. An increase in the
relative bargaining power of the research center can be shown to rotate the A(z) curve in a
counterclockwise direction about some zφ ∈ (0, 1). It follows that for a high enough ω, an
increase in φ leads to a fall in z̄, with the converse result applying for low enough ω. This
result will be discussed at length in section 4, when I introduce multinational firms.

12

This condition will in fact be shown to necessarily hold in the general-equilibrium model (this is why I
avoid labelling it as an assumption), where the relative wage in the North will necessarily adjust to ensure
positive labor demand in the South.
13
The A(z) curve is decreasing in z for low values of z even when φ approaches one. Assumption 1 rules
out cases in which A(z) might tilt up for a high enough z (see Appendix A.1). In those cases, the result in
Lemma 1 would still go through as long as A(1) < ω.

11

Figure 2: The Choice of Location
xl produced in the North

xl produced in the South

A(z)

ω

0

2.4

z

1

z

Dynamics: The Product Cycle

As discussed in the introduction, one of the premises of Vernon’s (1966) original product-cycle
hypothesis is that as a good matures throughout its life cycle, it becomes more and more
standardized.14 Vernon believed that the unstandardized nature of new goods was crucial
for understanding that they would be first produced in a high-wage country.
To capture this standardization process in a simple way, consider the following simple
dynamic extension of the static model developed above. Time is continuous, index by t,
with t ∈ [0, ∞). Consumers are infinitely lived and, at any t ∈ [0, ∞), their preferences for
good y are captured by the demand function (1). On the technology and contracting sides,
the parameter φ and the relative wage ω are assumed to be time-invariant.15 The output
elasticity of the low-tech input is instead assumed to increase through time. In particular,
this elasticity is given by
z(t) = h (t) , with h0 (t) > 0, h (0) = 0, and lim h(t) = 1.
t→∞

14
In discussing previous empirical studies on the location of industry, Vernon wrote: “in the early stages
of introduction of a new good, producers were usually confronted with a number of critical, albeit transitory,
conditions. For one thing, the product itself may be quite unstandardized for a time; its inputs, its processing,
and its final specifications may cover a wide range. Contrast the great variety of automobiles produced and
marketed before 1910 with the thoroughly standardized product of the 1930’s, or the variegated radio designs
of the 1920’s with the uniform models of the 1930’s.” (Vernon, 1966, p.197).
15
The latter assumption will be relaxed in the general-equilibrium model, where ω will be endogenized.

12

I therefore assume that the product-development intensity of the good is inversely related
to its maturity. Following the discussion in the introduction, this is meant to capture the
idea that most goods require a lot of R&D and product development in the early stages of
their life cycle, while the mere assembling or manufacturing becomes a much more significant
input in production as the good matures. I will take these dynamics as given, but it can be
shown that, under Assumption 1 and Condition 1, profits for the Northern research center
are weakly increasing in z. It follows that the smooth process of standardization specified
here could, in principle, be derived endogenously in a richer framework that incorporated
some costs of standardization.16 Finally, I assume that the structure of firms is such that
when Southern assembly is chosen, the game played by the two managers can be treated
as a static one and we can abstract from an analysis of reputational equilibria. This is a
warranted assumption when the separation rate for managers is high enough or when future
profit streams are suﬃciently discounted.
With this simplified, dynamic set-up, the cut-oﬀ level z̄ ≡ A−1 (ω) is time-invariant, and
the following result is a straightforward implication of Lemma 1:
Proposition 1 The model displays a product cycle. When the good is relatively new or
unstandardized, i.e., t ≤ h−1 (z̄), the manufacturing stage of production takes place in the

North. When the good is relatively mature or standardized, i.e., t > h−1 (z̄), manufacturing
is undertaken in the South.
Consider, for instance, the following specification of the standardization process:
z(t) = h (t) = 1 − e−t/θ ,
where 1/θ measures the rate at which 1 − z falls towards zero, i.e., the rate of standardization. With this functional form, the whole production process remains in the North until
´
³
1
, at which point manufacturing is shifted to
the product reaches an age equal to θ ln 1−z̄
the South. Naturally, production of the low-tech input is transferred to the South earlier,

the higher is the speed of standardization, 1/θ, and the lower is the threshold intensity z̄.
Furthermore, because the cut-oﬀ z̄ is itself a decreasing function of ω, it follows that the
higher is the relative wage in the North, the earlier will production transfer occur.17
16
For instance, if such costs were increasing in dz/dt, then a discrete increase in z would be infinitely costly.
A full fledged modeling of the standardization decision is left for future research.
17
Vernon (1966) hypothesized instead that before being transferred to low-wage countries, production would

13

As argued in the introduction, the fact that contracts cannot be perfectly enforced in
international transactions is of crucial importance for understanding the emergence of product
cycles. In order to illustrate this, consider the case in which the quality of intermediate inputs
were verifiable by an outside court even in international transactions, so that the manager of
the research center and that of the Southern manufacturing plant could also write enforceable
contracts. It is straightforward to check that, in such case, profits for the research center
³¡ ¢
´−α/(1−α)
1−z ¡ S ¢z
/α
. Comparing this expression with
would be πS (z) = (1 − α) λ wN
w

equation (3), it follows that labor demand in the South would be positive if and only if ω ≥ 1

(this is the analog of Condition 1 above). If ω > 1, profits would satisfy πN (z) ≤ πS (z) for all

z ∈ [0, 1], with strict inequality for z > 0. The production process would therefore be broken
up from time 0 and no product cycles would arise. If instead ω = 1, profits would satisfy
πN (z) = π S (z) for all z ∈ [0, 1] and the location of manufacturing would be indeterminate,
in which case product cycles would emerge with probability zero.
Arguably, incomplete contracting is just one of several potential frictions that would make
manufacturing stay in the North for a period of time. It is important to emphasize, however,
that not any type of friction would give rise to product cycles in the model. The fact that
incomplete contracts distorts both the manufacturing stage and the product development
stage in production is of crucial importance. For instance, introducing a transport cost or
a communication cost that created ineﬃciencies only in the provision of the low-tech input
would not suﬃce to give rise to product cycles in the model. In this paper, I choose to
emphasize the role of incomplete contracts because they are an important source of frictions in
the real world and, also, because they are a very useful theoretical tool for understanding firm
boundaries, which are the focus of section 4 below. In particular, the type of organizational
cycles unveiled by the empirical literature on the product cycle could not be easily rationalized
in theoretical frameworks in which production transfer to low-wage countries was delayed
merely by transport costs or communication costs.18
first be located in middle-income countries for a period of time. An important point to notice is that in doing
the comparative statics with respect to ω, I have held the contracting environment constant. Recent empirical
studies suggest that countries with better legal systems grow faster (Mauro, 1995, Knack and Keefer, 1995)
and have higher per-capita income (Hall and Jones, 1999, Acemoglu et al. 2001). If I allowed for this type of
correlation in the model, production might not be transferred earlier, the higher ω.
18
To illustrate this point, consider the case in which the Northern productivity advantage in product development is bounded and the production process cannot be fragmented across borders (e.g., because of prohibitive
transport costs or communication costs). Under these circumstances, the whole production process would
shift from the North to the South at some point along the life-cycle of the good, but the model would deliver
no predictions for the dynamic organizational structure of firms.

14

3

Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle in General
Equilibrium

In this section, the partial-equilibrium model developed above is embedded in a dynamic,
general-equilibrium framework with varieties in diﬀerent sectors standardizing at diﬀerent
rates. I will first solve for the time-path of the relative wage in the two countries and show
that the equilibrium wage in the North is necessarily higher than that in the South. Next,
I will study some macroeconomic and welfare implications of this new view of the product
cycle.

3.1

Set-up

Consider again a world with two countries, the North and the South. The North is endowed
with LN units of labor at any time t ∈ (0, ∞), while the Southern endowment is also constant

and equal to LS . At each period t, there is a measure N(t) of industries indexed by j, each
producing an endogenously determined measure nj (t) of diﬀerentiated goods. I consider an
economy in which exogenous inventions continuously increase the stock of existing industries.
In particular, I let Ṅ(t) = gN(t) and N (0) = N0 > 0. Hence, in any period t there are
N(t) = N0 egt industries producing varieties of final goods. Preferences of the infinitely-lived
representative consumer in each country are given by:
U=

Z

0

∞

e−ρt

Z

0

N(t)

log

ÃZ

nj (t)

!1/α

yj (i, t)α di

0

djdt,

(6)

where ρ is the rate at which the consumer discounts future utility streams. Notice that all
industries are viewed as symmetric with a unitary elasticity of substitution between them.
The varieties of diﬀerentiated goods also enter symmetrically into (6), but with an elasticity
of substitution equal to 1/(1 − α) > 1. Because the economy has no means of saving and
preferences are time-separable, the consumer maximizes utility period by period and the
discount rate plays no role in the model (other than to make the problem bounded).19 As is
well known, the instantaneous utility function in (6) gives rise to a constant price-elasticity
of demand for any variety i in any industry j:
yj (i, t) = λj (t)pj (i, t)−1/(1−α) ,
19

(7)

For simplicity, equation (6) assumes an infinite intertemporal elasticity of substitution in aggregate consumption. Because of the static nature of the consumer’s problem, this is an immaterial assumption and the
exact same results would apply for any well-behaved instantaneous utility function.

15

where
λj (t) =

1
E (t)
R nj (t)
N(t)
pj (i0 , t)−α/(1−α) di0

(8)

0

and E (t) is total world spending in period t. Because firms take λj (t) as given, each producer
of a final-good variety faces a demand function analogous to that in equation (1) in the
partial-equilibrium model above.
At each point in time, production of each final-good variety is also as described in section
2, with the additional assumption that, at every period t, production of each variety also
requires a fixed cost of f units of labor in the country where the hi-tech input is produced (i.e.,
the North). It is assumed that all producers in a given industry share the same technology as
specified in (2), with a common time-varying elasticity zj (t−t0j ), where t0j is the date at which
industry j was born. As before, I assume zj0 (·) > 0, zj (t0j ) = 0, and limt−t0j →∞ zj (t−t0j ) = 1.
In words, varieties in a given industry j are produced for the first time at t0j using only the
hi-tech input, and then all standardize at a common rate. Notice that industries may vary
not only in their birth dates, but also in the shape of their specific zj (·) functions. To isolate
the eﬀect of cross-industry diﬀerences in maturity and in standardization rates, I assume that
the technology for producing intermediate inputs, as well as fixed costs, are identical across
industries and varieties.
Firm structure is as described above, with the additional assumption that there is free
entry at every period t, so that the measure nj (t) of varieties in each industry always adjusts
so as to make research centers break even. The lack of profits in equilibrium is implied by
the fact that technology is a function of the industry’s age and not of the age of the producer
of a particular variety. Furthermore, as in section 2.4, I assume that firm structure is such
that when Southern procurement is chosen, the game played by the two managers can be
treated as a static one and we can abstract from an analysis of reputational equilibria. The
contracting environment is also analogous to that of the partial-equilibrium model and, in
particular, the parameter φ is time-invariant and common for all varieties and industries.
These assumptions, coupled with the absence of means of saving in the model, permit a
period-by-period analysis of the dynamic, general-equilibrium model.

3.2

Industry Equilibrium

Consider now the industry equilibrium in any period t ∈ [0, ∞). The unit elasticity of
substitution between varieties in diﬀerent industries implies that we can analyze firm behavior

16

in each industry independently. Consider then any industry j. Facing the same technology
and contracting environment, all producers in the same industry will necessarily set the same
price and therefore will earn the same profits. It follows that letting again z̄ (t) ≡ A−1 (ω (t)),
the low-tech input will be produced in the North if zj (t − t0j ) < z̄ (t), and in the South if
zj (t − t0j ) > z̄ (t), with the choice remaining indeterminate for zj (t − t0j ) = z̄ (t).
In order to characterize the industry equilibrium, notice first that because all firms in
a given industry j charge an identical optimal price p(zj (·)), the implied value of λj (t) in
equation (8) is easily computed. The equilibrium number of varieties produced in industry j
at time t can be solved for by plugging the value of λj (t) in the profit functions (3) and (4),
and setting operating profits equal to fixed costs, as dictated by free entry. This yields
 (1−α)E(t)

if zj (t − t0j ) < z̄ (t)
 N(t)wN (t)f
nj (t) =
.

 (1−α(φ(1−zj (t−t0j ))+(1−φ)zj (t−t0j )))E(t)
if zj (t − t0j ) > z̄ (t)
N(t)wN (t)f

(9)

Naturally, the equilibrium number of varieties in industry j depends positively on total spending in the industry and negatively on fixed costs.

3.3

General Equilibrium

Having described the equilibrium for a particular industry at time t, we can now move to the
general equilibrium, in which income equals spending
wN (t)LN + wS (t)LS = E(t)

(10)

and the labor market clears in each country. By Walras’ law, we can focus on the equilibrium in the labor market in the South. Southern labor will only be demanded by those
manufacturing plants belonging to an industry with zj (t − t0j ) > z̄ (t). It is straightforward
to show that labor demand by each manufacturing plant in the South can be expressed as
¡
¢
LSl = α (1 − φ) zj (·) E(t)/ wS (t) N(t)nj (t) . Denoting by Fz,t (z) the fraction of industries
with zj (t − t0j ) < z̄ (t) at time t and letting fz,t (z) be the corresponding probability density

function, the Southern labor-market clearing condition can be expressed as:
Z 1
α (1 − φ) zE(t)fz,t (z)dz = wS (t)LS .

(11)

z̄(t)

Defining ξ t (a, b) ≡

Rb
a

zfz,t (z)dz and using (10), equation (11) can be rewritten as follows:
ω (t) = Bt (z̄ (t)) ≡

1 − α (1 − φ) ξ t (z̄ (t) , 1) LS
.
α (1 − φ) ξ t (z̄ (t) , 1) LN
17

(12)

Figure 3: General Equilibrium
ω

g ; θµ ; LS/LN

A(z)

B’(z)

B(z)

ω’
ω

0

z'

z

1

z

Bt (z̄ (t)) is an increasing function of z̄ (t) satisfying Bt (0) > 0 and limz̄(t)→1 Bt (z̄ (t)) = +∞.
Intuitively, the higher is z̄ (t), the lower is labor demand in the South for a given ω (t), so an
increase in ω (t) is necessary to bring the Southern labor market back to equilibrium. When
z̄ (t) goes to 1, labor demand in the South goes to 0, and the required relative wage goes to
+∞. On the other hand, since the North always produces the hi-tech input, even when z̄ (t)
goes to 0, labor demand in the North is positive and hence Bt (0) is greater than 0. Figure 3
depicts the curve Bt (·) in the (z, ω) space.
The other equilibrium condition that pins down z̄ (t) and ω (t) comes from the partial
equilibrium. In particular, since α and φ are common across industries, z̄ (t) is also implicitly
defined by the equal profitability condition ω (t) = A(z̄ (t)), where A(·) is defined in equation (5). As discussed above, under Assumption 1, A(z̄ (t)) is a decreasing function of z̄ (t)
satisfying limz̄(t)→0 A(z̄ (t)) = +∞ and A(1) > 1. The function A(·) is depicted in Figure
3 together with the function Bt (·). It is apparent from Figure 3 that there exists a unique
equilibrium pair (z̄ (t) , ω (t)) at each period t ∈ [0, ∞). Furthermore, the fact that A(1) is
greater than 1, ensures that the equilibrium wage in the North is higher than that in the
South, i.e., ω (t) > 1.
The general equilibrium of the dynamic model is simply the sequence of period-by-period
general equilibria. Moreover, if the distribution function Fz,t (z) is (or converges to) a time-

18

invariant distribution, the steady-state equilibrium values for z̄ (t) and ω (t) will also be
time-invariant. In such case, all industries will necessarily follow product cycles, with varieties
being manufactured first in the North and later in the South.20 It is interesting to notice
that in spite of the rich heterogeneity in industry product-cycle dynamics, the cross-sectional
picture that emerges from the model is very similar to that in the classical Ricardian model
with a continuum of goods of Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson (1977). In contrast to
their model, however, comparative advantage arises here from a combination of the Northern
productivity advantage in product development, the continuous standardization of goods,
and the fact that contracts are incomplete.
To illustrate the properties of the general equilibrium, consider again the particular functional form:
zj (t, t0j ) = 1 − e−(t−t0j )/θj ,

(13)

so that the elasticity of output with respect to xh falls at a constant rate 1/θ j . As before, I
will refer to 1/θ j as industry j’s specific rate of standardization. From the discussion in section 2.4, and given that the threshold z̄ (t) is common across all industries, the model predicts
that industries with higher rates of standardization will transfer manufacturing to the South
earlier. Furthermore, in the general equilibrium, the cross-industry distribution of standardization rates will have an additional eﬀect on the timing of production transfer, through its
impact on the world distribution of product-development intensities, as given by Fz,t (z). To
see this, assume that θj is independent from t0j and is exponentially distributed with mean θµ ,
i.e., Fθ (θ j ) = 1−e−θj /θµ . Notice that since N(t) grows at the constant rate g, the distribution
of birth dates in the economy converges to the c.d.f. Ft0 (t0 , t) ≡ N (t0 ) /N(t) = e−g(t−t0 ) .
Under these assumptions, Appendix A.2 shows that Fz,t (z) converges to a time-invariant
distribution function characterized by:
gθµ ln
Fz (z) =

³

1 + gθµ ln

1
1−z

³

´

1
1−z

´.

(14)

Computing the corresponding density function, ξ t (a, b) can be shown to converge to
ξ (a, b) ≡

Z

a

b

zfz (z)dz =

Z

a

b

³

1 + gθµ ln

zgθµ
´´2
³
1
1−z

dz.

(15)

(1 − z)

20
In fact, a much weaker assumption is needed for product cycles to emerge, namely, that the growth rate
of z(t) be lower than that of zj (t − t0j ) for all industries j.

19

In light of equations (12) and (15), the economy converges to a steady state in which the
Bt (z̄ (t)) curve is time-invariant and increasing in z̄ (t). In such a steady state, the general
equilibrium values of z̄ and ω are both unique and time-invariant.

3.4

Comparative Statics

Consider first an increase in the relative size of the South, i.e., an increase in LS /LN (see
Figure 3). As in Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson (1977), this shifts the B(·) curve up and
to the left leading to an increase in the relative wage in the North and a fall in z̄, which in
turn implies that all industries will shift manufacturing to the South at an earlier phase of
their life cycle. The intuition behind this result is as follows. At the initial relative wage,
the increase in the Southern relative labor creates an excess supply of labor in the South and
excess demand for labor in the North. An increase in ω and a fall in the measure of hi-tech
intensities for which manufacturing is done in the North are necessary to restore equilibrium.
With the particular functional form in equation (13), an increase in the exogenous rate of
invention (g) or a fall in the average rate of standardization (1/θµ ) also shift the B(·) curve
up and to the left and thus have completely analogous eﬀects on the equilibrium values of ω
and z̄.21 As it is apparent from equation (14), increases in g or θµ tend to transfer probability
mass from high z’s to low z’s, thus creating again an excess supply of labor in the South at
the initial ω and z̄. In sum,
Proposition 2 Holding θj and t0j constant, the relative wage in the North is higher and the
shift to Southern manufacturing occur earlier: (i) the higher the rate of invention g, (ii) the
lower the average rate of standardization 1/θµ , (iii) the larger the relative population size of
the South LS /LN .
The comparative statics on the relative wage are related to those obtained by Krugman
(1979) in the first paper to explore the macroeconomic implications of the product cycle
hypothesis. Krugman (1979) developed a simple model with two types of goods: new goods
and old goods. In his model, exogenous innovation adds to the stock of new goods which,
by assumption, can only be produced in the North. New goods become old goods at an
exogenous “imitation” rate, at which point they start being manufactured in the low-wage
South. As in Proposition 2 above, in his model too an increase in the rate at which new
goods appear in the North or an increase in the relative size of the South lead to an increase
21

In Appendix A.2, I show that both ∂ξ (·) /∂g < 0 and ∂ξ (·) /∂θµ < 0.

20

in the relative wage in the North. Krugman (1979) concluded from his comparative static
results that increased technological change in the North redistributed income from the South
to the North. Proposition 2 demonstrates that the validity of this claim depends very much
on the assumption that technological change takes the form of adding new products to the
economy. If instead it takes the form of an increase in the rate at which goods standardize
(an increase in 1/θµ in the model) the converse result applies.
By endogenizing the timing of technology transfer, the present model delivers additional
implications of a shift in the parameters g and θµ . For instance, an increase in the rate
of invention also leads to a reduction in the time it takes for manufacturing of a particular
good to be shifted to the South, which in Krugman’s (1979) model depends only on the
exogenous rate of imitation. Furthermore, in light of Proposition 2, the industry-specific
and the average rates of standardization have opposite eﬀects on the timing of technology
transfer. Although, the manufacturing of those goods that become standardized relatively
faster will be transferred to the South relatively earlier, the model predicts that for a given
θj , an increase in the average rate of standardization will in fact slow down the transfer of
production in industry j.22

3.5

Welfare: Comparison with the Case of Complete Contracts

As in section 2, the incompleteness of contracts governing international transactions is crucial
for the existence of product cycles. If contracts could be perfectly enforced in international
transactions, Northern and Southern assembly would be equally profitable if and only wages
were equal in both countries, from which it follows that the A(·) curve would become a step
function with a flat segment at ω = 1 for z ∈ (0, 1). Solving for Southern labor demand under
complete contracts, the analogous of the B(·) curve would be given by BC (z̄) =

1−αξ t (z̄,1) LS
αξ t (z̄,1) LN .

Relative to a world with incomplete contracts, the introduction of complete contracts would
shift the B(z̄) down and to the right (since α(1 − φ) < 1). The general equilibrium under
complete contracts would be as follows. If BC (0) > 1, then ω > 1 and assembly would always
be done in the South. As before, production transfer would occur instantly and no product
22

This result may help shed light on the evidence of a fall in the interval of time between the introduction
of a new product in the United States and its first production in a foreign location (c.f., Vernon, 1979). The
partial equilibrium model would suggest a simple explanation for this pattern: the technologies transferred in
the recent past (e.g., computer parts) get standardized much faster than those transferred in the 1950s and
1960s (e.g. television sets). Nevertheless, Proposition 2 indicates that an average decline in the transfer of
technologies does not necessarily follow from an average increase in the speed of standardization. Moreover,
Proposition 2 suggests two alternatives for explaining this fact: an increase in the rate of invention or an
increase in the relative population size of the South.

21

cycles would emerge. If instead BC (0) < 1, wages would be equalized and the location of
production of low-tech inputs would be indeterminate.23 Clearly, in such case product cycles
would emerge again with probability zero.
Consider next the welfare implications for each country of a shift from a steady-state
equilibrium with incomplete contracts to a steady-state equilibrium with complete contracts.
It is useful to decompose the welfare change into three items: (a) terms of trade, (b) production eﬃciency, and (c) available products. The terms of trade eﬀect relates to the fact that
such a move towards complete contracts necessarily depresses the relative wage in the North.
Intuitively, Northern wages include a rent on its comparative advantage stemming from incomplete contracting. In a world of complete contracts, this rent disappears and the relative
wage in the North is lower.24 Second, the shift to complete contracts improves production
eﬃciency on two accounts. On the one hand, it eliminates the direct distortions coming
from incomplete contracting (e.g., inflation of mark-ups). On the other hand, there is also a
production composition eﬀect that relates to the fact that complete contracts lead to a shift
of production towards the lower-wage country. The third eﬀect relates to the endogenously
determined measure of varieties in each industry. Preferences of the representative consumer
feature a love for variety, implying that welfare is increasing in this measure. Because fixed
costs of production are in terms of Northern labor, the lower relative wage under complete
contracts is associated with a higher measure of varieties available to consumers.
It follows that on account of all three eﬀects, the South is better oﬀ under complete
contract, while the North also benefits from the second and third eﬀects, but loses from the
first. The details are worked out in Appendix A.3, where it is proven that:
Proposition 3 Relative to a world with incomplete contracting, a shift to complete contracts
unambiguously increases welfare in the South, while having an ambiguous eﬀect on welfare in
the North.
Proof. See Appendix A.3.
If we relate the shift towards better enforcement of international contracts to a tightening
23

Labor market clearing in the South
only require
set of industries Z ⊂ [0, 1] that choose to
# that the
! would
"
"
manufacture in the South satisfy LS 1 − z∈Z zfz,t (z)dz = LN z∈Z zfz,t (z)dz.

24
The terms of trade move in favor of the South for an additional reason which is related to the assumption
that fixed costs are incurred in the North. In the model, incomplete contracts shift rents from the variable
to the fixed cost sector, i.e., from the South to the North. A move to complete contracting eliminates this
rent-shifting eﬀect thereby reducing the relative wage in the North. Graphically, this corresponds to the B(·)
curve shifting down and to the right.

22

of intellectual property rights (IPRs) in the South, Proposition 3 contrasts with the results
in Helpman (1993).25 Helpman analyzed the welfare implications of a shift to better enforcement of IPRs in models with both exogenous and endogenous innovation and imitation,
and concluded that such type of policies would unambiguously decrease welfare in the lowwage South, with the eﬀect on Northern welfare being, in general, ambiguous. Our diﬀerent
conclusions stem from our diﬀerent modeling of the vehicle of production transfer.26 When
the South gains market share by imitating Northern technologies, a tightening of IPRs will
naturally hinder production transfer, reduce labor demand in the South, and make the South
worse oﬀ. If production transfer is instead driven by voluntary decisions of Northern firms
choosing to transact with oﬀshore independent subcontractors or licensees, then a tightening of IPRs, to the extent that it alleviates contractual distortions in those international
transactions, will increase relative labor demand in the South and improve welfare there.

4

Firm Boundaries and the Product Cycle

This paper has so far focused on developing a new theory of the product cycle based on the
existence of incomplete contracting, and on analyzing its macroeconomic implications. The
recent literature on the theory of the firm has shown that incomplete contracts are also a
useful tool for understanding the determinants of ownership structure. In this section, I will
build on this literature to draw firm boundaries in a simple extension of the model. From
the analysis will emerge a much richer version of the product cycle, with implications for
the choice between intrafirm and arm’s length production transfer along the life cycle of a
product.

4.1

Set-up

The set-up of the model is the same as before with just one new feature. The research center
is now given the option of vertically integrating the manufacturing plant and becoming a
multinational firm. Following the property-rights approach of the theory of firm, vertical
integration has the benefit of strengthening the ex-post bargaining power of the integrating
25
Admittedly, in the set-up described in section 2.1, an improvement in the contracting environment is
more closely related to a tightening of trade-related intellectual property rights (TRIPS). Nevertheless, an
alternative set-up in which contract incompleteness originated from a weak legal system in the South would
yield similar results. In such a framework, the comparison between Proposition 3 and the results in Helpman
(1993) would be more transparent.
26
Lai (1998) makes a similar point in comparing the welfare implications of a tightening of IPRs in an
endogenous-growth model with both foreign direct investment and imitation as vehicles of technology transfer.

23

party (the research center), but the cost of reducing the ex-post bargaining power of the
integrated party (the manufacturing plant). In particular, by integrating the production of
the low-tech input, the manager of the manufacturing plant becomes an employee of the
research center manager. This implies that if the manufacturing plant manager refuses to
trade after the sunk costs have been incurred, the research center manager now has the option
of firing the overseas manager and seizing the amount of xl produced. As in Grossman and
Hart (1986), ownership is identified with the residual rights of control over certain assets. In
this case, the low-tech input plays the role of this asset.27 If there were no costs associated
with firing the manufacturing plant manager, there would be no surplus to bargain over after
production, and the manufacturing plant manager would ex-ante optimally set xl = 0 (which
of course would imply y = 0). In that case, integration would never be chosen. To make things
more interesting, I assume that firing the manufacturing plant manager results in a negative
productivity shock that leads to a loss of a fraction 1 − δ of final-good production. Under this

assumption, the surplus of the relationship remains positive even under integration.28 I take

the fact that δ is strictly less than one as given, but this assumption could be rationalized in
a richer framework. For reasons analogous to those that make Assumption 1 useful, I now
assume that:
Assumption 2: δ ≤

³

´
3/4−φ 1/α
.
1−φ

The rest of this section is structured as follows. I will first revisit the static, partialequilibrium model developed in section 2. Next, I will analyze the dynamics of the model
and discuss the implications of vertical integration for this new view of the product cycle.
Finally, I will solve for the general-equilibrium model with multinational firms.

4.2

Firm Behavior

In section 2.2, I computed ex-ante profits for the research center under two possible modes of
organization: (A) manufacturing by an independent plant in the North; and (B) manufacturing by an independent plant in the South. The possibility of vertical integration introduces
two additional options: manufacturing in the North by a vertically integrated plant and manufacturing in the South by a vertically integrated plant. Because contracts are assumed to
be perfectly enforceable in transactions involving two firms located in the same country, it is
27

See Antràs (2003) for a related set-up.
The fact that the fraction of final-good production lost is independent of z greatly simplifies the analysis,
but is not necesary for the qualitative results discussed below.
28

24

straightforward to show that the first of these new options yields ex-ante profits identical to
those in case (A). As is well known from the property-rights literature, in a world of complete contracts, ownership structure is both indeterminate and irrelevant. In contrast, when
Southern assembly is chosen, the assignment of residual rights is much more interesting.
C. Manufacturing by a Vertically-Integrated Plant in the South
Consider the problem faced by a research center and its integrated manufacturing plant
in the South. If both managers decide to make good-quality intermediate inputs and they
agree in the bargaining, the potential revenues from the sale of the final good are again
α(1−z) αz
xl .

R = λ1−α ζ αz xh

In contrast, if the parties fail to agree in the bargaining, the

product-development manager will fire the manufacturing plant manager, who will be left
with nothing. The research center will instead be able to sell an amount δy(i) of output,
which using equation (1) will translate into sale revenues of δα R. The quasi-rents of the
relationship are therefore given by (1 − δ α ) R. Generalized Nash bargaining leaves the research center with its default option plus a fraction φ of the quasi-rents. The manager of the
integrated manufacturing plant receives the remaining fraction 1 − φ of the quasi-rents. The
research center therefore sets xh to maximize φ̄R − wN xh , where
φ̄ = δ α + φ (1 − δ α ) > φ,
¡
¢
while the Southern manufacturing plant simultaneously chooses xl to maximize 1 − φ̄ R −
wS xl . Relative to case (B) in section 2, integration enhances the research center’s incentives

to invest (φ̄ > φ) but, at the same time, it reduces the manufacturing plant’s incentives
to invest. Combining the first-order conditions of these two programs yields the following
optimal price for the final good:
pSM

¡ N ¢1−z ¡ S ¢z
w
w
(z) =
¢z .
1−z ¡
1 − φ̄
αφ̄

Setting T so as to make the integrated manufacturing plant break even leads to the following
expression for the research center’s ex-ante profits:
¡
¡
¡
¢ ¢¢
πSM (z) = 1 − α φ̄ (1 − z) + 1 − φ̄ z λ

Ã ¡ ¢1−z ¡ ¢z !−α/(1−α)
wS
wN
,
¡
¢z
1−z
1 − φ̄
αφ̄

(16)

which is identical to (4) with φ̄ replacing φ, and where the subscript M reflects the fact that
the research center becomes a multinational firm under this arrangement.
25

The Equilibrium Choice Revisited
The product manager will now choose the manufacturing location and ownership structure
that maximize profits for a given z. Consider first the choice between Northern assembly and
Southern assembly by an independent firm. This was analyzed in section 2.3, where I showed
that under Assumption 1 and Condition 1, there exists a unique z̄ such that πN (z) > πS (z)
for z < z̄, and πN (z) < πS (z) for z > z̄. The cut-oﬀ level z̄ is implicitly defined by
z̄ = A−1 (ω), where A(z) is given in equation (5). Consider next the choice between Northern
assembly and Southern assembly by an integrated firm. Comparing equations (3) and (16),
it follows that πSM (z) ≥ πN (z) only if Ā(z) ≤ ω, where
Ā(z) =

Ã

1−α
¡
¡
¢ ¢
1 − α φ̄ (1 − z) + 1 − φ̄ z

!(1−α)/αz

−(1−z)/z

φ̄

1 − φ̄

.

(17)

Notice that Ā(z) is identical to A(z) with φ̄ replacing φ. Under Assumption 2, φ̄ is less
or equal to 3/4, and from the above discussion of the properties of A(z) it follows that
Ā0 (z) < 0 (see Appendix A.1). Furthermore, limz→0 Ā(z) = +∞, Ā(z) > 1 for all z ∈ [0, 1],
and if the relative wage is high enough (namely, Ā(1) < ω), there exists a unique cutoﬀ
z̄MN = Ā−1 (z) ∈ (0, 1) such that πN (z) > πSM (z) for z < z̄MN , and πN (z) < πSM (z) for

z > z̄MN .29 As with the comparison involving arm’s length production transfer, when the
low-tech input is not very important in production, the cost-saving benefit of producing it in

the South is outweighed by the costs of incomplete contracts, which distort the marginal cost
of production of both the hi-tech and the low-tech inputs. On the other hand, when very
little product development is needed for production, then lower wage in the South is relatively
more profit enhancing, and Southern manufacturing becomes more attractive. Crucial for
this result is the fact that, following Grossman and Hart (1986), and contrary to the older
transaction-cost literature, vertical integration does not eliminate the opportunistic behavior
at the heart of the hold-up problem. Ownership, however, crucially aﬀects the distribution
of ex-post surplus through its eﬀect on each party’s outside option, and this explains that z̄
and z̄MN are not identical.
Finally, we need to compare profits under Southern assembly by an independent firm with
those under Southern assembly by an integrated firm. Comparing equations (4) and (16), it
29

If instead Ā(1) > ω, then π N (z) > π S
M (z) for all z ∈ [0, 1] and vertical integration is never chosen in
equilibrium.

26

Figure 4: Underproduction and Ownership Structure
MV

xh
xh

MO

M*
A

*

R*
RV

B

xhV

RO

C

xhO

xlV

xlO

xl*

xl

follows that πSM (z) > πS (z) if and only if
α
¡
¡
¢ ¢ Ãµ ¶1−z µ
¶z ! 1−α
1 − α φ̄ (1 − z) + 1 − φ̄ z
φ̄
1 − φ̄
1 < Θ (z) ≡
1 − α (φ (1 − z) + (1 − φ) z)
φ
1−φ

(18)

The curve Θ (z) is a decreasing function of z, satisfying Θ (0) > 1 and Θ (1) < 1 (see Antràs,
2003, for a formal proof). This implies that there exists a unique cutoﬀ z̄MS = Θ−1 (1) such
that πSM (z) > πS (z) for z < z̄MS , and πSM (z) < πS (z) for z > z̄MS . The logic of this result
lies at the heart of Grossman and Hart’s (1986) seminal contribution. In a world of incomplete
contracts, ex-ante eﬃciency dictates that residual rights should be controlled by the party
undertaking a relatively more important investment in a relationship. If production of the
final good requires mostly product development (i.e., z is low), then the investment made by
the manufacturing plant manager will be relatively small, and thus it will be optimal to assign
the residual rights of control to the research center. Conversely, when the low-tech input is
important in production, the research center will optimally choose to tilt the bargaining
power in favor of the manufacturing plant by giving away these same residual rights.
Figure 4 illustrates this point by depicting the amounts of inputs produced under each
organizational mode, as well as those prevailing under complete contracts. The curves M ∗
and R∗ represent the reaction functions x∗h (xl ) and x∗l (xh ) under complete contracts, with
the corresponding equilibrium in point A. Similarly, B and C depict the incomplete-contract
equilibria corresponding to vertical integration and arm’s length transacting, respectively. It
27

is clear from the graph that incomplete contracting leads to underproduction of both xh and
xl . The crucial point to notice from Figure 4, however, is that because the manufacturing
plant has a relatively weaker bargaining power under integration, the underproduction in xl is
relatively higher under integration that under outsourcing. Furthermore, the more important
is the low-tech input in production, the more value-reducing will the underinvestment in xl be.
It thus follows that profits under integration relative to those under arm’s length transacting
will tend to be lower, the more important is the low-tech input in production (i.e., the higher
z).
So far I have only discussed the existence of the three cut-oﬀ levels: z̄, z̄MN , and z̄MS .
¡
¢αz/(1−z)
Notice, however, that Θ (z) = A(z)/Ā(z)
. This can be shown to imply that z̄, z̄MN ,

and z̄MS must satisfy one of the following: (i) z̄MS = z̄ = z̄MN , (ii) z̄MS < z̄ < z̄MN , or (iii)
z̄MN < z̄ < z̄MS .30 Figure 5 is instructive in understanding this result. The figure depicts the
curves A(z) and Ā(z), the latter being the thicker curve. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, both
A(z) and Ā(z) are decreasing in z. That these curves intersect just once is ensured by the
fact that A(z 0 ) = Ā(z 0 ) is only consistent with Θ (z 0 ) = 1, which necessarily implies z 0 = z̄MS .
Furthermore, it is easy to show that A(z) > Ā(z) for low enough z, while A(z) < Ā(z) for
high enough z.31 For any relative wage ω, it is clear that either z̄MS < z̄ < z̄MN (left panel)
or z̄MN < z̄ < z̄MS (right panel). The case z̄MS = z̄ = z̄MN occurs with probability zero and
will be ignored hereafter.
As indicated in both panels in Figure 5, for a low enough value for z, the benefits from
Southern assembly are too low relative to the distortions from incomplete contracting, and xl
is produced in the North. Furthermore, for a suﬃciently high value of z, a profit-maximizing
research center will decide to outsource the manufacturing input to an independent manufacturing plant in the South. Whether for intermediate values of z the research center becomes
a multinational firm or not depends on parameter values. If z̄MS < z̄ < z̄MN , then there
©
ª
exists no z ∈ [0, 1] for which πSM > max πN , πS , and multinational firms do not arise in

equilibrium. Conversely, if z̄MN < z̄ < z̄MS , multinational firms can arise provided that
z ∈ [z̄MN , z̄MS ]. To summarize the results of this section,

Lemma 2 If z̄MS < min {z̄, z̄MN }, the research center chooses to produce the low-tech input
30

To see this, notice for instance that z M S < z if and only if both A (z M S ) > ω and Θ(z) < 1. But the
latter can only be true if A(z)/Ā(z) = ω/Ā(z) < 1, which implies z < z M N .
31
Notice the similarities between the curves A(z) and Ā(z), and the comparative static exercise of increasing
φ at the end of section 2.3.

28

Figure 5: Partial Equilibrium and Firm Boundaries
(b) An equilibrium with multinationals

(a) An equilibrium without multinationals

xl produced in South
by subsidiary

xl produced
in North

xl produced in the South by unaffiliated

xl produced in the North

A(z)

A(z)

xl produced in South
by unaffiliated

A(z)

A (z)

ω

ω

0

zMS

z

zMN

1

z

0

zMN

z

zMS

1

z

in the North for z < z̄, and in the South by an unaﬃliated party for z > z̄. On the other
hand, if z̄MS > min {z̄, z̄MN }, the low-tech input is produced in the North for z < z̄MN , in
the South by an aﬃliated party if z̄MN < z < z̄MS , and in the South by an unaﬃliated
party if z̄ > z̄MS .
An equilibrium with multinational firms is more likely the higher is z̄MS relative to the
other two thresholds z̄ and z̄MN . In section 2.3, I showed that z̄ is a decreasing function
of the relative wage ω. By way of implicit diﬀerentiation, and making use of the fact that
Ā0 (z) < 0, it follows that z̄MN is also decreasing in ω. The choice between an independent and
an integrated Southern supplier, as captured by the threshold z̄MS is instead unaﬀected by the
relative wage in the North.32 From this it follows that the measure of product-development
intensities for which multinationals exist, i.e., min {z̄MS − z̄MN , 0}, is non-decreasing in the
relative wage ω in the North.

4.3

Dynamics: The Product Cycle

Consider a dynamic set-up analogous to that in section 2.4. As before, assume that the
output elasticity of the low-tech input evolves according to z(t) = h (t), with h0 (t) > 0,
32

This follows directly from the assumption of Cobb-Douglas technology and isolates the partial-equilibrium
decision to integrate or outsource from any potential general-equilibrium feedbacks. This implied blockrecursiveness is a useful property for solving the model sequentially, but the main results should be robust to
more general specifications for technology.

29

h (0) = 0, and limt→∞ h(t) = 1. The parameters φ, α, ω, and δ are instead assumed to be
time-invariant, implying that z̄, z̄MN , and z̄MS are also constant through time. The following
is a straightforward corollary of Lemma 2:
Proposition 4 The model displays a product cycle. If z̄MS < min {z̄, z̄MN }, the product
cycle is as described in Proposition 1. If instead z̄MS > min {z̄, z̄MN }, the following product

cycle emerges. When the good is relatively new or unstandardized, i.e., t < h−1 (z̄MN ), the
manufacturing stage of production takes place in the North. For an intermediate maturity of
the good, h−1 (z̄MN ) < t < h−1 (z̄MS ), manufacturing is shifted to the South but is undertaken within firm boundaries. When the good is relatively standardized, i.e., t > h−1 (z̄MS ),
production is shifted to an unaﬃliated party in the South.

This is one of the crucial results of this paper. In words, it states that if the threshold
maturity level min {z̄, z̄MN } at which manufacturing is shifted to the South is high enough,
the transfer of production will occur at arm’s length and multinationals will not emerge in
equilibrium. Conversely, if this threshold maturity level is low enough, manufacturing will
be shifted to the South within the boundaries of the Northern firm by establishing a whollyowned foreign aﬃliate. In that case, arm’s length assembly in the South will only be observed
at a later stage in the life cycle of the good.
The model is consistent with the evolution of the Korean electronics industry from the
early 1960s to the late 1980s.33 In the early 1960s, Korean electronic firms were producing
mostly low-quality consumer electronics for their domestic market. The industry took oﬀ
in the late 1960s with the establishment of a few large U.S. assembly plants, almost all
wholly owned, followed in the early 1970s by substantial Japanese investments. These foreign
subsidiaries tended to assemble components exclusively for export using imported parts.34
In this initial phase, foreign aﬃliates were responsible for 71% of exports in electronics, with
the percentage reaching 97% for the case of exports of integrated circuits and transistors, and
100% for memory planes and magnetic heads. In the 1970s and 1980s domestic Korean firms
progressively gained a much larger market share, but the strengthening of domestic electronic
companies was accompanied by a considerable expansion of technology licensing from foreign
firms. Indeed, as late as 1988, 60% of Korean electronic exports were recorded as part of an
33

The following discussion is based on Bloom (1992), UNCTAD (1995, pp. 251-253), and Cyhn (2002).
Motorola established a production plant in Korea in 1968. Other U.S.-based multinationals establishing
subsidiaries in Korea during this period include Signetics, Fairchild and Control Data.
34

30

Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) transaction.35 The percentage approached 100%
in the case of exports of computer terminals and telecommunications equipment. Korean
giants such as Samsung or Goldstar were heavily dependent on foreign licenses and OEM
agreements even up to the late 1980s.36
At a more micro level, several cross-sectional implications of the model are consistent with
the findings of the empirical literature on the product cycle. Mansfield and Romeo (1980)
analyzed 65 technology transfers by 31 U.S.-based firms in a variety of industries. They
found that, on average, U.S.-based firms tended to transfer technologies internally to their
subsidiaries within 6 years of their introduction in the United States. The average lag for
technologies that were transferred through licensing or through a joint venture was instead
13 years.37 Similarly, after surveying R&D executives of 30 U.S.—based multinational firms,
Mansfield, Romeo, and Wagner (1979) concluded that for young technologies (less than 5
years old), internal technology transfer tended to be preferred to licensing, whereas for more
mature technologies (between 5 and 10 years), licensing became a much more attractive
choice.
In much more detailed studies, Davidson and McFetridge (1984, 1985) looked at 1,376
internal and arm’s-length transactions involving high-technology products carried out by 32
US.-based multinational enterprises between 1945 and 1975. Their logit estimates indicated
that the probability of internalization was higher: (i) the newer and more radical was a
technology; (ii) the fewer was the number of previous transfers of the same technology; and
(iii) the larger was the fraction of the transferor’s resources devoted to scientific R&D.
t

Considering again the specific functional form z(t) = 1 − e− θ , another cross-sectional
implication of the model is that an increase in the rate of standardization 1/ θ anticipates
the shift of production towards the South but (weakly) reduces the length of time that the
good is produced by a wholly-owned aﬃliate in the South. Using a sample of 350 US firms,
Wilson (1977) indeed concluded that licensing was more attractive the less complex was the
good involved, with his measure of complexity being positively correlated with the amount of
35

OEM is a form of subcontracting which as Cyhn’s (2002) writes “occurs when a company arranges for an
item to be produced with its logo or brand name on it, even though that company is not the producer”.
36
There is also some evidence that Northern firms did not license their leading edge technologies to their
Korean licensees. For instance, in 1986, Hitachi licensed to Goldstar the technology to produce the 1-megabyte
Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM) chip, when at the same time it was shifting to the 4-megabyte
DRAM chip. Similarly, Phillips licensed the production of compact disk players to ten Korean producers,
while keeping within firm boundaries the assembly of their deck mechanisms.
37
Their sample consisted of 39 internal transfer and 26 arm’s length transfers.

31

R&D undertaken for its production. In their study of the transfer of 35 Swedish innovations,
Kogut and Zander (1993) similarly found that the probability of internalization was lower
the more codifiable and teachable and the less complex was the technology.
As mentioned at the end section 4.2, the model also implies that an increase in ω not
only makes the shift to Southern production earlier (as in section 2.4), but also increases
the probability that this transfer will occur within firm boundaries. This is also consistent
with the cross-sectional results of at least two contributions to the empirical literature on
the product cycle. In their sample of 1,376 transfers, Davidson and McFetridge (1985) found
that controlling for several characteristics of the recipient country, a higher GNP per capita
of the recipient country (in the model a lower ω) was associated with a lower probability
of internalization. Using aggregate industry data from the U.S. Department of Commerce,
Contractor (1984) found similar results.

4.4

General Equilibrium

In this section, I will adopt again the general-equilibrium framework in section 3 and solve for
the equilibrium relative wage in the presence of multinational firms. By doing so, we can study
the eﬀect of some additional factors on the choice between foreign direct investment and arm’s
length arrangements, as well as the welfare implications of the emergence of multinational
firms.
Because the analysis closely parallels that in section 3, the details of the derivations are
relegated to Appendix A.4. In order to solve for the equilibrium relative wage, it is useful
to define ze(t) = min {z̄MN (t), z̄(t)}, which according to Lemma 2 constitutes the threshold

z above which production is shifted to the South regardless of ownership structure. This is

the only variable apart from ω (t) that we need to pin down in the general equilibrium. This

is because z̄MS does not depend on ω (t) and because the threshold z̄MN (t) is only relevant
when z̄MN (t) < z̄(t), in which case ze(t) = z̄MN (t) and z̄(t) is irrelevant.

Computing labor demand by Southern manufacturing plants and imposing labor market

clearing in the South yields the following equilibrium condition relating ω and ze analogous
to equation (12) (see Appendix A.4):

1−α(1−φ̄)ξ(!
z,z̄MS )−α(1−φ)ξ(z̄MS ,1) LS


 α(1−φ̄)ξ(!z ,z̄M S )+α(1−φ)ξ(z̄MS ,1) LN
ω = BM (e
z) ≡


 1−α(1−φ)ξ(!z,1) LS
α(1−φ)ξ(!
z,1) LN

if ze < z̄MS
if ze > z̄MS

.

(19)

To save on notation, the distribution function Fz,t (z) is assumed to converge to a time32

Figure 6: General Equilibrium and Firm Boundaries
(b) A general equilibrium with multinationals

(a) A general equilibrium without multinationals

ω

ω

A(z)

BM(z)

A(z)

BM(z)

ω

ω

B(z)

AM(z)

AM(z)

B(z)

0

zMS ~z = z

1

z

0

~
z

z zMS

1

z

invariant distribution, so that we can focus on the steady-state general equilibrium and safely
drop time subscripts. Notice that if ze > z̄MS the equilibrium is one without multinationals

and the equilibrium condition naturally collapses back to the one in the previous model, i.e.,
z ) = B(e
z ). If instead ze < z̄MS , multinationals indeed arise in equilibrium. FurtherBM (e
more, from the standard logic in Grossman and Hart (1986), an integrated manufacturing

plant manager underinvests relatively more than a non-integrated one. Hence, for a given
z, Southern labor demand is relatively lower for vertically-integrated manufacturing plants,
implying that BM (e
z ) > B(e
z ) for ze < z̄MS . This is depicted in Figure 6, where for comparison
z ) is a continuous and inthe curve B(e
z ) is plotted as a dotted curve. Note also that BM (e

z ) = +∞.
creasing function of ze. Furthermore it satisfies BM (0) > B(0) > 0 and limz!→1 BM (e

As in section 3, the other equilibrium condition that pins down ze and ω comes from firm

behavior. In particular, because z̄ is implicitly defined by ω = A(z̄), and z̄MN is implicitly
defined by ω = Ā(z̄MN ), it follows that ze = min {z̄MN , z̄} is implicitly defined by:
ω = AM (e
z) ≡

 µ
¶(1−α)/α!z
−(1−!
z )/!
z

φ̄
1−α


 1−α(φ̄(1−!z )+(1−φ̄)z!)
1−φ̄

³




1−α
1−α(φ(1−!
z )+(1−φ)!
z)

´(1−α)/α!z

z)/!
z
φ−(1−!
1−φ

if ze < z̄MS

.

(20)

if ze > z̄MS

z ) = A(e
z ). On
Again, if ze > z̄MS , multinationals are not active in equilibrium and AM (e

z ) > 1, which in turn implies
the other hand, if ze < z̄MS , then it must be the case that Θ (e
33

AM (e
z ) = Ā(e
z ) < A(e
z ). Intuitively, research centers choose to vertically integrate the Southern manufacturing plant only when, by doing so, they manage to alleviate the distortions
stemming from incomplete contracting. It follows that in order to match the profitability of Northern assembly, an active integrated manufacturing plant in the South requires a
lower relative wage than an independent one. This is again depicted in Figure 6. Notice
that AM (e
z ) is continuous and, under Assumptions 1 and 2, decreasing in ze. Furthermore,
z ) = +∞ and AM (1) > 1.
limz!→0 AM (e

As illustrated in Figure 6, there exists a unique general-equilibrium (e
z , ω) pair. Depend-

ing on parameter values, the equilibrium is one without multinational firms (left panel) or
one with multinational firms (right panel). The equilibrium without multinational firms is
identical to that in section 3. As before, in the steady state, the general-equilibrium values of
ze and ω are time-invariant, and all industries necessarily follow product cycles, with varieties

in those industries first being manufactured in the North and later in the South. On top
of this endogenous product cycles, an equilibrium with multinational firms also features endogenous organizational cycles, with production being shifted to the South first within firm
boundaries and only later to independent firms in the South. Furthermore, an interesting
result follows from direct inspection of Figure 6:
Proposition 5 Relative to a world with only arm’s length transacting, allowing for intrafirm
production transfer by multinational firms weakly accelerates the transfer of production to the
South (lowers ze), while having an ambiguous eﬀect on the relative wage ω.

Intuitively, the introduction of multinational firms in a world with only arm’s length

transacting helps to alleviate the distortions generated by the incompleteness of contracts.
This is because the research center is now given the possibility to have the low-tech input
produced in the South, while facing a less severe hold-up problem in its production of the
hi-tech input. As a result, when multinationals arise in equilibrium, the threshold z above
which xl is produced in the South necessarily falls (e
z falls).38 On top of this eﬀect, there is
a general-equilibrium eﬀect. As discussed above, integrated manufacturing plants demand
relatively less Southern labor than nonintegrated plants. As a result, clearing of the Southern
labor market requires either an increase in the measure of z’s for which production is done
in the South (again a fall in ze) or a fall in the relative wage in the South (a higher ω). Both
38

Alternatively, for a given z$, the relative Northern wage above which xl is produced in the South necessarily
falls (remember that this is the reason why Ā($
z ) < A($
z ) to the left of z̄MS ).

34

the partial and general-equilibrium eﬀects work to reduce ze, while they have opposite eﬀects
on the equilibrium relative wage.

The result in Proposition 5 fits well Moran’s (2001) recent study of the eﬀects of domestic-

content, joint-venture, and technology-sharing mandates on production transfer to developing
countries. Plants in host countries that impose such restrictions, he writes, “utilize older technology, and suﬀer lags in the introduction of newer processes and products in comparison to
wholly owned subsidiaries without such requirements” (p. 32). He also describes an interesting case study. In 1998, Eastman Kodak agreed to set up joint ventures with three designated
Chinese partners. These joint ventures specialized in producing conventional films under the
Kodak name. When the Chinese government allowed Kodak to establish a parallel wholly
owned plant, Kodak shifted to this aﬃliate the manufacturing of the latest digitalized film
and camera products (Moran, 2001, p. 36).

4.5

Comparative Statics

Let us briefly return to the particular case analyzed before, so that ξ t (a, b) converges to
ξ (a, b) ≡

Z

b

zfz,t (z)dz =

a

Z

a

b

zgθµ
dz
³
´´2
³
1
1 + gθµ ln 1−z
(1 − z)

z ) curve up and to the left
As in section 3.4, an increase in g, θµ or LS /LN shifts the BM (e
(see Appendix A.2). This tends to increase the relative wage in the North and reduce ze,
so that production is shifted to the South earlier. Hence, introducing multinational firms

does not undermine the validity of the comparative static results in Proposition 2. More

interestingly, an increase in the rate of invention, a slowdown in the rate of standardization,
and an increase in the relative size of the South all tend to (weakly) increase the measure of
product-development intensities for which multinational firms exist. Intuitively, by creating
an excess supply of Northern labor, an increase in g, θ µ , and LS /LN , lead to an increase
in the relative wage and an increase in the threshold product-development intensity (1 − ze)
below which manufacturing is transferred to the South. From the standard Grossman-Hart

logic, it then becomes more likely that the Northern research center will decide to keep this
transfer within firm boundaries. In sum,
Proposition 6 The measure of product-development intensities for which multinationals exist, i.e., min {z̄MS − z̄MN , 0}, is non-decreasing in g, θµ , and LS /LN .
35

Several authors have identified a recent surge in foreign direct investment flows to less
developed countries (e.g., Feenstra, 1999). According to Proposition 6, this fact can be
explained by the same forces that would have led to a fall in the interval of time between
the introduction of a new product in the North and its first production in a less developed
country (see footnote 22).

4.6

Welfare

According to Proposition 5, a shift towards an equilibrium in which foreign direct investment
flows are positive accelerates the transfer of production to the South, while having an ambiguous eﬀect on relative wages. I now analyze the welfare implications of such a shift. To do
so, it is useful to decompose again the change in welfare into the following three components:
(a) terms of trade, (b) production eﬃciency, and (c) available products. The fact that the introduction of multinational firms has an ambiguous eﬀect on relative wages implies an equally
ambiguous welfare change on account of both the terms-of-trade and the available-products
components. In contrast, it is easy to show that the production eﬃciency eﬀect works to
increase welfare in both countries. On the one hand, multinationals will only be active to the
extent that they alleviate the distortions coming from incomplete contracting. On the other
hand, when active, multinationals lead to a shift of production to the lower-wage country.
In general, the net eﬀect on each country’s welfare is ambiguous, but the following result is
straightforward to prove by extending the analysis in Appendix A.3:
Proposition 7 Provided that its eﬀect on relative wages is small enough, allowing for intrafirm production transfer by multinational firms is welfare improving for both countries.
If the terms-of-trade and available-products eﬀects are negligible, only the production
eﬃciency is left, and the introduction of multinational firms has a net positive eﬀect on each
country’s welfare. This result provides some support for the view pushed by Moran (2001),
that the domestic-content, joint-venture, and technology-sharing requirements that certain
host countries impose on foreign firms have a negative net contribution to welfare.

5

Conclusions

This paper has presented a dynamic, general-equilibrium model featuring both endogenous
product cycles and endogenous organizational cycles. It has been argued that the same

36

forces that make firms choose to manufacture their new goods in high-wage countries can
explain why, when they decide to transfer production to low-wage countries, they might
choose to do so inside their firm boundaries. The model delivers a few macroeconomic
implications that complement the work of Krugman (1979). For instance, I have shown that
increased technological change in rich countries will widen the world distribution of income
only to the extent that technological change takes the form of an addition of new goods to
the economy. When technological change takes the form of a continuous standardization
of products, an acceleration of technological change will instead lead to a narrowing of the
world distribution of income. Furthermore, the model predicts that an improvement in
the contractual environment in international transactions would necessarily benefit low-wage
countries, with the net welfare eﬀect being in generally ambiguous for high-wage countries.
In contrast to previous general-equilibrium theories of the multinational firm, firm boundaries were not drawn appealing to technological considerations, such as economies of scale or
transport costs.39 As in Antràs (2003), I instead set forth a purely organizational, propertyrights model of the multinational firm.40 Multinational firms emerged in equilibrium whenever transaction-cost minimization dictated that certain goods would be transacted more
eﬃciently within firm boundaries than at arm’s length. Relative to a world with only arm’s
length transacting, I showed that multinational firms, by alleviating contract incompleteness,
anticipated the transfer of production to low-wage countries and, under certain conditions,
increased welfare in both rich and poor countries.
The simple model developed here has proven to be a useful lens through which to interpret several findings in the international business literature. Nevertheless, much remains to
be done. For instance, the present framework has abstracted from at least one important
channel of production transfer, namely, imitation. Future eﬀorts should also be directed
at incorporating elements of alternative theories of the firm to the study of international
patterns of specialization.

39
This previous literature builds on the seminal work of Helpman (1984) and Markusen (1984), and is
extensively reviewed in Caves (1996) and Markusen (1995). Ethier (1986), Ethier and Markusen (1996), and
Glass and Saggi (2002) study the choice between foreign direct investment and licensing, but in frameworks
in which the internalization decision is unrelated to the allocation of some residual rights of control.
40
This paper is related to an emerging literature on general-equilibrium models of ownership structure (c.f.,
McLaren, 2000, Grossman and Helpman, 2002a, Antràs, 2003). In Antràs (2003), I unveiled two systematic
patterns in the volume of intrafirm trade, which I then rationalized in a theoretical framework that combined
a Grossman-Hart-Moore view of the firm with a Helpman-Krugman view of international trade.

37

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91, pp.
1369-1401.
[2] Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont and Patrick Rey (1994), “Renegotiation Design with
Unverifiable Information,” Econometrica, 62:2, pp. 257-282.
[3] Antràs, Pol (2003), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” forthcoming Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
[4] Bloom, Martin (1992), Technological Change in the Korean Electronics Industry, Development
Center Studies, OECD, Paris.
[5] Caves, Richard E. (1996), Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Second Edition,
Cambridge University Press.
[6] Che, Yeon-Koo and Donald B. Hausch (1999), “Cooperative Investments and the Value of Contracting,” American Economic Review, 89:1, pp. 125-147.
[7] Contractor, Farok J. (1984), “Choosing between Direct Investment and Licensing: Theoretical
Considerations and Empirical Tests,” Journal of International Business Studies, 15:3, pp. 167188.
[8] Cyhn, J. W. (2002), Technology Transfer and International Production: the Development of the
Electronics Industry in Korea, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
[9] Davidson, W. H. and Donald G. McFetridge (1984), “International Technology Transactions and
the Theory of the Firm,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 32:3, pp. 253-264.
[10] Davidson, W. H. and Donald G. McFetridge (1985), “Key Characteristics in the Choice of International Technology Transfer Mode,” Journal of International Business Studies, 16:2, pp. 5-21.
[11] Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul A. Samuelson (1977), “Comparative Advantage,
Trade and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic
Review, 67:5, pp. 823-839.
[12] Ethier, Wilfred J. (1986), “The Multinational Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101:4, pp.
805-833.
[13] Ethier, Wilfred J. and James R. Markusen (1996), “Multinational Firms, Technology Diﬀusion
and Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 41:1, pp. 1-28.
[14] Feenstra, Robert C. (1998), “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the Global
Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12:4, 31-50
[15] Feenstra, Robert C. (1999), “Facts and Fallacies about Foreign Direct Investment,” in Martin
Feldstein, ed. International Capital Flows, University of Chicago Press and NBER, pp. 331-350.
[16] Glass, Amy J., and Kamal Saggi (2002), “Licensing versus Direct Investment: Implications for
Economic Growth”, Journal of International Economics, 56:1, pp. 131-153.
[17] Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94:4, pp. 691-719.
[18] Grossman Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (1991a), “Endogenous Product Cycles,” Economic
Journal, 101:4, pp. 1214-1229.
[19] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (1991b), “Quality Ladders and Product Cycles,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106:2, pp. 557-586.
[20] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (2002a), “Integration vs. Outsourcing in Industry
Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117:1, pp. 85-120.

38

[21] Gruber William, Dileep Mehta, and Raymond Vernon (1967), “The R & D Factor in International
Trade and International Investment of United States Industries,” Journal of Political Economy,
75:1, pp. 20-37.
[22] Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114:1, pp. 83-116.
[23] Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,” Journal of
Political Economy, 98:6, pp. 1119-1158.
[24] Helpman, Elhanan (1984), “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations”, Journal of Political Economy, 92:3, pp. 451-471.
[25] Helpman, Elhanan (1993), “Innovation, Imitation, and Intellectual Property Rights,” Econometrica, 61:6, pp. 1247-1280.
[26] Hirsch, Seev (1967), Location of Industry and International Competitiveness, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
[27] Jensen, Richard and Marie Thursby (1987), “A Decision Theoretic Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and Trade,” Review of Economic Studies, 54:4, pp. 631-647.
[28] Kogut, Bruce and Udo Zander (1993), “Knowledge of the Firm and the Evolutionary Theory of
the Multinational Corporation,” Journal of International Business Studies, 24:4, pp. 625-645.
[29] Knack, S., and P. Keefer (1995), “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country Tests
Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics and Politics 7:3, pp. 207-27.
[30] Krugman, Paul (1979), “A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World Distribution
of Income,” Journal of Political Economy, 87:2, pp. 253-266.
[31] Lai, Edwin L. -C. (1998), “International Intellectual Property Rights Protection and Rate of
Product Innovation,” Journal of Development Economics, 55:1, pp. 133-153.
[32] McLaren, John (2000), “Globalization and Vertical Structure,” American Economic Review, 90:5,
pp. 1239-1254.
[33] Mansfield, Edwin, and Anthony Romeo (1980), “Technology Transfer to Overseas Subsidiaries
by U.S.-Based Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95:4, pp. 737-750.
[34] Mansfield, Edwin, Anthony Romeo, and Samuel Wagner (1979), “Foreign Trade and U. S. Research and Development,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 61:1, pp. 49-57.
[35] Markusen, James R. (1984), “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade”
Journal of International Economics, 16, pp. 205-226.
[36] Markusen, James R. (1995), “The Boundaries of Multinational Enterprises and the Theory of
International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9:2, pp. 169-189.
[37] Mauro, Paolo (1995), “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110:3, pp.
681-712
[38] Moran, Theodore H. (2001), Parental Supervision: The New Paradigm for Foreign Direct Investment and Development, Washington DC: Institute for International Economics.
[39] Nöldeke, Georg and Klaus M. Schmidt (1995), “Option Contracts and Renegotiation: A Solution
to the Hold-up Problem,” RAND Journal of Economics, 26:2, pp. 163-179.
[40] Parry, Thomas G. (1975), “The Product Cycle and International Production: U.K. Pharmaceuticals,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 24:1, pp. 21-28.
[41] Segerstrom, Paul S., T. C. A. Anant, and Elias Dinopoulos (1990), “A Schumpeterian Model of
the Product Life Cycle,” American Economic Review, 80:5, pp. 1077-1091.

39

[42] UNCTAD (1995), World Investment Report: Transnational Corporations and Competitiveness,
New York: United Nations.
[43] Vernon, Raymond (1966), “International Investment and International Trade in the Product
Cycle,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80:2, pp. 190-207.
[44] Vernon, Raymond (1979), “The Product Cycle Hypothesis in a New International Environment,”
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 41, pp. 255-267.
[45] Vernon, Raymond and W. H. Davidson (1979), “Foreign Production of Technology-Intensive
Products by U.S.-Based Multinational Enterprises,” Working Paper No. 79-5, Harvard Graduate
School of Business Administration.
[46] Wells, Louis T. Jr. (1969), “Test of a Product Cycle Model of International Trade: U.S. Exports
of Consumer Durables,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 83:1, pp. 152-162.
[47] Williamson, Oliver E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, Free Press.
[48] Wilson, Robert W. (1977), “The Eﬀect of Technological Environment and Product Rivalry on
R&D Eﬀort and Licensing of Inventions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 59:2, pp. 171-178.

40

A

Appendix

A.1

Proof of Lemma 1

I will first show that under Assumption 1, A0 (z) < 0 for all z ∈ [0, 1].
Lemma 3 If φ ≤ 3/4, then A0 (z) < 0 for all z ∈ [0, 1].

Proof. Straightforward diﬀerentiation yields A0 (z) < 0 if and only if
µ
¶
1 − α (φ (1 − z) + (1 − φ) z) α/(1−α)
(2φ − 1) αz
φ
<0
r(z, φ, α) = ln
−
1−α
(1 − α (φ (1 − z) + (1 − φ) z))
It is easy to show that ∂r(·)/∂z ≥ 0 for all z ∈ [0, 1] (with strict inequality for z > 0), while more
cumbersome algebra also delivers ∂r(·)/∂φ ≥ 0 for all φ ∈ (0, 1). We hence need only show that
r(1, 3/4, α) < 0. But this is true because ∂r(1, 3/4, α)/∂α < 0 for α ∈ (0, 1) and r(1, 3/4, 0) = 0.
QED.41

Notice next that, as discussed in the main text, limz→0 A (z) = +∞ > ω, where in computing
the limit I make use of the fact that (1 − αx) xα/(1−α) is increasing in x for α ∈ (0, 1) and x ∈ (0, 1).
Finally, by Condition 1, there exists a zc ∈ [0, 1] such that A(zc ) < ω. Because A(z) is a continuous

function of z for z ∈ [0, 1], and, by Lemma 3, A0 (z) < 0, it follows that there is a unique z̄ such that
ω = A(z̄). Furthermore, for all z < z̄, A(z) > ω, and for all z > z̄, A(z) < ω. QED.

A.2

Algebra of the Particular Case

I will first show that the distribution of z converges to a c.d.f. characterized by equation (14). Note
that from equation (13), t0j = t + θj ln (1 − zj (t, t0j )). For a given θj , the fraction of industries with
zj (t − t0j ) < z converges to
Fz (z|θ j ) = 1 − Ft0 (t + θ j ln (1 − z) , t) = 1 − (1 − z)

gθ j

,

where I have used the fact that the distribution of birth dates converges to Ft0 (t0 , t) = e−g(t−t0 ) ,
as well as the fact that t0j and θj are independent. Because Fθ (θj ) = 1 − e−θj /θµ , the limiting
unconditional distribution is then given by

Fz (z) = 1 −

Z

∞

0

(1 − z)gθj

as claimed in equation (14) above.

³ ³
´´
1
gθ µ ln 1−z
³ ³
´´ ,
· fθ (θj ) · dθ j =
1
1 + gθµ ln 1−z

Letting fz (z) be the corresponding probability density function, it follows that
ξ (a, b) ≡
41

Z

a

b

zf(z)dz =

Z

a

b

zgθ µ
dz
³
´´2
³
1
1 + gθµ ln 1−z
(1 − z)

To see that an upper bound on φ is required, notice that at φ = 1, r(z, 1, α) = ln
which is positive for high enough z.

41

!

1−α(1−z)
1−α

#

−

αz
,
1−α(1−z)

Integrating by parts yields:
ξ (a, b) =

a
1 + gθµ ln

³

1
1−a

´−

b
1 + gθµ ln

³

1
1−b

´+

Z

a

b

1
1 + gθµ ln

³

1
1−z

´ dz

(A.1)

To proof the claim in section 3.4 that an increase in g or θ µ shifts the B(·) curve up and to the left, we
need only show that ∂ξ (z̄, 1) /∂g < 0 and ∂ξ (z̄, 1) /∂θµ < 0. But this is follows from straightforward
diﬀerentiation of ξ (z̄, 1) in (A.1). Similarly, to proof the claim in section 4.4 that an increase in g or
z , z̄MS )+ξ (z̄MS , 1) = ξ (e
z , 1), and therefore
θµ shifts the BM (·) curve up and to the left, notice that ξ (e
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
z , 1) + φ̄ − φ ξ (z̄MS , 1). The result then follows
1 − φ̄ ξ (e
z , z̄MS ) + (1 − φ) ξ (z̄MS , 1) = 1 − φ̄ ξ (e

again from ∂ξ (z, 1) /∂θ µ < 0 and ∂ξ (z, 1) /∂g < 0.

A.3

Proof of Proposition 3

The results in Proposition 3 follow from comparing instantaneous welfare in a steady-state equilibrium
with incomplete contracts to that in a steady-state equilibrium with complete contracts. Let us first
derive a general expression for instantaneous welfare. Plugging equation (7) into (6), imposing the
equality of income and spending, and rearranging, welfare in country c = {N, S} can be expressed as:
¶(1−α)/α
Z µZ nj
wc Lc N
−α/(1−α)
c
pj (i)
di
dj
u =
N
0
0
In an equilibrium with incomplete contracts, the North manufactures all low-tech inputs in industries
with zj < z̄. Substituting the relevant values of pj (i) and nj (i) and using the definition of A(z) in
equation (5), welfare in the North can be expressed as
Ã
¢ !(1−α)/α µ
¡
¶
¶z
Z 1µ
(1 − α) LN + LS /ω
ω
N
N
fz (z)dz ,
F (z̄) +
uIC = αL
Nf
A(z)
z̄

(A.2)

¡ N¢
S
.
while that in the South is simply uSIC = uN
IC L / ωL

Under complete contracts and wage equalization (i.e., BC (0) < 1), welfare in country c reduces to
Ã
¢ !(1−α)/α
¡
(1 − α) LN + LS
c
c
.
(A.3)
uCC = αL
Nf

Comparing equations (A.2) and (A.3) and given that ω > A(z) for all z > z̄, it is easy to see that
the North may indeed be worse oﬀ under complete contracts. The result is ambiguous because, as is
apparent in the first term of equation (A.2), the higher relative wage under incomplete contracts is
associated with a relatively lower measure of available products. In contrast, the South necessarily
benefits from complete contracts because under incomplete contracts both ω > 1 and A(z) > 1 for all
z ∈ [0, 1].
Finally consider the case of complete contracts and BC (0) > 1. Denote the relative wage in this
equilibrium by ω C > 1. In this case, welfare is given by:
Ã
¢ !(1−α)/α Z 1
¡
(1 − α) LN + LS /ω C
N
N
uCC 0 = αL
ωzC fz (z)dz,
Nf
0

42

¢
¡
S
N
. The South is again necessarily better oﬀ
while that in the South is simply uSCC 0 = uN
CC 0 L / ω C L
under complete contracts because ω > ω C and A(z) > 1 for all z ∈ [0, 1], while the eﬀect on Northern
welfare is again ambiguous.

A.4

General Equilibrium with Multinational Firms

Consider first the industry equilibrium with multinational firms. Because all producers in a given
industry share the same technology and contracting environment, they all behave in an identical manner. If z̄MS < min {z̄ (t) , z̄MN (t)}, there will be no active multinationals and the equilibrium number

of varieties in any industry j is again given by equation (9).42 If instead z̄MS > min {z̄ (t) , z̄MN (t)},

then it is straightforward to show that nj (t) is given by:
 (1−α)E(t)


N(t)wN (t)f





(1−α(φ̄(1−zj (t−t0j ))+(1−φ̄)zj (t−t0j )))E(t)
nj (t) =
N(t)wN (t)f






 (1−α(φ(1−zj (t−t0j ))+(1−φ)zj (t−t0j )))E(t)
N(t)wN (t)f

if zj (t − t0j ) ≤ z̄MN (t)
if z̄MN (t) < zj (t − t0j ) ≤ z̄MS .
if zj (t − t0j ) > z̄MS

Defining ze(t) = min {z̄MN (t), z̄(t)} and computing labor demand by Southern manufacturing

plants yields a labor market clearing condition analogous to equation (11) in section 3:
Z

1
z
!(t)

α (1 − φz ) zE(t)fz,t (z)dz = wS (t)LS ,

(A.4)

where φz = φ̄ if z̄MN (t) < z < z̄MS (t), and φz = φ otherwise. Plugging equation (10) into (A.4),
Rb
and defining again ξ (a, b) ≡ a zfz (z)dz, yields equation (19) in the main text, where time subscripts
have been dropped.

42

Notice that if φ, α, and δ are time-invariant, so will z̄M S . The other two thresholds will only be constant
through time in a steady-state equilibrium with a constant relative wage.

43

