NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PARTIAL ADJUSTMENT WITHOUT APOLOGY
Robert G. King
Julia K. Thomas
Working Paper 9946
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9946
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2003

Please direct correspondence to Julia Thomas, Department of Economics, University of Minnesota, 271 19th
Avenue South, Minneapolis, MN 55455; tel: 612 626 9675; email: jkt@econ.umn.edu. We thank seminar
participants at the Oxford Meetings of the Society of Economic Dynamics and the University of Virginia for
their comments. All remaining errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the
Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Robert G. King and Julia K. Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Partial Adjustment without Apology
Robert G. King and Julia K. Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 9946
August 2003/Revised August 2004
JEL No. E1, E2
ABSTRACT
Many kinds of economic behavior appear to be governed by discrete and occasional
individual choices. Despite this, econometric partial adjustment models perform relatively well at
the aggregate level. Analyzing the classic employment adjustment problem, we show how discrete
and occasional microeconomic adjustment is well described by a new form of partial adjustment
model that aggregates the actions of a large number of heterogeneous producers.
We begin by describing a basic model of discrete and occasional adjustment at the micro
level, where production units are essentially restricted to either operate with a fixed number of
workers or shut down. We show that this simple model is observationally equivalent at the market
level to the standard rational expectations partial adjustment model. We then construct a related, but
more realistic, model that incorporates the idea that increases or decreases in the size of an
establishment's workforce are subject to fixed adjustment costs. In the market equilibrium of this
model, employment responses to aggregate disturbances include changes both in employment
selected by individual establishments and in the measure of establishments actively undertaking
adjustment. Yet the model retains a partial adjustment flavor in its aggregate responses. Moreover,
in contrast to existing models of discrete adjustment, our generalized partial adjustment model is
sufficiently tractable to allow extension to general equilibrium.
Robert G. King
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rking@bu.edu

Julia Thomas
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jkt@econ.umn.edu

1

Introduction

In many contexts, actual factor demands clearly involve complicated dynamic elements
absent in static demand theory. For example, empirical studies of the market demand for
labor typically find that lags, either of demand or of the determinants of demand, contribute substantially to the explanation of employment determination. The most frequent
rationalization of such lags is that individual plants face marginal costs that are increasing in the extent of adjustment, leading them to choose partial adjustment toward the
levels suggested by static demand theory. Many empirical studies also indicate, however,
that the partial adjustment model is inconsistent with the behavior of individual plants
or firms. For example, Hamermesh (1989) shows that individual plants undertake discrete
and occasional workforce adjustments rather than the smooth changes implied by partial
adjustment. Nonetheless, the model continues to be a vehicle for applied work, essentially because it is a tractable way of capturing some important dynamic aspects of market
demand. It is frequently thus employed in an apologetic manner, with the researcher
suggesting that it is a description of market, rather than individual, factor demand.1
We present a generalized partial adjustment model in which individual production units
adjust in a discrete and occasional manner, yet there is smooth adjustment at the aggregate
level. Specifically, individual units face diﬀering fixed costs of adjustment, so the timing
of their adjustments is infrequent and asynchronized while aggregation across plants leads
to a smooth pattern of aggregate factor demand well-approximated by the standard partial adjustment model. Our exposition of this model’s relation to the traditional model
commonly used in empirical work is unique to this paper.
Our basic framework is suﬃciently tractable that it has already been applied to examine several topics, among them price adjustment and capital investment.2 Here, we
apply it to employment which, relative to the investment application, requires a diﬀerent
timing to trace the resulting distribution of production. We provide the first comprehensive presentation of the framework so that researchers may conveniently adapt it to study
other problems. To facilitate its broad application, we then extend the method to allow
for persistent idiosyncratic shocks.
Our model provides a microeconomic foundation for the variety of plant-level adjustment examined in the empirical work of Caballero and Engel (1992, 1993) and Caballero,
1

See, for example, Kollintzas (1985).
Dotsey, King and Wolman (1999) use the framework to analyze price adjustment; Thomas (2002) uses
it to examine investment.
2

1

Engel, and Haltiwanger (1997). There, individual production units are assumed to adjust
employment probabilistically, with adjustment probabilities being a function the diﬀerence
between a target level of employment and actual employment. Aggregating from such
adjustment hazard functions, which are their basic unit of analysis, they examine the implications of the resulting state-dependent adjustment behavior for aggregate employment
demand dynamics. In the absence of a microeconomic foundation for such probabilistic adjustment, Caballero and Engel (1993, p. 360, paragraph 2) explain that they “trade some
deep parameters for empirical richness.” In contrast, we explicitly model the plant’s adjustment decision as a generalized (S, s) problem and derive the adjustment hazard functions
that are the starting point of previous research.3
One key stylized fact uncovered in the empirical literature is that an important route
through which aggregate shocks aﬀect aggregate employment is by changing the fraction
of plants that choose to adjust. Accordingly, we develop a model where the aggregate
adjustment rate is an endogenous function of the state of the economy. While our generalized model is not observationally equivalent to the traditional partial adjustment model
with time-invariant aggregate adjustment rates, impulse responses establish that it retains
the basic features of gradual partial adjustment. Another distinguishing feature of our
theoretical approach is that it is feasible to undertake generalized (S, s) analysis within a
general equilibrium framework, so that the influence of aggregate shocks on equilibrium
adjustment patterns may be systematically studied. Moreover, it is suﬃciently tractable to
accommodate additional sources of heterogeneity; thus, beyond achieving consistency with
the stylized facts highlighted here, the framework has the potential for use in applications
designed to examine richer aspects of establishment-level dynamics.
The organization of this discussion is as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the essential
properties of the standard partial adjustment model, and section 3 describes the evidence
on microeconomic adjustment patterns that the standard model fails to explain. Section
4 develops a model that is consistent with the observation that individual establishments
hire varying amounts of labor at discrete and occasional times, and it illustrates a resulting
hedging eﬀect on the demand for labor. Next, section 5 embeds the framework within a
fully specified general equilibrium macroeconomic model and endogenizes the timing of
employment changes by assuming that each plant faces a fixed cost of adjustment that is
random across both time and plants. The resulting generalized (S, s) model allows us to
examine the influence of deep parameters on the adjustment process. Moreover, with a
3

Generalized (S, s) models were first studied by Caballero and Engel (1999) to explain the observed
lumpiness of plant-level investment demand.

2

large number of plants, the model is similar to the traditional partial adjustment model in
that it yields a smooth market labor demand. We illustrate the properties of our generalized
partial adjustment model using a series of numerical examples.4 A distinguishing feature of
the model, beyond its consistency with the evidence on employment adjustment in section
3, is that it has the potential to reproduce the sharp changes in market employment demand
found in the data during episodes involving large changes in productivity.5 Moving from
our market demand examples, we then provide counterpart results that illustrate the role
of equilibrium in shaping the aggregate response to shocks. Finally, section 6 illustrates
how the framework is tractably extended to allow for persistent diﬀerences in productivity
across establishments, and section 7 concludes.

2

The standard partial adjustment model

The standard partial adjustment model relates current employment, Nt , to target or
desired employment, Nt∗ , through Nt −Nt−1 = κ[Nt∗ −Nt−1 ], where κ ∈ (0, 1) is the fraction
of the gap closed in the period. This specification implies the influence of past actual or
desired employment on current employment,
Nt =

κNt∗

+ (1 − κ)Nt−1

∞
X
∗
=κ
(1 − κ)j Nt−j
.

(1)

j=0

As shown by Sargent (1978), this empirical partial adjustment model may be derived as the
solution to a firm’s dynamic profit maximization problem under the assumption that there
are quadratic costs of adjusting the workforce. In the absence of costly adjustment, assume
that the firm’s workforce declines at the rate d ∈ [0, 1) due to quits or mismatches. If et
employees are hired at time t, then Nt = (1 − d) Nt−1 +et , and the cost of the workforce ad4

Our generalized partial adjustment model is distinguished from earlier generalized cost of adjustment
models, as summarized, extended and critiqued in Mortensen (1973), in that it suggests very diﬀerent
dynamics at the establishment-level. Nonetheless, because our model is essentially one with many dynamically related factor demands, it is capable of generating some of the aggregate dynamics that motivated
researchers in this earlier area. For example, under unrestricted parameters, interrelated factor demand
models were found to be consistent with oscillatory approaches to the long-run position. Our model can
also generate such rich dynamics, although it does not do so under the parameters selected here.
5
This is because the economywide rate of adjustment implied by our model varies with aggregate conditions. The traditional model under-predicts employment changes during such episodes precisely because
the adjustment rate there is constant.

3

justment is Ξ (et ) = B2 e2t , where B > 0.6 Let zt reflect current productivity, and wt be the
real wage, (both serially correlated random variables known at date t), and let production
be f (Nt , zt ). Discounting future earnings by βh∈ (0, 1), ³the firm chooses {Nt , et }´∞
t=0 to maxi
P∞ t
f
(N
|
z
,
imize its expected present discounted value, E
β
,
z
)−Ξ
(e
)−w
N
,
w
t
t
t
t
t
0
0
t=0
subject to Nt = (1 − d) Nt−1 + et and given initial employment N−1 . If the production
function is quadratic in employment, it is straightforward to show that
Nt∗

∞
X
= [Et
(β/κ)j (χa at+j − χw wt+j )],

(2)

j=0

demonstrating that the presence of lags in employment implies leads under rational expectations, as stressed by Sargent (1978).7
The key implications of the model are: (i) current employment, Nt , is directly related to lagged employment, Nt−1 , because adjustments are costly, and (ii) expectations of
future wages and productivity influence current employment through the target, Nt∗ , because, given adjustment costs, its choice will in part determine future employment. Taken
together, these features imply that adjustment costs dampen the response to changes in
current wage and productivity and yield smooth, gradual changes in employment over time.

3

Disconcerting evidence

While the traditional partial adjustment model oﬀers a tractable framework with which
to study gradual aggregate labor adjustment, there is considerable empirical evidence to
suggest that the model is not consistent with the behavior of individual production units.
This evidence suggests a number of stylized facts about individual and aggregate adjustment that we summarize here.
Stylized fact 1: Adjustment at the plant level is discrete, occasional and asynchronous.
Hamermesh (1989) examines monthly data on output and employment between 1983 and
1987 across seven manufacturing plants. For each plant, output fluctuates substantially
over the sample. Employment exhibits long periods of constancy broken by infrequent and
large jumps at times roughly coinciding with the largest output fluctuations. Hence, the
6

This captures the idea that the firm’s marginal adjustment cost is rising in the extent of employment
adjustment; the same idea is incorporated in alternative adjustment cost functions used in applied work.
7

In (1) and (2), the parameters κ, χa and χw depend on the adjustment cost parameter B, the discount
factor β and the parameters of the production function.

4

plant data are not consistent with the smooth employment adjustment that would arise
from convex adjustment costs.
Stylized fact 2: Aggregates exhibit smooth and partial adjustment. Hamermesh (1989)
also examines the behavior of the aggregate of his seven manufacturing plants. He finds
that fluctuations in aggregate employment resemble the dynamics of aggregate output and
appear consistent with smooth adjustment behavior of aggregates. More specifically, he
argues that the standard partial adjustment model works quite well at the aggregate level,
even though it does not describe the behavior of individual production units.8
Stylized fact 3: Adjustment hazards depend on aggregate conditions. Following the
econometric literature on discrete choices, the probability that an individual production
unit makes a discrete change in a particular date is typically called an adjustment hazard.
Caballero and Engel (1993) construct a general framework for studying aggregate employment changes that can incorporate a variety of assumptions about how adjustment hazards
are related to aggregate conditions. Using U.S. manufacturing data from 1961 through
1983, Caballero and Engel examine the dynamics of aggregate employment changes under
two alternative specifications for the hazard function: (1) a benchmark constant hazard
case and (2) an alternative hazard model involving higher moments of the cross-sectional
distribution of firms’ ‘disequilibrium’ levels, reflecting state-dependent adjustment behavior. They find large increases in explanatory power for aggregate employment changes in
moving from the constant hazard model to a generalized hazard structure and attribute
this to the eﬀects of large aggregate shocks upon the employment hazard.
Stylized fact 4: Adjustment hazards depend on measures of ‘micro gaps’. More direct evidence on the importance of state-dependent adjustment hazards is provided by Caballero,
Engel and Haltiwanger (1997). Studying the direct relationship between the adjustment
8

Hamermesh compares log likelihood values from the estimation of a smooth adjustment model based
on quadratic costs to those from a lumpy adjustment fixed-cost alternative. For plant level data, the
latter achieves much larger likelihood values, indicating that lumpy adjustment based on fixed costs better
describes the micro data. Further, his switching model estimates of the percentage ‘disequilibrium’ required
to induce adjustment are large, suggesting that plants vary employment with a non-marginal adjustment
only in the presence of substantial shocks to expected output. However, diﬀerences at the aggregate level
are too small to discriminate between models, as is the case when they are compared using 4-digit SIC data.
Thus, lumpy adjustment behavior at the microeconomic level is obscured by aggregation. From this and
similar evidence, Hamermesh and Pfann (1996, page 1274) conclude that “observing smooth adjustment
based on data describing industries or higher aggregates over time is uninformative about firms’ structures
of adjustment costs and in no way disproves the existence of lumpy costs.”

5

hazard at the level of the individual production unit and the extent of that unit’s gap between current employment and a measure of desired employment, these authors show that
the adjustment hazard depends on the size of this discrepancy. They suggest that individual units may face diﬀerential adjustment costs, so that the distribution of adjustment
costs governs the adjustment hazard.
Stylized fact 5: Aggregate shocks are much more important in accounting for aggregate
responses than are shifts in cost distributions. The empirical analysis of Caballero, Engel
and Haltiwanger (1997) also suggests that changes in the distribution of adjustment costs
are not central in explaining stylized fact 3. Rather, aggregate shocks induce changes
in hazards that are important for aggregates because they produce movements along the
micro-distribution of employment imbalances.

4

Generalized partial adjustment

A number of recent theoretical and empirical studies — notably those of Caballero
and Engel (1993) and Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1997) — have argued for a richer
vision of the adjustment process that can generate the stylized facts discussed above. The
framework we develop exemplifies such a model. In particular, it delivers the implication
that, while individual establishments’ employment adjustments are discrete, (fact 1), their
asynchronous timing implies a smooth aggregate employment series similar to that implied
by the traditional partial adjustment model, (fact 2). Moreover, an individual production
unit’s probability of adjustment depends on a measure of the ‘gap’ between its current
employment and a notion of desired employment, (fact 4), and the model can produce
substantial responses of employment to aggregate shocks without relying on any shifts
in the distribution of adjustment costs, (fact 5). At the same time, it can be readily
incorporated into a general equilibrium model, so that the relationship between adjustment
hazards and macroeconomic conditions can be studied.
We assume a large and fixed number of units, each making discrete choices about their
employment adjustment over time. Production at the plant level is constant returns in
labor and a fixed input, which we normalize to 1, f (nt , 1, zt ).9 Any unit that does not
adjust its workforce sees it decay at rate d,
nt = (1 − d)nt−1 + et ,
9

(3)

The presence of the fixed input allows determination of the employment choice at the production unit.

6

where et is the number of hires. We begin by assuming that the opportunity to adjust
employment arrives exogenously according to a probabilistic mechanism specified below.
This assumption will be relaxed to allow consistency with stylized fact 3 in section 5.
To capture the observation that a production unit may have a greater likelihood of
adjusting employment when there has been a longer interval since its last adjustment,
we allow the adjustment probability to depend on the length of time since the unit last
changed employment, which we index by j. That is, if a production unit has not adjusted
its employment for j − 1 periods, then the conditional probability of its being allowed to
adjust its employment in the j th period is αj . For now, we assume that these adjustment
probabilities depend only upon time since last adjustment and are a fixed vector α =
[α1 , α2 , · · · αJ−1 , 1] over time. We further assume that αj−1 < αj for all j = 1, 2, ..., J,
where J represents the maximum interval before a production unit will be allowed to adjust
its employment with probability 1: αJ = 1.
Let njt represent the current labor stock of a production unit that last adjusted its
employment j periods ago.10 We use the notation Vj (njt , zt , wt ) to denote the value of
a production unit that last adjusted j periods ago, entering the current period with a
workforce of njt , that is not currently able to adjust its employment, and use V0 (zt , wt ) to
denote the value of a production unit currently able to adjust. For a unit that is currently
readjusting its stock of labor,
µ
h
V0 (zt , wt ) = max f (nt , zt ) − wt n0t + βE α1 V0 (zt+1 , wt+1 )
(4)
n0t
i¶
+ (1 − α1 ) V1 ((1 − d) n0t , zt+1 , wt+1 ) | zt , wt ,
where n0t is freely chosen, and (zt , wt ) follows a joint Markov process.11 The right-hand
side of the Bellman equation involves three expressions. First, there is the flow of current
profit. Second, there is the discounted value of being a unit that adjusts next period, which
occurs with probability α1 . Third, there is the value of being a unit that does not adjust
next period, an outcome that occurs with probability (1 − α1 ).
For units not currently able to adjust their workforce, there are no decisions in this
simple model, although there would be in more elaborate settings allowing adjustments
on other margins, such as in hours-per-worker. Their labor evolves according to njt =
10

Except where necessary for clarity, we supress commas in subscripts throughout this text.
As n0t is our model’s counterpart to target employment in the traditional model, we occasionally refer
to it as n∗ when making comparisons below.
11

7

(1 − d)nj−1,t−1 , and their value functions obey the functional equation
h
Vj (njt , zt , wt ) = f (njt , zt ) − wt njt + βE αj+1 V0 (zt+1 , wt+1 )

(5)

i
+ (1 − αj+1 ) Vj+1 ((1 − d) njt , zt+1 , wt+1 ) | zt , wt .

Adjusting production units choose employment so as to maximize the right-hand side
of (4), which results in an eﬃciency condition of the following form:
³
´¯
i
h
¯
D1 f (n0t , zt ) − wt + βE (1 − α1 ) (1 − d) D1 V1 (1 − d)n0t , zt+1 , wt+1 ¯ zt , wt = 0.

A notable feature of this condition is that the optimal employment decision on the part of
the adjusting production unit is independent of the length of time since it last adjusted and
the size of its workforce at the start of the period, since neither j nor njt enters into the
eﬃciency condition. This justifies our writing V0 above in the restricted form that omits
these factors. Working with the value function (5) above, we can determine the marginal
value of additional workers:
D1 Vj (njt , zt , wt ) = D1 f (njt , zt ) − wt
³
´¯
i
h
¯
+βE (1 − αj+1 ) (1 − d) D1 Vj+1 (1 − d) njt , zt+1 , wt+1 ¯ zt , wt .

These derivatives may be used iteratively to simplify the eﬃciency condition and derive an
alternative implicit expression for the optimal workforce chosen by an adjusting production
unit. In particular, n∗t solves

D1 f (n0t , zt ) − wt + E

J−1
Xh
j=1

³
´¯
i
¯
[β(1 − d)]j ϕj D1 f ((1 − d)j n0t , zt+j ) − wt+j ¯ zt , wt = 0, (6)

where ϕj gives the adjusting unit’s probability of remaining in the nonadjustment state for
j consecutive periods:
j
Y
(1 − αk ), j = 1, . . . , J − 1.
(7)
ϕj ≡
k=1

In the special case of a Cobb-Douglas production function, y = znγ , the condition in (6)
may be explicitly solved for adjusting units’ optimal labor demand as:
h
i 1
 P
¯
j
γj ϕ z
¯ zt , wt 1−γ
γβ
(1
−
d)
E J−1
t+j
j
j=0
h
i 
n0t =  P
,
¯
j
jϕ w
¯
z
β
E J−1
(1
−
d)
,
w
t
j t+j t
j=0
8

which depends positively on current and expected future productivity and negatively on
current and expected future wages. Since this forward-looking labor demand is similar to
the behavior of target employment in the standard partial adjustment model of section 2,
we sometimes refer to it in this manner. However, it is worth stressing that the economic
reasons for this are somewhat diﬀerent. In the standard model, the firm’s labor demand is
forward-looking because current adjustments aﬀect the future costs that a firm encounters
when it adjusts. Here, by contrast, labor demand is forward-looking because a current
adjustor is aware that it may not be able to adjust its employment again in the near
future.
The condition in (6) also implies that our generalized adjustment model has a hedging
property arising because of forecasted future labor force departures. In particular, if wages
and productivities are expected to be constant over time, then an establishment will demand more employment than it would in a frictionless environment. Suppressing changes
in wages and productivities in (6), the target employment level solving (6) is a constant
n∗ (α, z, w). Let ns represent the static optimum satisfying D1 f (ns , z) − w = 0 that would
be chosen if the unit could adjust its employment in every period with certainty. Given
concavity of f , it follows that [D1 f ((1 − d)j n0 , z) − w] < [D1 f ((1 − d)j+1 n0 , z) − w]. This
implies the summation in (6) evaluated at n0 = ns is strictly positive. Moreover, as both
this sum and its preceding expression, D1 f (n0 , z) − w, are decreasing in n0 , the dynamic
optimum, n∗ , must exceed the static optimum, ns .
Production units hire more labor than they currently need in an eﬀort to hedge against
the possibility that they may be unable to hire in the immediate future. Further, n∗ will be
larger the higher is this probability of future nonadjustment; for instance, given d and α2
· · · αJ−1 , a reduced probability of adjustment in the first period after an adjustment, (lower
α1 ) yields higher values for ϕ1 , . . . , ϕJ−1 and thus a higher value for the summation at any
n0 . The higher is the probability of being unable to restock employment, the stronger is
the hedging motive.

5

Endogenizing adjustment

We now endogenize the timing of individual production units’ adjustment by introducing fixed costs of adjustment that are stochastic across production units, an approach
adopted by Caballero and Engel (1999) in their study of manufacturing investment.12
12

The generalized adjustment model developed here has been used in several general equilibrium applications. Dotsey, King and Wolman (1999) study the dynamics of price adjustment, while Thomas (2002) and

9

Within each date, any individual production unit faces a random cost ξ that it must pay
in order to adjust its employment. This cost is drawn from a time-invariant distribution
over [0, B] that is summarized by the CDF G(ξ) and associated PDF g(ξ).
In addition to endogenizing adjustment timing, we also illustrate that it is straightforward to incorporate the generalized partial adjustment approach into a general equilibrium
setting, which we do now by imposing two restrictions on the prices faced by establishments
within each date. First, asset-market clearing will require that all establishments discount
their future profit flows by households’ marginal rate of substitution between current and
future consumption denoted here by β pt+1
pt . Equivalently, establishments value their current output by pt , the current marginal utility of consumption, and discount their future
values by the household subjective discount factor β. Next, the equilibrium wage, wt , will
equal households’ marginal rate of substitution between current leisure and consumption,
D2 u(c,1−N)
D1 u(c,1−N) . Provided that these restrictions are satisfied, the role of households in the
economy is eﬀectively subsumed, and equilibrium allocations are retrieved as the aggregate
of establishments’ decisions.13
At the start of each date t, any establishment may be identified as a member of a particular time-since-adjustment group, j, where j indicates the numbers of periods that have
elapsed since the last active employment adjustment. Given its current cost draw ξ, and
given its start of period employment, njt , and St , the aggregate state of the economy determining prices and expectations, such an establishment will adjust its employment if its
fixed cost does not exceed the value of the adjustment, that is, if V0 (St ) − Vj (njt , St ) ≥ ξ.14
Because there is a large number of production units within each diﬀerent time-sinceadjustment group, each group is characterized by a marginal plant that finds it just worthwhile to adjust. This marginal plant is associated with a cost ξ jt such that
ξ jt = V0 (St ) − Vj (njt , St ).

(8)

All production units in the j th time-since-adjustment group with adjustment costs at or
Khan and Thomas (2003a) investigate investment dynamics and Khan and Thomas (2003b) use a similar
approach to study (S,s) inventory accumulation. In this study, we use linear approximation methods in the
tradition of Sargent (1978) to explore the general equilibrium dynamics, as do Dotsey, King and Wolman
(1999) and Thomas (2002).
13
See Khan and Thomas (2003a) for further explanation.
14
As will be made explicit below, St includes two endogenous vectors that together identify the start-ofperiod distribution of plants over employments, alongside exogenous aggregate productivity, zt . We assume
z follows a Markov process that is taken as given by all agents, as is the evolution of the endogenous
aggregate state, A, according to a mapping A0 = Ψ(A, z) that, in equilibrium, results from the aggregation
of individual actions.

10

below the threshold in (8) will choose to adjust. As a result, the fraction of plants adjusting
out of any particular group j, j = 1, . . . , J − 1, is given by
αjt = G(ξ jt ).

(9)

From (8), note that these adjustment fractions are functions of the plant-level state vector,
(njt , St ). We assume that the stochastic processes for productivity, wages and interest rates
are such that, given the function f and the discount factor β, B < V0 (St ) − VJ (nJt , St ) for
all values of the vector (nJt , St ). This assumption, which follows naturally from B < ∞,
given bounded processes zt , wt and pt , assures us that αJ = 1.
Having described the determination of endogenous adjustment probabilities, we must
restate the plant’s optimization problems to introduce adjustment costs and time-varying
adjustment probabilities determined by (8) - (9). With state-dependent probability αj+1,t+1 ,
a production unit entering period t + 1 in group j + 1 will adjust at that date. The counterpart to (4), the value of a plant that is currently adjusting its labor, is:
"
µ
³
´
pt+1 h
V0 (St ) = max f (n0t , zt ) − wt n0t + βE
α1,t+1 V0 St+1
n0t
pt

(10)

#¶
³
´i
−ξ 1,t+1 + (1 − α1,t+1 ) V1 (1 − d) n0t , St+1 | St ,

where ξ 1,t+1 reflects the expected fixed cost that the plant will pay at date t+1, conditional
R G−1 (α1,t+1 )
xg(dx). Similarly, the
on its undertaking an employment adjustment, ξ 1,t+1 = 0
value of a plant that last adjusted j periods ago, the counterpart to equation 5, is
"

Vj (njt , St ) = f (njt , zt ) − wt njt + βE

³
´
pt+1 h
αj+1,t+1 V0 St+1
pt

(11)

#
³
´i
−ξ j+1,t+1 + (1 − αj+1,t+1 ) Vj+1 (1 − d) njt , St+1 | St .

Adjusting plants exit the j th group for the adjustment group and choose an optimal
employment level n0t (n∗t ) satisfying the marginal profit condition below, which generalizes
(6) to reflect optimal adjustment probabilities:

D1 f (n0t , zt )−wt +E

J−1
Xh
j=1

i
pt+j
[β(1−d)]j ϕj,t+j [D1 f ((1−d)j n0t , zt+j )−wt+j ] | St = 0. (12)
pt
11

Here, as in (7), ϕj,t+j is the probability the unit will make no further adjustment in the
next j periods. That is, for j = 1, ..., J − 1,
ϕj,t+j ≡

j ³
j ³
´ Y
´
Y
1 − αk,t+k =
1 − G(ξ k,t+k ) .

k=1

k=1

In practice, it is convenient to break the large forward-looking condition determining target
employment into J first-order stochastic diﬀerence equations as follow.
D1 f (n0t , zt ) − wt + β(1 − d)E

hp

t+1

pt

i
Ω1,t+1 | St = 0,

(13)

where, for j = 1, ..., J − 1,
µ
i¶
hp
t+1
Ωjt ≡ (1 − αjt ) D1 f (njt , zt ) − wt + β(1 − d)E
Ωj+1,t+1 | St .
pt

5.1

(14)

Partial adjustment of market labor demand

The probabilistic approach to microeconomic employment adjustment that we have
constructed is consistent with the empirical evidence on rising employment adjustment
hazards. Moreover, the framework allows us to aggregate individual plants’ labor demand
and derive a simple expression for market labor demand. Since the economy is populated
by a large number of production units, we can describe the distribution of plants in any
date t using the vector θt = [θ1t , ..., θ Jt ], with each θjt representing the fraction of units
that begin the period having last adjusted j periods prior to the current date.15 Letting
P
ω 0t ≡ Jj=1 θjt αjt denote total adjusting units in any date t, the elements of this vector
are as follow.16
θ1t = ω0,t−1

(15)

15

More precisely, the distribution at the start of any date t is completely summarized by the vector θt
together with a vector of previous target employment levels [n∗t−1 , ..., n∗t−J ] from which the current support
is trivially retrieved. Note that the time-since-adjustment approach to tracking the plant distribution
pursued here allows us to capture the time-varying distribution of establishments over employment levels
using a linear systems solution approach. We could instead directly track the measure associated with each
possible employment level. However, in that case, we would need to include employments that at times
have zero population, necessitating a nonlinear solution method as, for instance, in the investment study
of Khan and Thomas (2003a).
J−1
S
16
Given a fixed measure of production units, this overall adjustment rate is ω0t = 1 −
ω0,t−j ϕjt .
j=1

12

θjt = (1 − αj−1,t−1 ) θj−1,t−1

for j = 2, ..., J.

(16)

Market labor demand may then be represented as a moving average of the employment
actions of production units, with lag weights determined by adjustment fractions across
time-since-adjustment groups:
Nt =

n∗t

J
X

θjt αjt +

j=1

J−1
X
j=1

θjt (1 − αjt ) dj n∗t−j .

(17)

Here, n∗t is the target value of employment that solves (12); in the case of Cobb-Douglas
i 1
 S h
1−γ
J−1
j
γj
E j=0 γβ (1−d) ϕj,t+j zt+j |zt ,wt
∗
i 
production, this is nt =  S h
.
j
jϕ
E J−1
β
(1−d)
w
z
,w
|
t
t
t+j
j,t+j
j=0
This is the third result of our generalized partial adjustment model. The market’s
dynamic demand for labor describes aggregate employment as a weighted average of past
target employments, as in the traditional partial adjustment model (1). Consequently,
while the underlying production unit level demands are adjusted discretely and occasionally, the market demands vary smoothly in every time period. Further, since each target
employment, n∗t−j , j = 1, . . . , J − 1, involves expectations of future wages and productivities, so does market labor demand.
While equation (17) shows that our generalized partial adjustment model has a representation similar to the traditional partial adjustment model, there are important differences that eliminate exact aggregate equivalence. In particular, the lag weights here
vary over time, because they are composite functions of the adjustment rates αj , which
themselves are functions of plant and aggregate state variables, as consistent with stylized
fact 3. Thus, in contrast to the traditional model, our economywide rate of adjustment
responds to changes in aggregate conditions, including changes in economic policy.

5.2

Planning representation

The generalized partial adjustment model described above may be derived as the
solution to a single dynamic optimization problem, which makes the link to the standard
model of section 2 more direct. We briefly outline this reformulation to illustrate the
tractability of the approach and thus its suitability for applications.17 While we rely on the
17

Here, we have chosen to begin our discussion with a description of decentralized actions and now follow
with a planning representation. The reverse ordering would have been equally straightforward, which

13

equivalence between a social planning and competitive equilibrium solution in this section,
as in Lucas and Prescott (1971), it is important to stress that the generalized partial
adjustment approach can also be applied to settings in which competitive equilibrium is
not optimal.18
The aggregate representation consolidates the ownership of all plants, diﬀerentiated
by their time since last adjustment, j = 1, . . . , J, into a single entity, a planner acting
to maximize the expected discounted lifetime utility of a representative household. Using
the notation θt ≡ [θ1t , ..., θJt ], nt ≡ [n1t , ..., nJt ], and αt ≡ [α1t , ..., αJt ] to describe the
economywide distribution of plants, employment, and adjustment fractions across groups,
the planner’s total available output is:
Yt = f (n0t , zt )

J
X

θjt αjt +

j=1

J−1
X
j=1

θjt (1 − αjt )f (njt , zt ).

(18)

Total employment is an analogous sum of the employments of adjusting and non-adjusting
establishments,
J
J−1
X
X
D
Nt = n0t
θjt αjt +
θjt (1 − αjt )njt .
(19)
j=1

j=1

Finally, economywide adjustment costs are
Qt =

J
X

θjt Γ(αjt ),

(20)

j=1

R G−1 (α))
xg(dx) is the total volume of costs averaged across plants in a group
where Γ(α) = 0
if fraction α of that group adjusts.
Given the current distribution of plants over time-since-last-adjustment groups, the
associated employment levels, and aggregate productivity, the planner chooses fractions
of plants adjusting (αjt )J−1
j=1 and optimal employment for those that are adjusting their
workers, n0t , which together determine the next period distribution of plants, θt+1 and the
household’s current consumption and work hours. The planner’s problem is:
emphasizes the flexibility of the approach. The representation is selected according to its convenience in
application.
18
In its application to the analysis of price adjustment by Dotsey, King and Wolman (1999), for example,
the presence of monopolistic competition means that equilibrium is not optimal.

14

W (θt , nt , zt ) = max u(ct , 1 − Nt ) + βEW (θt+1 , nt+1 , zt+1 | θt , nt , zt )
Λt

(21)

+λt [Yt − Qt − ct ]

+wt λt [Nt − NtD ],
J
hX
i
θjt αjt − θ1,t+1
+s0t λt
j=1

+

J−1
X
j=1

h
i
sjt λt θjt (1 − αjt ) − θj+1,t+1

subject
h to nj+1,t+1 = (1 − d)njt , for j i= 0, . . . , J − 1, and subject to (18)-(20), where
J−1
Λt = ct , Nt , n0t , {αjt }J−1
j=1 , {θ j+1,t+1 }j=0 .
The solution to this problem will satisfy the constraints above with equality and a series
of eﬃciency conditions that follow. First, the standard conditions apply to the choice of
household consumption and labor supply,
λt = D1 u(ct , 1 − Nt )
wt λt = D2 u(ct , 1 − Nt ).
From these two equations, it is clear that the output price, pt , and the real wage, wt , faced
by establishments in the decentralized economy examined above must correspond to the
multipliers λt and wt , respectively, if the competitive allocation is to match that obtained
here.
Note that the multipliers sjt attached to the distributional constraints in (21) represent
date t post-production valuations of establishments that will enter the next date in plant
group j + 1. To clarify the equivalence between the planning allocation and that in the
decentralized economy, we define the pre-production valuations of establishments as:
vjt ≡ f (njt , zt ) − wt njt + sjt , for j = 0, ..., J − 1,
and we use these, rather than the original multipliers, in representing the optimal adjustment fractions. Eﬃciency with respect to the choice of αjt requires that the solution to
this problem satisfy
G−1 (αjt ) = v0t − vjt ,
so that it is just worthwhile to relocate the marginal plant with cost ξ jt into the adjustment
group, and plants with costs greater than this threshold are not adjusted. This determines
15

αjt , j = 1, . . . , J − 1, and is equivalent to (8) provided the multipliers vjt attain the same
value as before. That this is the case may be seen from the eﬃciency conditions with
respect to θj+1,t+1 , j = 0, . . . , J − 1, which imply that the value associated with a plant
with employment level njt satisfies
hλ ³
t+1
αj+1,t+1 v0,t+1 − Γ(αj+1,t+1 )
vjt = f (njt , zt ) − wt njt + βE
λt
´
i
+ (1 − αj+1,t+1 ) vj+1,t+1 | θt , nt , zt .

These expressions are equivalent to the plant Bellman equations of section 5, since the
expected adjustment cost conditional on adjustment in (11) is equal to Γ (αj+1,t+1 ), the
average cost paid by adjusting plants, by definition of Γ (·). Finally, the eﬃciency condition
with respect to the choice of n0t may be expressed as (13)-(14), provided pt = λt at every
date. Therefore, the solution to the planning problem, given the aggregate state (θt , nt , zt ),
is the same as in the decentralized economy of the previous section.

5.3

Numerical examples: The five stylized facts

We use a series of numerical examples to illustrate several interesting properties of the
model developed above, and to contrast its dynamics to those of the traditional model.
We begin with an examination of the model assuming that prices, wages and interest rates
are exogenously fixed, as is commonly the case in analyses using the traditional partial
adjustment model. Our examples involve functional forms and parameter values that are
standard; production at the plant level is described by a Cobb-Douglas production function
f (n, z) = znν with ν = 0.66. Total factor productivity has a mean of 1 and follows a firstorder autoregressive process with a one-period autocorrelation of 0.9225, roughly consistent
with the annual properties of the Solow Residual. The plant’s discount factor is β = 0.939,
which corresponds to an annual interest rate of 0.065. These values will be familiar to
quantitative researchers; see, for example, King and Rebelo (1999).
The remaining parameter values are chosen arbitrarily; however, extensive sensitivity
analysis has confirmed that the properties of the model we have developed are not qualitatively sensitive to variation in these parameters. First, we assume that the distribution of
adjustment costs is uniform with an upper support of 0.008. This yields a distribution of
employment across plants that is suitable for illustrating the generalized partial adjustment
model’s properties. Next, for the traditional model, we assume the quadratic cost parameter is B = 4. This choice facilitates comparison, as it yields a dynamic response that

16

is relatively close to our generalized partial adjustment model with adjustment rates held
constant. Finally, we assume a separation rate of d = 0.06 and a wage rate of w = 1.14.
Before proceeding further, note that we have developed a model that is designed to
be consistent with stylized facts 1 and 5 of section 3. Specifically, due to fixed costs of
adjustment, labor changes at the plant level are discrete and occasional in the model.
Moreover, since the distribution of adjustment costs is assumed to be constant over time,
it cannot be the source of aggregate fluctuations. Such fluctuations must arise through
aggregate shocks as suggested by previous empirical work.
Our first figure showing the stationary distribution of plants illustrates the model’s
ability to reproduce stylized fact 4: adjustment probabilities depend on plants’ gaps between actual and target employment. In figure 1, we see that adjustment fractions are
an increasing function of the time since last adjustment, as the cost of non-adjustment
rises with the level of disequilibrium, while the distribution of adjustment costs is identical
across groups. Thus, in the second panel of the figure, the distribution function of plants
across groups is necessarily downward sloping, given the law of motion for θ in (16).
Figure 2 illustrates stylized fact 2; aggregate employment is characterized by smooth
and gradual adjustment. Panels (a) and (b) show percentage deviations in market employment and output from their steady state values, in response to a persistent rise in
aggregate productivity, for the three models discussed above. PA corresponds to the traditional partial adjustment model of section 2, where staggered aggregate adjustment arises
from the presence of quadratic adjustment costs, while TD represents the response for the
generalized model with a fixed vector of time-dependent adjustment fractions. Finally, SD
denotes the response in the generalized state-dependent partial adjustment model. There,
fixed costs of adjustment dissuade some production units from responding immediately to
the rise in productivity. This protracts the aggregate response in employment, and hence
output, so that both TD and SD share the hump-shaped features that distinguish the
traditional partial adjustment model. This hump-shaped response in employment, most
pronounced for the SD model, is absent in a frictionless model of employment adjustment.
There, without adjustment costs, the shape of the employment response is identical to the
monotonic response of the auto-correlated productivity shock.
The TD model, with an upward sloping but time-invariant adjustment hazard, matches
the traditional partial adjustment model closely. Only at the earliest date of the response
does the traditional model move more gradually, due to the rising marginal cost of aggregate employment changes. The size of this initial diﬀerence in employment response is
nonetheless only about two-thirds of 1 percent. This is in part because plants in the time17

dependent adjustment model are not permitted to alter the timing of their employment
adjustments in response to shocks, so that all rises in aggregate employment must come
from changes in intensive margin adjustment decisions. Moreover, the onset of diminishing
returns at the level of the production unit restrains the rise in the employment levels chosen
by its current adjustors.
While the state-dependent adjustment model shares similar qualitative features with
the other staggered adjustment models, the ability of establishments to alter the timing of
their employment adjustments at relatively low cost produces two potentially important
changes in the market response. First, because aggregate employment is increased through
changes in both intensive and extensive margin adjustment, SD produces a substantially
larger rise in employment, and hence output, at the dates of highest productivity. It is
precisely this ‘time-varying elasticity’ of aggregate employment demand with respect to
aggregate shocks that distinguishes the SD model, allowing for sharper changes in market
employment, relative to the traditional model. The empirical work of Caballero and Engel
(1992, 1993) finds that such properties are important in explaining the dynamics of aggregate employment demand during episodes involving unusually large shocks, such as the
recession of 1974-1975 and the subsequent expansion. Second, the model has the ability
to produce more complicated cyclical adjustment patterns; in each panel, the SD response
oscillates above and below the traditional model’s response. As neither of these features in
present when adjustment rates are held fixed, it is apparent that they arise due to changes
in adjustment timing at the micro-level.
Figure 3 verifies the importance of the time-varying plant distribution by displaying
the SD responses in each of the two margins through which aggregate employment is
raised. Panel (a) depicts percent changes in extensive margin adjustment through changes
J
P
in the fraction of production units adjusting, ω 0t =
θjt αjt , while panel (b) displays
j=1

intensive margin changes through the employment levels chosen by current adjustors, n0t .
Given the persistent nature of the productivity shock, the rewards to early adjustment are
expected to be large, thus raising the threshold costs above which adjustment is rejected
within each time-since-adjustment group. As a result, adjustment fractions rise across
groups, and the number of adjustors in the economy rises 25 percent above its steady state
value. This illustrates that stylized fact 3 is met by our generalized partial adjustment
model: adjustment rates vary with aggregate conditions. Note that, in contrast to the
large change in adjustment rates, the percent rise in target employment per adjusting unit
is considerably smaller. Large increases in employment are not worthwhile given decreasing

18

returns in establishment-level production. Thus, in this example, changes in the number
of adjusting plants are more important than changes in the employment chosen by such
plants in determining movements in aggregate employment. Furthermore, the latter is
responsible for the cyclical pattern seen in figure 2 for the aggregate series.
Comparing panels (a) and (b) of figure 3, note that, while the target employment
response monotonically declines, the number of adjustors oscillates in its return to steady
state. The large rise in the number of adjustors at the impact of the shock results in a
large shift in the distribution of production units away from higher time-since-adjustment
groups and into group 1 starting the next period. Given rising adjustment hazards, only
a small fraction of these extra members find it worthwhile to adjust again, so many of the
initial surge in adjustors begin the subsequent date in group 2. In this way, the eﬀects
of early rises in adjustment rates filter out through subsequent distributions, reducing
total adjustment toward trend, and then below it once a disproportionate fraction of the
population finds its way into time-since-adjustment groups associated with low adjustment
fractions. Eventually, the mass of early adjustors works its way suﬃciently far out the
distribution, where adjustment rates are relatively high, so that total adjustment returns
above trend. This pattern is repeated in a dampened fashion until the distribution resettles.
Figure 4 aggregates the eﬀects of changes in intensive margin versus extensive margin adjustment to provide a decomposition of the market employment response into two
underlying components: “nj eﬀects” associated with changes in employment levels across
groups (due to changes in target employments) and “ωj eﬀects” arising from changes in
the distribution of plants across these groups at the time of production, ω jt ≡ (1 − αjt )θjt ,
j = 1, ..., J, (due to changes in the fractions adjusting from each group). Specifically, at
each date, the percentage deviation from steady state in aggregate employment is given by
 


J−1
J−1
X ³ ωj nj ´
X ³ ωj nj ´
n
bjt  + 
ω
b jt  ,
n
bt = 
n
n
j=0

j=0

¡ ωj nj ¢

reflects the percentage contribution of the j th group to aggregate emwhere each
n
ployment in steady state, and each n
bjt and ω
b jt represent percent deviations from trend in
the group j employment and population levels, respectively, at the time of production in
date t. At the onset of the shock, rises in employment associated with current adjustors,
n0t , contribute less than half of the percentage rise in the aggregate series. The remainder is due to a rise in the adjustment group, ω 0 , associated with this high target and
corresponding reductions in the populations of groups associated with lower employment
levels, ω j , j = 1, . . . , J. In the following date, adjusting plants again select a high target
19

employment level, and this is compounded by a rise in the employment held by members
of group 1, a consequence of the high employment choice of the previous period. These
eﬀects of raised targets continue to feed through the distribution, raising the employment
levels associated with each subsequent group, for a number of periods. As a result, the nj
component of aggregate employment exhibits the smooth humped shape associated with
partial-adjustment. The aggregate series inherits this shape to an extent, but it is both
more pronounced in its rise and less smooth in its return to trend, due to the ω j eﬀects
arising from changes in membership across groups. High adjustment fractions amplify the
aggregate response initially; however, by date 3, when the number of adjustors begins to
fall below trend, an increasing fraction of production units operates with relatively low
employment levels. This dampens the rise in the aggregate series, and speeds its initial
rate of decline, relative to that of the nj component. Further, just as the disruption in the
population distribution produced oscillations in the total adjustors series of figure 3, it also
causes overshooting in the ω j component’s convergence and thereby generates the cyclical
features evident in the aggregate series.

5.4

General equilibrium eﬀects

One of the key features of our approach is that discrete micro-level adjustment dynamics can be readily introduced into a general equilibrium setting. So far, we have used
the dynamic model to study the influence of variations in productivity on aggregate labor
demand and the adjustment decisions of individual units, holding fixed the real wage rate
and the real interest rate. A general equilibrium model allows changes in productivity to
aﬀect the wage and interest rates, so that its dynamics are more complicated. For example,
when a rise in productivity increases labor demand, this will bring about some increase
in the wage rate in order to clear the labor market. This wage change has implications
for both the level of labor that adjusting establishments select, (the target solving (12),)
and the fractions of establishments that choose to adjust from each current employment,
(the adjustment fractions solving (8)-(9)). Our equilibrium analysis is designed to be very
simple, but it illustrates some important points. Here, we assume a particular functional
form for the representative household’s preferences, so as to generate restrictions on the
behavior of the wage rate and the interest rate.19
19

In particular, maintaining the functional forms and parameter values assumed
above,
 we assume that

1+γ
the representative household’s momentary utility function is U (C, N ) = log C − χ N1+γ , where χ = 2.55
and γ = 0.50. This specification implies that there is a steady-state level of labor of n = 0.20 and a
general equilibrium labor supply elasticity of γ −1 = 2 with respect to the real wage rate. Higher values of

20

Figure 5 compares the dynamic general equilibrium response to an aggregate productivity shock within the state-dependent generalized adjustment model to the response arising
without market-clearing variations in wages and interest rates. Quantitatively, as might be
expected, equilibrium price movements sharply dampen the response in employment, and
hence output, to a persistent change in productivity. However, in contrast to the investment analysis of Thomas (2002), equilibrium does not eliminate the influence of costly and
discrete adjustment. In particular, the level of employment continues to display a hump
in the dynamic response due to these costs, which is also an implication of the standard
partial adjustment model discussed in section 2 above.
There are also qualitative changes in both the extensive and intensive margins of employment adjustment with equilibrium movements in wages and interest rates. First, the
previous nonmonotonicity in the fraction of units adjusting essentially disappears. This is
because equilibrium price changes oﬀset much of the large rise in target employment that
would otherwise occur at the impact of the shock. With the rise in target employment
dampened, establishments have less incentive to pay fixed costs to move up the timing
of their employment adjustments. Thus, equilibrium reduces the jump in the total fraction adjusting, thereby reducing the disruptions to current and future plant distributions
that cause these oscillations. Second, the smooth mean reversion in target employment
becomes less regular. Nonetheless, target employment continues to be monotonic, and it is
the changes in adjustment timing that lead to the hump-shaped aspects of the aggregate
quantity responses. More establishments do choose to adjust employment when there is a
favorable productivity shock, but they do not all adjust immediately.

6

Persistent idiosyncratic shocks

To this point, plants have been diﬀerentiated by only two features of their circumstances: (i) they have diﬀerent realizations of adjustment costs, and hence (ii) they enter
the period with diﬀerent values of the endogenous state variable njt . However, there is
ample evidence that establishments are aﬀected by additional persistent plant-level states,
such as stochastic variations in productivity. In this section, we show how our equilibrium
generalized partial adjustment model is tractably extended to allow for persistent productivity shocks to establishments. The methods, however, can be applied to other persistent
exogenous micro states, such as variations in product demand for monopolistic competitors
γ would imply sharper diﬀerences between the equilibrium and fixed price models, as these would raise the
responsiveness of the wage to changes in employment demand.

21

or shifts in the distribution of adjustment costs.
We assume that the plant-specific productivity shocks follow an M -state Markov process;
a ∈ {a1 , . . . , aM } with transition probabilities given by the time-invariant matrix Φ; specifically, the probability of transiting from state al to state am is given by φ(l, m), for
l = 1, ..., M and m = 1, ..., M . We begin by defining some notation that will describe
the distribution of establishments over employment and productivity at each date, then
show how the aggregation is handled, and next proceed to outline the associated planning problem. For brevity, we omit the corresponding decentralized representation of the
economy, although the mapping should be transparent by comparison to the sections above.
At the start of date t, any establishment is identified by its current productivity draw, a,
and its current employment level. We continue to assume that, when not actively adjusted,
a plant’s employment declines at rate d across dates, and active adjustments to its stock
incur a fixed cost, ξ, drawn from the time-invariant distribution G(ξ) with associated PDF
g(ξ). Given the eﬀect of current plant-specific productivity draws on adjustment decisions
and on the target employments selected by current adjustors, (and hence on future distributions), the economy’s aggregate state, S, will now include M 2 + M time-since-adjustment
vectors that together describe the current start-of-period distribution of establishments
over labor and productivity. We preserve the ability to solve this economy linearly by
tracking the distribution of plants according to their membership in groups identified by
(i) time-since-last adjustment, (ii) productivity draw at the date of last adjustment, and
(iii) current productivity draw. As before, employment selected by adjusting establishments does not depend upon the current stock; however, it does depend upon current
productivity.
To study the evolution of plant-level conditions, for each h and each l, we define θjt (h, l)
as the start-of-date measure of plants that last adjusted j periods in the past to a target
employment consistent with ah , (their productivity at the time of the adjustment), and
that have current productivity level al . Let αjt (h, l) denote the corresponding fractions
of each of these groups undertaking active employment adjustment within the current
period. While adjustment fractions reach 1 within some finite number of periods, the full
adjustment horizons for plants now depend upon the productivity they had when they last
actively changed their employment and on their current productivity. Let J(h, l) denote the
full adjustment horizon associated with plants associated with productivity ah at the time
of last adjustment and current productivity al .20 Because establishments transit across
20

As with J in the model above, the horizons here, J(h, l), are endogenous variables recovered in the
solution for the economy’s steady state. One cost of pursuing a linear systems solution for the dynamics

22

current productivities from date to date, each vector θt (h, l) = [θjt (h, l)] will have length
Jh ≡ max{J(h, 1), ...J(h, M )}. Finally, each of these vectors is associated with the vector
of start-of-date employment levels nt (h) = [njt (h)] of length Jh .21

6.1

Aggregation

The evolution of the plant distribution may be summarized as follows. First, there
are M 2 equations representing the fractions of establishments that are current adjustors,
and hence will begin the next period with time-since-last adjustment 1. One such equation
holds for each current productivity, l = 1, ..., M , and for each next-period productivity, m =
1, ..., M . Each represents the fraction of all establishments that have current productivity
al and adjust from their start of period employment level to the associated target n0t (l),
and that will then enter next period identified by (n1t (l), am ).
θ1,t+1 (l, m) = φ(l, m)

Jh
M ³X
X
h=1 j=1

´
θjt (h, l)αjt (h, l)

(22)

Next, there are M 2 sets of equations describing the non-adjusting population. Each set
is identified by a particular (past, current) productivity combination, and each contains
Jh − 1 separate equations, one for each possible time-since-last-adjustment. Specifically,
each equation isolates the fraction of all plants that had productivity ah , h ∈ {1, ..., M },
at the time of their last adjustment j periods in the past, do not adjust this period, (hence
produce with employment njt (h)), and then draw productivity am , m ∈ {1, ..., M }, at
the start of the next period. These are the plants that will enter the next date having
labor associated with productivity ah from j + 1 periods in the past and having current
productivity am .
θj+1,t+1 (h, m) =

M
X
l=1

θjt (h, l)[1 − αjt (h, l)]φ(l, m)

for j = 1, ..., Jh − 1

(23)

is that we must assume that the economy stays suﬃciently local to the steady state that these horizons are
impervious to aggregate shocks. To know whether this assumption is reasonable in a given application,
one must verify that all endogenous adjustment fractions remain strictly in the (0, 1) interval at every date
over long simulations.
21
For example, in the case of a 2-state Markov shock, the start-of-date plant distribution over employment
and productivities is completely summarized by four θ vectors and two n vectors. Using the notation
outlined above, these are: θt (1, 1) and θt (1, 2), each of length J1 ≡ max{J(1, 1), J(1, 2)}; θt (2, 1) and
θt (2, 2), each of length J2 ≡ max{J(2, 1), J(2, 2)}; nt (1) of length J1 ; nt (2) of length J2 .

23

Finally, there are M sets of equations describing future employments of those that had
productivity ah , h ∈ {1, ..., M }, at the time of their last adjustment:
nj+1,t+1 (h) = (1 − d)njt (h)

for j = 0, ..., Jh − 1.

(24)

Equations (25)- (28) describe aggregate output gross of adjustment costs, aggregate
labor demand and total adjustment costs in the economy. Aggregate output is total production by all establishments with current productivity {al }M
l=1 that adjust to the optimal
employment consistent with their productivity, together with the output of all nonadjustors (of each current productivity al ) that last adjusted to an employment consistent with
productivity {ah }M
h=1 :
Yt =

M h ³
M J(h,l)
´X
i
X
X
f n0t (l), al , zt
θjt (h, l)αjt (h, l)
h=1 j=1

l=1

+

(25)

M X
M hJ(h,l)−1
X
X
l=1 h=1

j=1

³
i
´
f njt (h), al , zt θjt (h, l)[1 − αjt (h, l)] .

Total employment demand is an analogous sum of the employments of adjusting and nonadjusting establishments:
NtD

M h
M J(h,l)
i
X
X
X
n0t (l)
=
θjt (h, l)αjt (h, l)

+

(26)

h=1 j=1

l=1

M X
M hJ(h,l)−1
X
X
l=1 h=1

j=1

i
njt (h)θjt (h, l)[1 − αjt (h, l)] .

Finally, economywide adjustment costs are the total of those paid by establishments of each
time-since-adjustment age that last adjusted to an employment consistent with productivity ah and now have productivity al , again summing across past and current productivity
levels:

Qt =

M X
M hJ(h,l)
X
X
l=1 h=1

j=1

³
´
θjt (h, l)Γ αjt (h, l) ,

(27)

where each Γ(α) in (27) represents the average adjustment cost paid per member in a given
group, conditional on adjustment fraction α from that group,
Γ(α) ≡

Z

G−1 (α)

xg(x).

0

24

(28)

6.2

Planning problem

The planning problem for the generalized partial adjustment model with persistent
plant-specific productivities is listed below. Here, the aggregate state vector includes the
M 2 + M vectors that together describe the current distribution of establishments over
employment
and productivity, alongside
current exogenous aggregate productivity, z:
i
h
M
M
St ≡ [θt (h, l)]h,l=1 , [nt (h)]h=1 , zt .
W (St ) = max u(ct , 1 − Nt ) + βEW (St+1 |St )

(29)

Λt

+λt [Yt − Qt − ct ] + wt λt [Nt − NtD ],
subject
( to (22)-(28), where
h
i
J(h,l)−1 M
Λt = ct , Nt , [n0t (l)]M
,
[α
(h,
l)]
jt
j=1
l=1

h,l=1

h
i
J(h,l)−1 M
, [θj+1,t+1 (h, l)]j=0

h,l=1

)

.

The solution to this problem satisfies (22)-(28) and the constraints in (29) with equality, as
well as a series of eﬃciency conditions that, after some algebra, may be written as follow.
First, aggregate consumption and labor supply satisfy
λt = D1 u(ct , 1 − Nt )
wt λt = D2 u(ct , 1 − Nt ).
Next, we describe the conditions determining target employments. For each plantspecific productivity level al , define ω0t (l) to be the total establishments that currently
have this productivity and adjust their employment;
ω 0t (l) ≡

M J(h,l)
X
X

θjt (h, l)αjt (h, l), for l = 1, ..., M .

h=1 j=1

The conditions identifying the optimal employment levels for each of these groups of adM
P
Jh equations of
justing establishments may then be written recursively as below in the
h=1

(30)-(31). For l = 1, ..., M :

µ
¶
´
i
³
h
λt+1 Ω1,t+1 (l)
| St = 0,
D1 f n0t (l), al , zt − wt + β(1 − d)E
λt
ω0t (l)
where, for each h = 1, ..., M,
25

(30)

Ωjt (h) ≡

M
X
l=1

´
i
h
³
θjt (h, l)[1 − αjt (h, l)] D1 f (1 − d)j n0t (h), al , zt − wt

(31)

µ

¶
λt+1
+β(1 − d)E
Ωj+1,t+1 (h) | St , for j = 1, ..., Jh − 1.
λt

Note that these conditions closely parallel that in the model without plant-level productivity shocks. As there, the marginal eﬀects of a single plant’s current employment choice on
its production and wage payments continue for so long as it does not re-adjust its employment. The second term in (30) reflects the probability-weighted sum of future eﬀects for
any single member of the ω 0t (l) group of adjusting plants. Any such plant may enter date
t + 1 with productivity a1 and produce without readjusting its employment with probabilθ
(l,1)
θ1,t+1 (l,2)
ity 1,t+1
ω0t (l) [1 − α1,t+1 (l, 1)]; with probability
ω 0t (l) [1 − α1,t+1 (l, 2)], the plant may have
productivity a2 and not adjust employment next period, and so forth. The collections of
equations in (31) summarize the resulting marginal eﬀects from t + 1 and forward until
date t + Jl , the date by which this currently adjusting plant will with certainty re-adjust
its employment if it has not already done so.
The conditions determining optimal adjustment fractions from within each group of
plants are listed below. In each case, the adjusting fraction equates the marginal cost
paid to adjust the last plant from a given group to the net value of moving that plant
into the adjustment group associated with its current productivity. For each group of
establishments that had productivity ah at the time of last adjustment, h ∈ {1, ..., M },
and now have productivity al , l ∈ {1, ..., M }, the optimal adjustment fractions from each
time-since-last-adjustment subgroup will satisfy:
³
´
ξ αjt (h, l) = v0t (l) − vjt (h, l) for j = 1, ..., J(h, l) − 1

(32)

where ξ(α) ≡ G−1 (α). For example, αjt (1, 2), the fraction adjusted from the plant group
identified by (njt (1), a2 ), equates the associated marginal adjustment cost to the diﬀerence
between v0t (2), the value of a plant of type (n0t (2), a2 ) at the time of production, and
vjt (1, 2), that of a type (njt (1), a2 ) plant at production time. Together, (32) determines
M P
M
P
all
[J(h, l) − 1] adjustment fractions, given the production-time values of each plant
h=1 l=1

type below.
The values associated with members of each diﬀerent plant group are expressed recursively as follow. First, the value of any adjusting plant with current productivity al is, for
26

each l = 1, ..., M :
"
µ
M
h ³
i
´
λt+1 X
v0t (l) = f n0t (l), al , zt − wt n0t (l) + βE
φ(l, m) α1,t+1 (l, m)v0,t+1 (m)
λt m=1
#
³
´¶
+[1 − α1,t+1 (l, m)]v1,t+1 (l, m) − Γ α1,t+1 (l, m)
| St .
This includes the plant’s current profit flows associated with having (n0t (l), al ) at production time, plus its discounted probability-weighted continuation value. At date t + 1, the
plant will draw productivity a1 with probability φ(l, 1). In this case, its expected fixed cost
payment
will ´
be the conditional average adjustment cost paid by any member of its group,
³
Γ α1,t+1 (l, 1) , and it will adjust employment to n0,t+1 (1) with probability α1,t+1 (l, 1), or
not adjust with probability [1 − α1,t+1 (l, 1)]. Alternatively, the plant will have productivity
a2 with´ probability φ(l, 2), in which case its expected fixed cost payment will be
³
Γ α1,t+1 (l, 2) , and it will adjust its employment to n0,t+1 (2) with probability α1,t+1 (l, 2),
or not with probability [1 − α1,t+1 (l, 2)], and so forth.
M
M P
P
Finally, we have remaining
[J(h, l) − 1] equations that identify the values assoh=1 l=1

ciated each group of nonadjusting plants in the economy. For each (h, l) past and current
productivity combination, for each j = 1, ..., J(h, l) − 1, the value of a nonadjusting plant
identified by (njt (h), al ) at production time in date t is:

"
µ
M
h ³
i
´
λt+1 X
vjt (h, l) = f njt (h), al , zt − wt njt (h) + βE
φ(l, m) αj+1,t+1 (h, m)v0,t+1 (m)
λt m=1
#
³
´¶
+[1 − αj+1,t+1 (h, m)]vj+1,t+1 (h, m) − Γ αj+1,t+1 (h, m)
| St .
Given the current aggregate state, St , and the values of J(h, l), the evolution of this
economy with persistent plant-specific productivity shocks is fully described by a system
of X first-order stochastic diﬀerence equations, where
X =7+2

M X
M
X

J(h, l) + (M + 2)

h=1 l=1

M
X
h=1

Jh − M 2 .

Thus, the economy’s aggregate dynamics may be solved as a local appropriation around

27

the steady state using standard linear systems methods.22 In solving for the steady-state,
we add to this system the solution for the additional endogenous variables defining the
iM
h
.
nonadjustment horizons, [J(h, l)]M
l=1
h=1

7

Concluding remarks

Using a time-invariant distribution of adjustment costs that are random across production units at a point in time, and over time for any unit, we have developed a new
variety of partial adjustment model for labor demand. Our generalized partial adjustment
model is consistent with 5 stylized facts: (1) employment adjustment at the establishment
is discrete and occasional, (2) aggregate employment is smooth and gradual, (3) individual
plants’ probabilities of adjustment, their adjustment rates, vary over time in response to
aggregate conditions, (4) these adjustment probabilities are functions of the diﬀerence between plants’ actual and target employment and (5) movements in aggregate employment
are largely driven by movements in aggregate factors, not by changes in plant-level factors.
The last stylized fact has motivated the focus in our numerical examples on cases where
idiosyncratic uncertainty at the plant level that is transitory and there are no additional
sources of plant-specific heterogeneity. Existing empirical research suggests that such factors are of secondary importance in explaining movements in aggregate employment. A
benefit to our abstraction is that we are able to develop a generalized (S, s) model of
establishment-level labor adjustment that rationalizes existing empirical work that has
heretofore assumed state-dependent adjustment hazards. Moreover, we have shown that
our method allows convenient aggregation of the discrete adjustment actions of a heterogeneous distribution of production units into a smooth planning problem.
Using our generalized partial adjustment model, we have analyzed the dynamics of
employment under two alternative assumptions about the wage rate and interest rate, two
prices that are central to an establishment’s adjustment decision. We began by assuming
that both prices were fixed, while productivity fluctuated exogenously. Next we considered
a simple general equilibrium formulation in which these prices were endogenously determined, and hence varied with changes in productivity. The dynamics under these two
formulations are quite diﬀerent, but the diﬀerences are understandable consequences of
variations in wages and interest rates. Previous research in this area has been conducted
22

For example, suppose that a took on one of only M = 2 possible states, and suppose that the highest
possible adjustment cost draw was suﬃciently low such that none of the resulting four J(h, l) nonadjustment
horizons exceeded 4 periods. Then the maximum size of the resulting linear system would be 163 equations.

28

almost exclusively under the assumption of exogenous prices, given the complications presented by nontrivial heterogeneity in production. An important contribution of the current
model lies in its ability to limit such complications, thereby allowing straightforward aggregation, and hence the natural extension to general equilibrium. Moreover, while we have
selected to abstract from additional sources of plant-level heterogeneity in the numerical
examples here, we have shown how the addition of persistent plant-specific shocks is a
straightforward extension to our current framework. We therefore view it as a tractable
basis for future research into the dynamics of factor adjustment.

29

References
[1] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel [1992], “Beyond the PartialAdjustment Model,” American Economic Review 82, 360-384.
[2] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel [1993], “Microeconomic Adjustment
Hazards and Aggregate Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, 359-383.
[3] Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel [1999], “Explaining Investment
Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Approach,” Econometrica 67,
783-826.
[4] Caballero, Ricardo J.; Eduardo M. R. A. Engel; and John C. Haltiwanger [1997], “Aggregate Employment Dynamics: Building From Microeconomic Evidence,” American
Economic Review 87, 115-137.
[5] Dotsey, Michael; Robert G. King; and Alexander L. Wolman, [1999], “State Dependent
Pricing and the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 14, 655-690.
[6] Hamermesh, Daniel S. [1989], “Labor Demand and the Structure of Adjustment
Costs,” American Economic Review 79, 674-689.
[7] Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Gerard A. Pfann [1996], “Adjustment Costs in Factor
Demand,” Journal of Economic Literature 34, 1264-1292.
[8] Khan, Aubhik and Julia K. Thomas [2003a], “Nonconvex factor adjustments in equilibrium business cycle models: do nonlinearities matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 331-360.
[9] Khan, Aubhik and Julia K. Thomas [2003b], “Inventories and the Business Cycle: An
Equilibrium Analysis of (S,s) Policies” NBER working paper w10078.
[10] King, Robert G. and Sergio T. Rebelo [1999], “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,”
chapter 14 in M. Woodford and J. Taylor (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics IB
Elsevier Science.
[11] Kollintzas, Tryphon E. [1985], “The Symmetric Linear Rational Expectations Model,”
Econometrica 53, 963-976.

30

[12] Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and Edward C. Prescott [1971], “Investment Under Uncertainty,”
Econometrica 39, 659-681.
[13] Mortensen, Dale T. [1973], “Generalized Costs of Adjustment and Dynamic Factor
Demand Theory,” Econometrica 41, 657-665.
[14] Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott [1994] “Barriers to Technology Adoption
and Development,” Journal of Political Economy 102, 298-321.
[15] Sargent, Thomas J. [1978], “Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under
Rational Expectations,” Journal of Political Economy 86, 1009-1044.
[16] Thomas, Julia K. [2002], “Is Lumpy Investment Relevant for the Business Cycle?”
Journal of Political Economy 110, 508-534.

31

Figure 1a: Steady State Adjustment Fractions

1
0.8
αj

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

7

8

Figure 1b: Steady State Distribution

0.25
0.2
θj

0.15
0.1

0.05
0
1

2

3

4
5
time since adjustment

6

Figure 2a: Market Employment

percent deviation

3

PA
TD
SD

2
1
0
0

2

6

8

10

Figure 2b: Market Output

3
percent deviation

4

PA
TD
SD

2.5
2

1.5
1
0

2

4

date

6

8

10

Figure 3a: Total Adjustors
percent deviation

20
15
10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

8

9

10

percent deviation

Figure 3b: Target Employment
2.5

2

1.5
1

2

3

4

5

date

6

7

Figure 4: Decomposition of Market Employment

3

total
nj effects
ωj effects

2.5

percentage change

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
1

2

3

4

5

date

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 5: Effects of Equilibrium
Employment
Total Adjustors
30
GE
GE
Fixed Prices
Fixed Prices
20

percent deviation

3
2

10
1
0
1

0
3

5

7

9

Output

3

GE
Fixed Prices

2.5

percent deviation

11

-10
1

3

5

7

9

11

Target Employment
GE
Fixed Prices

3
2

2

1.5

1

1

0.5
1

3

5

7

date

9

11

0
1

3

5

7

date

9

11

