                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                TRADE POLICY AND INDUSTRIAL
                                     SECTOR RESPONSES:
                                USING EVOLUTIONARY MODELS
                                 TO INTERPRET THE EVIDENCE

                                              Erkan Erdem
                                              James Tybout

                                          Working Paper 9947
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9947


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2003




This paper was prepared for the 2003 issue of the Brookings Trade Forum, and presented at the May 2003
Brookings Trade Forum Conference in Washington D.C. We are grateful to the Brookings Institution and the
National Science Foundation (grant 421-18 687W0) for funding. We also wish to thank Wolfgang Keller,
Penny Goldberg, Marc Melitz and Dani Rodrik for many useful comments, and Gautam Gowrisankaran and
Ariel Pakes for making their Gauss and C code available. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Erkan Erdem and James Tybout. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Trade Policy and Industrial Sector Responses: Using Evolutionary Models to Interpret the
Evidence
Erkan Erdem and James Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 9947
August 2003
JEL No. F1, L1

                                            ABSTRACT


       Firm- and plant-level empirical studies typically find that trade liberalization squeezes price-

cost margins among import-competing firms, that this heightened competitive pressure induces

productivity gains among these same firms, and that further efficiency gains come from market share

reallocations. Using a computable industrial evolution model to simulate the dynamic effects of

import competition, we demonstrate what types of managerial behavior, long-term transition paths

and welfare effects are consistent with this set of stylized facts.

Erkan Erdem
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
517 Kern Graduate Building
University Park, PA 16802
exe133@psu.edu

James Tybout
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
517 Kern Graduate Building
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
jtybout@psu.edu
I.     Overview

       Most students of economic development feel that liberal trade regimes are a good

thing, and that the costs of protection can be substantial. In significant part, this belief

traces to the notion that foreign competition disciplines domestic firms, forcing them to

eliminate waste, accelerate their innovation rates, or shut down. This “import discipline”

notion traces, in turn, to numerous firm- and plant-level empirical studies of liberalization

episodes. These conclude that the manufacturing sectors of developing countries have

become more efficient after trade liberalization episodes, that this has been accomplished

partly through producer turnover, and that heightened competitive pressure from imports

has been the motivating force.

       Although the empirical literature that supports the import discipline hypothesis

offers some robust findings, it leaves many basic issues unresolved. One source of

ambiguity is that it is based on flawed measures of firm performance. But more

fundamentally, this literature (a) fails to identify empirically the mechanisms that link

import competition to efficiency, (b) only describes the short-run effects of trade

liberalization, and (c) doesn’t translate firms’ performances into welfare measures. Our

objective is to address these shortcomings. Using a computable industrial evolution

model to simulate the dynamic effects of import competition, we demonstrate what types

of managerial behavior, long-term transition paths, and welfare effects are consistent with

the findings of previous firm- and plant-level empirical studies.

       Our analysis is based on a modified version of Pakes and Ericson’s (1995) and

Pakes and McGuire’s (1994) modelhereafter, the PEM model. It describes an industry

populated by a changing set of firms, each producing its own differentiated product. New




                                                                                               1
firms enter the industry when the expected present value of their future earning stream

exceeds their entry costs, and incumbent firms exit when the expected value of their

future earnings stream falls below the scrap value of their assets. While active, firms can

invest an amount of their choosing to increase the likelihood of a quality-improving

product innovation. All economic agents make optimal choices, given their current

information sets and the idiosyncratic shocks they experience. (Inter alia, these choices

reflect accurate perceptions concerning the stochastic processes they optimize against and

the behavior of their competitors.) We modify the PEM framework by introducing an

imported product variety that competes with the domestically-produced varieties and

increases in quality at an exogenous rate.

       Simulations of our version of the PEM model reproduce the well-known features

of short-run adjustment to trade liberalization by import-competing sectors: price-cost

margins fall, and efficiency improves, largely because of the elimination of weak product

lines and the exit of inefficient plants. But our results also demonstrate that the intra-

industry efficiency effects of foreign competition are probably more nuanced than

commonly believed.

       Specifically, we find that productivity gains due to the purging of weak firms are

transitory, and likely to dissipate within 10 to 15 years of trade liberalization. As they

fade, the cumulative effects of reform-induced changes in the incentive to innovate

become more important. These are often negative, so foreign competition can create a

longer-term tendency for the quality of domestic goods to deteriorate relative to imports.

Depending upon the nature of the trade reforms, this tendency may or may not be offset

by quality/efficiency gains due to embodied technological progress in imported capital. In




                                                                                              2
any case, heightened import competition is likely to be accompanied by permanently

higher plant or product line turnover cum more rapid job creation and job destruction.

Finally, there is a strong possibility of welfare losses on the part of domestic producers,

but welfare gains among consumers due to lower prices are likely to be larger.



II.     The Import Discipline Hypothesis

        Let us begin our discussion by recounting the logic behind the import discipline

hypothesis, and the firm-level evidence that is often cited in its support.

A.      Micro Foundations for the Trade-Efficiency Linkage

        A variety of theoretical arguments provide possible explanations for the import

discipline hypothesis. Some of these apply to any policy reform that intensifies

competitive pressures. For example, in contexts where ownership is separate from

management, heightened competition can reduce agency problems, and thus may induce

managers to move toward high-effort contracts (Hart, 1983; Voustden and Campbell,

1994). This effect is quite sensitive to modeling assumptions, however, and might well go

in the other direction (Scharfstein, 1988; Martin, 1993).

        Regardless of whether agency problems are present, competition may heighten

incentives to innovate among those firms close to the technological frontier, while

inducing the rest to forfeit market share and/or shut down. Boone (2000) defines

heightened competitive pressure as a shock that induces this pattern of response, and

provides some examples of demand systems and market equilibria that exhibit this

property.1 Of course, competitive pressures may serve mainly to reduce the rents from


1
 Aghion, et al (2003) develop a simple model with the same features. They posit that firms can improve
their efficiency by no more than one unit per period, so firms that lag more than one unit behind the


                                                                                                         3
innovation, as Schumpeter argued, so these laudatory effects need not obtain. Aghion et

al (2002) demonstrate that the relationship between product market competition and

innovation might exhibit an inverted-U shape, reflecting the relative strength of

Schumpeterian and Boone-type forces.

         Other linkages between openness and efficiency are inherently trade-related. For

example, Melitz (forthcoming) and Bernard et al (forthcoming) demonstrate that by

liberalizing trade, countries create new markets for their most efficient firms and new

competition for the rest. Thus it is possible to generate efficiency enhancing market share

reallocations without necessarily involving innovative activity. Trade flows may also act

as a conduit for embodied or disembodied knowledge flows, and may (or may not)

change the returns to innovation through general equilibrium effects on factor prices and

market sizes (Grossman and Helpman, 1991).



B.       The existing evidence

         Given the widespread appeal of import discipline arguments, and given the many

possible forms they might take, the profession has looked to empiricists to document their

nature and measure their importance. Two developments during the past quarter-century

have made it possible for the empiricists to respond in force. One is that numerous plant

and firm-level data sets have accumulated over sufficient time spans to support

econometric inference. The other is that many developing countries have dramatically

liberalized their trade regimes, generating a number of natural experiments.



technological frontier have no chance of catching up. With homogeneous products and Bertrand
competition, the threat of competition from an efficient foreign supplier induces firms one step behind to
invest in innovations, and induces those further back to relinquish their market.


                                                                                                             4
         At least five such natural experiments have attracted attention from empiricists.

One of the earliest occurred in Chile, which went from widespread quantitative

restrictions and average effective protection rates over 100 percent in 1967 to virtually no

quantitative restrictions and average effective protection rates of 15 percent by 1979

(Tybout, et al, 1991). Next, Mexico went from license coverage ratios of 91 percent and

tariff-based effective protection rates of 31 percent in 1984 to license coverage ratios of

11 percent and effective protection rates of 9 percent in 1990 (Tybout and Westbrook,

1995). The Cote d’Ivoire also began its liberalization in 1985, removing quantitative

restrictions, and reducing average tariffs by 30 percent over the following 2 years

(Harrison, 1994). More recently, Brazil reduced its exchange rate-adjusted average

nominal tariff rate from 80 percent in 1985 to 21 percent in 1995, simultaneously

eliminating non-tariff barriers (Muendler, 2003). Finally, in 1991 India removed

“licensing and other non-tariff barriers on all imports of intermediate and capital goods

and [implemented] significant reductions in tariffs on imports” (Krishna and Mitra,

1998).

         Table 1 summarizes a subset of the resulting studies, grouped by country-specific

liberalization episode. For each episode, we summarize evidence on plant- or firm-level

productivity gains and their relation to measures of trade protection (column 4). Further,

since productivity gains due to intra-plant innovations are conceptually distinct from

those due to market share reallocations (including entry and exit), we cite evidence that

isolates reallocation effects when it is available (column 5). Finally, to give some

indication of whether competitive pressures intensified with trade liberalization, we cite

studies that relate price-cost mark-ups to openness proxies in column 6.




                                                                                              5
       The message that emerges from Table 1 is consistently supportive of the import

discipline hypothesis. Import-competing sectors generally undergo the biggest

productivity gains during and immediately after trade liberalization episodes. These gains

are due, in significant part, to reallocation effects. And they are generally accompanied

by reductions in price-cost mark-ups, suggesting that heightened competitive pressure is

the driving force behind the adjustments.


C.     Limitations of the existing evidence

       Taken together, the studies in Table 1 constitute a valuable set of stylized facts

concerning the effects of trade policy on industrial sector performance. Nonetheless, our

ability to draw policy implications from this evidence is limited by problems with the

performance measures that have been used, and by problems linking these measures to

the policy regime. We now consider each in turn.

       Problems measuring performance

       One measurement problem derives from data limitations. It is infeasible to collect

detailed information on the quantities of each of the different product varieties that firms

produce. Thus all of the productivity studies in Table 1 measure output as deflated

revenues. Similarly, although most of these studies measure labor inputs in terms of

number of workers or hours worked, data limitations force them to measure intermediate

inputs as deflated expenditures, and capital stocks as depreciated and depreciated

expenditures. The resulting productivity measures therefore fall somewhere between

revenue per unit cost, and revenue per unit input bundle.

       This feature of productivity measures would be a non-issue if outputs and

intermediate input bundles were homogeneous across producers. But manufactured



                                                                                               6
products are quite differentiated, even within narrowly defined industries, and price-cost

mark-ups exhibit considerable variation across producers with product-specific demand

conditions. In this setting, Katayama, et al (2003, hereafter KLT) note that firms with

high mark-ups tend to generate lots of revenue per unit input bundle, and thus tend to

appear relatively productive. Similarly, high ratios of revenues to measured input usage

tend to occur at firms that pay dearly for their workers, since these firms pass some of

their labor costs forward to consumers. In contrast, when demand elasticities are

common across firms, cross sectional variation in true productive efficiency has little to

do with cross sectional variation in revenue per unit input bundle. The reason is that

productivity shocks cause input usage and revenue to move up or down roughly in

proportion to one another.2

           This spurious cross-sectional variation in measured productivity matters

especially in studies where the effects of reallocation-based productivity gains are

calculated because big firms tend to pay their workers more, and to face relatively low

demand elasticities.3 Thus they tend to look relatively efficient, even if their true


2
    KLT show that if the production technology is constant returns and Cobb-Douglas, measured productivity
                                                              p
for the ith producer takes the form: φ~ = µ + ln Wt + α ln Wit , where µ it is the firm’s optimal mark-up
                                       it  it
                                                 Pt        Wt p
(determined by demand elasticities), Wt is the industry-wide price deflator used for factor inputs, Pt is the
industry-wide deflator used for sales revenues, Wt p is the appropriate industry-wide price index for factors
measured in physical terms (most importantly, labor), Witp is the unobservable firm-specific unit price for
                                                                              ~
these same factors , and α is the share of total cost attribute to labor. Thus φ reflects mark-ups and
relative labor costs but it is independent of true productivity unless productivity affects mark-ups or the
prices of factors measured in physical units. Even if the workers are paid more because they are more
productive, the standard performance measures tell us nothing about economic efficiency because firms
that use valuable inputs to produce valuable outputs need not be more efficient than firms that use cheap
inputs to produce cheap output.
3
 Although it is somewhat tangential to our discussion, it is worth noting that this property of standard
productivity measures probably also creates large biases in studies that compare productivity indices across
multinationals, exporters and domestic producers.


                                                                                                                7
productivity is mediocre, and measured efficiency gains will be overstated when market

shares shift in favor of these firms. Nonetheless, to the extent that big firms get big by

being efficient, one can expect some cross-sectional correlation between measured

efficiency and true efficiency, so measures of reallocation-based productivity gains are

not entirely spurious.

           Time series variation in measured productivity is also likely to have a spurious

component, albeit here again it should at least be correlated with true productivity

growth. More precisely, if the cross-firm distribution of factor prices were time invariant,

if the price deflators used were representative of the prices faced by the sample of

producers being analyzed, and if firms could change their input usage without incurring

adjustment costs, the average productivity measure would be a good proxy for average

true productivity.4 But mark-ups clearly tend fall with trade liberalization and this effect

is particularly marked among large producers (Table 1, column 6). Thus, to the extent

that this margin squeeze is most dramatic among import-competing firms, these studies

may tend to understate efficiency gains in the import-competing industries during

liberalization episodes. Measured productivity growth may also be understated in these

industries because adjustment costs induce them to retain excess labor and capital during

periods of slack demand. Both effects may help explain why the measured efficiency

gains during the Brazilian, Chilean and the Mexico trade liberalizations were quite


4
    Under the assumptions in footnote 1, this follows because profit maximization implies that the optimal
mark-up ( µ it ) is related to the firm’s true productivity ( φ it ) by µ = φ − ln W it , where lnWit is the log
                                                                         it  it
                                                                                   Pit
of the unobservable firm-specific deflator for a unit bundle of all inputs, regardless of whether they are
measured in physical or expenditure terms. Substituting this expression into the expression for measured
productivity in footnote 1 and averaging across firms yields the result that cross-firm mean values of
measured productivities should be close to mean values of true productivity if the price deflators used are
representative of the sample of firms.


                                                                                                                   8
modest, despite major policy shocks and, at least in Chile, evidence of widespread labor

shedding.

       The fact that manufactured products are differentiated across firms and through

time creates another basic measurement problem for the studies in Table 1. Product

innovations generally affect social welfare, but productivity studies only pick up temporal

variation in process innovation. Thus, for example, firms that save on input usage by

producing less appealing products are likely to look better than firms that keep their

marginal costs constant but improve their products. With variation in both product quality

and productive efficiency, firms’ performances should be measured in terms of their

contributions to social surplus. Like the first problem, this one may be more important for

cross-plant analyses than for time series, although changes in the set of available products

probably matter over medium to long-term horizons.

       A final measurement problem is that the Table 1 studies tend to miss some costs

that firms incur in order to become more productive. Because the data are usually

unavailable, analysts are usually unable to include investments in R&D, worker training

and other types of overhead in their studies. Similarly, when efficiency gains are

accomplished through labor shedding, severance costs and the costs borne by displaced

workers are generally not part of the calculations. By understating the costs of innovation

and workforce downsizing, the typical study tends to treat productivity gains as

unequivocally desirable, and may overstate the gains from import competition.

       Problems linking performance to the policy regime

       Even if firms’ performances had been appropriately measured, they would still

leave some basic policy issues unresolved. One reason is that they are not very




                                                                                           9
informative about the underlying behavior that generated the observed patterns of

association between performance measures and openness proxies. For example, although

we can be fairly confident that intra-firm efficiency is correlated through time with

openness, we don’t know whether it reflects the changing nature of an agency problem, a

shift in the return to innovation at owner-managed firms, or greater incentives to shed

non-essential labor. Nor do we know whether trade liberalization increases the incentives

to absorb new embodied technologies through capital investments.5 Answers to these

questions determine whether the observed correlations are due to domestic market

failuresin which case trade policy may not be the best way to address themor are

inherently trade-related.

           Related issues arise in studies that measure reallocation-based productivity gains.

Most simply report the amount of sectoral productivity growth that is not attributable to

intra-plant productivity gains (Pacvnik, 2001; Liu, 1993; Tybout and Westbrook, 1995;

Tybout, 1992). But without a dynamic structural model to interpret these figures, it is

impossible to say how things might have differed under a more protectionist regime.6 Do

reallocation-based gains reflect an improvement in the efficiency of the weeding out

process, or are they present because liberalization creates more plants that need weeding

outperhaps by reducing the incentives to innovate?

           Finally, because the time periods covered by the studies in Table 1 are relatively

brief, it is not clear whether this body of evidence describes transitory changes or long-

run adjustments. They might reflect a one-time shakedown, or they might reflect a lasting

5
    Muendler (2003) does provide some evidence on the role of imported technologies in Brazil.




                                                                                                 10
change in industry dynamics. They might even describe short-run effects that are more

than reversed over the medium to long term.



III.     Interpreting the evidence with structural models

         Thus far we have argued that the existing empirical evidence on import discipline

effects is noisy and biased, but three basic findings are probably qualitatively correct.

Specifically, among import-competing firms, trade liberalization squeezes price-cost

margins, induces some intra-plant efficiency gains, and induces additional efficiency

gains due to the shutting down of weak plants. We have also argued that, measurement

issues aside, these findings are of limited use for policy analysis. They do not tell us

anything about the managerial behavior behind the intra-plant productivity gains, they do

not go beyond short-run effects, and they do not link adjustment patterns to welfare. The

remainder of this paper presents a calibrated model that does all of these things in a way

that is consistent with the empirical evidence.



A.       An Industrial Evolution Model with Import Discipline Effects

         If we are to interpret the existing evidence and draw policy implications, we

require a structural model that captures several basic features. First, if we are to study

intra-firm productivity change, the model should include the micro foundations for at

least one form of induced innovation. Second, given that we believe the trade regime

affects competitive pressures and mark-ups, the model should allow for imperfect

competition. Third, if we are to study adjustment paths, the model should be explicitly

6
 Muendler (2003) goes one step further by estimating exit probabilities for incumbent plants before versus
after the Brazilian trade liberalization of the early 1990s. But this exercise does not explain entry or market


                                                                                                            11
dynamic, with forward-looking heterogeneous agents who foresee the future imperfectly.

Fourth, given that we believe turnover-based productivity growth is significant, the

model should allow for endogenous entry and market share reallocations. And finally, if

we are to study the net welfare effects of changes in behavior, the model should assign

some costs to entry and innovation.

         Needless to say, the modeling exercise we have described above is a difficult one.

But if we forego econometric analysis and content ourselves with calibration, it is

possible to construct a computable model with all of these features, and thereby to

develop a broad sense for some of the dynamic structural relationships that are consistent

with the stylized facts of Table 1. In the remainder of this section we demonstrate how

this might be done, and we use the results to inform our interpretation of the econometric

evidence. To keep the analysis tractable we study a hypothetical industry populated by a

handful of firms that differ only in terms of the quality of their products.

         The Ericson-Pakes-McGuire Model

         We base our analysis closely on the industrial evolution model developed by

Ericson and Pakes (1995) and simulated by Pakes and McGuire (1994 and 2001). The

basic assumptions behind the simulated version of this model are concisely summarized

in Pakes (2001) and Pakes and McGuire (2001), which we now paraphrase.

         The PEM model describes the evolution of an industry populated by a changing

set of firms, each producing a single differentiated product. Factor prices and the price of

an outside goodfor present purposes, a composite imported goodare exogenous.

Product quality varies across firms and through time. The current-period pay-off to an



share reallocations, and it fails to identify the deep parameters needed for counter-factual analysis.


                                                                                                         12
active firm with product quality level i is determined by a profit function π (i, s ) , where

                                                      [              ]
i ∈ Ζ + , the set of positive integers, and s = s j ; j ∈ Z + is a vector whose jth element

gives the number of active firms at quality level j.7 Given s, incumbents with product

quality i decide whether to remain active or exit and sell their firm for a scrap value φ .

Those that remain active also choose an investment level x, which costs them cx and

shifts the probability distribution for their next-period quality realization. Larger x

investments lead to more favorable shifts.

        For a firm currently at quality i, investing x in product development, and

operating in a market with structure s, let p (i ′, s ′ | x, i, s ) be the perceived probability

distribution for next period’s market structure. Then, given a discount factor of β , such a

firm perceives its current value to be

                                                                                                  
                              
              V (i, s ) = max φ , π (i, s ) + sup x ≥ 0 − cx + β ∑ V (i , s ) p (i , s | x, i, s )  .
                                                                         ′ ′      ′   ′                   (1)
                                                             i ′, s ′                           
                                                                                                      

If the max operator returns φ , it is optimal for the entrepreneur to sell the firm for scrap,

otherwise it chooses the investment level x that maximizes the term in square brackets

and proceeds to compete in the product market.

        It is convenient to treat the quality index i as normalized relative to current quality

of the imported good. Then if i grows through time, firms at this quality level must be

investing more than enough in innovation to keep up with the quality of the imported good.

More precisely, let the Bernoulli random variables ν t and ζ t represent increments to own



7
 Given investment decisions, future realizations on (i,s) are presumed not to depend upon firms’ current
pricing or output decisions. Thus the profit function reflects a simple “spot market” equilibrium in the
goods markets and, for example, punishment strategies are disallowed.


                                                                                                           13
and foreign quality, respectively, and assume that it evolves according to:

it +1 − it = ν t − ζ t . Shocks to the quality of the imported good, ζ t , are exogenous draws

that take on the value one with probability µ (1) = δ , where 0 < δ < 1 is a constant. Shocks

to the quality of a domestic good depend upon the firm’s investment current investment:

                      axt
P[ν t = 1 | xt ] =           , where a > 0 is a constant. Thus for a firm investing xt , the
                     axt + 1

                                                                                             axt
expected gain in quality relative to the imported good is E (it +1 − it ) =                         -δ .
                                                                                            axt + 1

        To further characterize the transition kernel, p (i ′, s ′ | x, i, s ) , let ŝi describes the

states of the competitors of a firm at state i when the industry structure is s, and let

q( sˆi | i, s, ζ ) describes this firm’s beliefs about the probability of landing at market

structure sˆi next period, given the current state and ζ t . Then the transition probabilities

that enter the value function (1) are:


         p (i ′ = i*, s ′ = s* | x, i, s ) = ∑ p (ν = i * −i − ζ | x)q (sˆi′ = s * −e(i*) | i, s, ζ )µ (ζ ) ,
                                          ζ

where e(i) is a compatible vector with zeros everywhere except in the ith position, which

holds a one. Note that q( sˆi | i, s, ζ ) embodies firm i’s beliefs about entry behavior and the

value functions of all competing incumbents.

        Finally, there is at most one entrant per period, and this entrepreneur creates a

firm if doing so generates an expected discounted cash flow that exceeds the entry cost,

xe. Any potential entrant for whom this condition holds pays xe (drawn from a uniform

distribution), and after a set-up period becomes an incumbent with an initial relative

quality i e . Note that i e measures quality relative to imported good, so this specification


                                                                                                                14
means that entrants always jump into the market the same expected distance from the

foreign best practice frontier, so it amounts to the assumption that foreign technological

innovations are always embodied in the capital stocks of new firms, up to a constant gap.

        Equilibria obtain when all firms’ beliefs, q( sˆi | i, s, ζ ) , are consistent with the

objective distribution of industry structures based on the investment, entry and exit rules

described above. Pakes and Erikson (1995) show that Markov-perfect equilibria exist,

although uniqueness is not ensured. Also, although the industry exhibits ongoing entry

and exit, the number of firms is bounded by some integer n , and each active firm is

limited to a finite integer set of states, Ω = {1, K , K } . Thus one need only compute

                                                                                 
equilibria for tuples (i, s ) ∈ Ω × S where S ≡ s = [s1 ,K, s k ] : ∑ s j ≤ n < ∞  .
                                                                   j              

         Our adaptation of the model

        We base firms’ profit functions on pure Bertrand competition in product markets

characterized by a nested-logit demand system (McFadden, 1974). Nest 0 contains only

the composite imported variety, and nest 1 contains all of the domestic varieties. More

precisely, we define the net utility that the jth consumer derives from consuming a unit of

product i at price Pit in period t to be:


                          ω 0t + ω it − θPit + ξ j ,1 t + (1 − ϕ )ε ijt   i = 1, N t
                 U ijt =                                                             .
                         ω 0t − θP0t + ξ j ,0 t + (1 − ϕ )ε 0 jt               i=0



                                                     t     
Here P0t is the price of the imported good, ω0t = g  ∑ ζ k  , g ′(⋅) ≥ 0 , g ′′(⋅) < 0 ,
                                                           
                                                     k =1 

measures the mean gross utility delivered by a unit of the current generation imported


                                                                                                  15
variety, and ω it = f (it ) measures the mean extra utility delivered by a unit of any

domestic good at quality level it. 8 Also, θ > 0 measures price sensitivity, and ϕ

measures the degree of substitution between domestic varieties and the imported good

( 0 < ϕ < 1 ). The latter follows because ξ j, d t varies only across individuals and across

nests (d=1 for domestic varieties and 0 for imports), while ε ijt varies across individuals

and across all varieties. (Both ξ j , d t + (1 − ϕ )ε ijt and ε ij have extreme value distributions

across individuals.) This allows us to control the degree of substitution between imports

and the domestic varieties.9

         Given our utility function, improvements in the quality of the imported good and

reductions in its price have very similar effects from the perspective of consumers. Thus

ongoing quality improvements abroad can also be viewed as ongoing price reductions,

perhaps due to exchange rate appreciation. Similar comments apply concerning the

domestic goods. Marginal cost reductions always lead to price reductions in our

characterization of the spot market equilibrium. So, although we assume that the

domestic firms have identical, flat marginal cost schedules, roughly speaking we may

view the effects of product innovations as similar to the effects of process innovation.




8
 We use f(i) = 15i /(i + 1) − 5 . (We do not need to make specific assumptions about g (⋅) to solve the
model, since it only affects the level of consumer surplus.) Note that our specification for f(⋅) implies
diminishing marginal utility from quality premiums. Also, it ensures that the return to quality
improvements (relative to the imported good) approaches zero as i→ ∞, and thus eliminates the incentive
for firms to drive i above the maximum value considered, K.
9
 Berry (1994) provides further details on the product market equilibria that obtain with nested logit
demands and pure Bertrand pricing rules.



                                                                                                        16
B.     The Simulation Exercises

       Using modified versions of the Gauss and C programs written by Ariel Pakes,

Paul McGuire and Gautam Gowrisankaran, we study the effects of import competition on

industrial structure using two policy experiments. The first is to permanently reduce the

price of the composite imported good, P0 (hereafter, the “RPM experiment”). It is meant

to approximate a reduction in trade barriers. The second is to permanently accelerate the

rate of innovation for imported goods, δ (hereafter, the AIM experiment). It is meant to

describe the effects of trading with a country where technological progress is rapid, as

opposed to modest.

       Both sets of exercises begin from a parameterization in which imports have a very

small market share. Also, we assume that no more than six domestic firms are

simultaneously active in the domestic market. (This bound is rarely hit under the

parameterizations we usethree to five firms are typically active.) Thus we caution that

the results may overstate the importance of oligopolistic interactions for most

manufacturing industries.

       To eliminate any role for starting values, we begin each simulation with 5,000

periods under the pre-reform parameterization, then we shock the parameter of interest

and track the industry’s adjustment. The shock is always presumed to surprise

entrepreneurs, but once in place the new parameter values are presumed to be common

knowledge. Each experiment is repeated 100 times, and the average trajectories are

graphed. Our graphs are normalized so that the regime change takes place in period 50,

and thereafter they show both the simulated responses and the mean trajectory that would




                                                                                           17
have emerged in the absence of the regime switch. The parameter values we use for these

simulations are presented in Table 2.

       It is not possible to be precise about the length of time that corresponds to a single

period. But the typical life span of a firm in our simulations is 4 to 6 periods, so an

average life span of 10 years implies that one period amounts to roughly 2 years.

Similarly, we note that the average entry/exit rate in our base case simulations is 23

percent, which is roughly twice the annual rate observed among manufacturing plants in

semi-industrialized countries (Roberts and Tybout, 1996).

       Reduced Price for Imports (RPM)

       Our results for a permanent reduction in the price of importsthe RPM

experimentare summarized by figures 1.1 through 1.8 and the first two columns of

Table 3. Consider first the domestic market share trajectories presented in figure 1.1.

When the price of the imported good drops from 1.5 to 0, the share of output supplied by

domestic firms immediately drops as consumers shift toward the import variety. The

price-cost mark-ups of domestic varieties also drop as domestic entrepreneurs react to the

new environment (figure 1.5).

       The net exit rate is roughly 10 percent in the first post-reform period, and all of

the disappearing firms come from the low end of the product quality distribution. Thus

the unweighted average quality of domestic goods rises sharply in the immediate

aftermath of the reform (figure 1.2). (The weighted average relative quality of domestic

goods doesn’t change much initially because exiting firms are smallsee figure 1.3.) But

incentives to innovate are clearly less at the lower imported price, reflecting a simple

Schumpeterian mechanism: firms with the most market power gain the most from R&D



                                                                                             18
(figure 1.4).10 Consequently, average quality/efficiency begins a sustained downward

trend after 4 or 5 periods. One implication is that short-run analyses of the efficiency

effects of trade liberalization may be quite misleading.

         Workers are unlikely to like the new regime because it discourages investments in

product improvements, thereby reducing firms’ average live spans (Table 3) and

increasing rates of job turnover. On the other hand, consumers are clearly better off,

especially during the early periods (figure 1.8). This is because the prices of domestic and

foreign goods are lower after the reform (figure 1.5), the decline in the relative quality of

domestic goods hasn’t really gotten started (figures 1.2 and 1.3), and the domestic

varieties that exit weren’t contributing much to their welfare. Consumers’ enthusiasm for

the new regime fades as the relative quality of domestic products declines, and the prices

of these goods come back up a bit. But overall, the reform generates a 22 percent increase

in the present value of their surplus (Table 3).11

         Finally, domestic producers suffer capital losses when the regime hits, and they

remain worse off under the new regime because their mark-ups are smaller (figure 1.7).

Overall, the present value of their surplus is reduced by 11 percent. Nonetheless, social

welfare is dominated by consumer surplus, which increases in present value by 21

percent (Table 3).

         Of course, other assumptions might have led to different patterns of response, and

we could certainly refine our calibration, but it is noteworthy that our simulations match

10
   Rodrik (1992) flags this effect as a possible reaction to heightened import competition. In our model it is
conceivable that a small reduction in the price of imports might drive a marginal firm from the market,
thereby increasing the return to innovation for the remaining producers. However, this phenomenon is
clearly not typical of our simulations.




                                                                                                           19
up well to most of the econometric evidence. That is, import competition induces smaller

firms, lower mark-ups, and a cleansing effect that helps to sustain efficiency. The only

seeming incongruity is that efficiency gains in the RPM experiment come exclusively

from firm turnover and market share reallocations in our simulations, while the studies in

Table 1 find significant intra-firm productivity gains. However, one can reconcile this

experiment with the evidence by simply thinking of entry and exit as corresponding to

product lines rather than plants. Then the same plant might continue to exist as it retools

for a new product, and thus might exhibit short run intra-plant efficiency gains. This

interpretation is consistent with evidence on the Chilean experience, where plants

improved their efficiency by shedding labor rather than expanding output with a given

labor force (e.g., Tybout, 1996). It is also consistent with the common finding that, while

manufacturing productivity improves after trade liberalization, unemployment increases

economy-wide, and therefore aggregate productivity growth is modest.

        Accelerated innovation among imports (AIM)

        An alternative form of opening occurs when domestic firms are faced with

accelerated innovation among the imported goods. We think of this type of shock as

approximating policies that bring dynamic new trading partners into play and/or policies

that remove non-tariff barriers on products that are subject to relatively rapid

technological change. It might also approximate policies that lead to extended periods of

real exchange rate appreciation, although it is difficult to imagine this occurring

indefinitely without macro crises emerging. The simulated responses to such a regime

change are graphed in figures 2.1 through 2.8, which contrast behavior when δ =0.6 with


11
  Given that we have held the rate of innovation among imported goods fixed, consumer preferences for
the open regime don’t depend upon what functional form we choose for g (⋅) .


                                                                                                        20
behavior when δ =0.8. (Recall that δ is the exogenous probability of an improvement in

the quality of imported goods.)

       Figure 2.1 shows that domestic firms lose no market share in the face of this type

of competitive pressure. The reason is that they reduce their prices enough to compensate

for the reduction in their relative quality once new regime begins to take hold (figure

2.5). They do, however, gradually lose relative quality (figures 2.2 and 2.3, lower line) as

improvements among imported goods cumulate and they increasingly scale back their

own investments (figure 2.4). The gradual decline in domestic investment mirrors the

gradual fall in domestic mark-ups, once again reflecting a Shumpeterian reduction in the

incentive to innovate.

       Our post-reform series on relative efficiency are a bit misleading because, when

the rate of innovation among imported goods increases, the yardstick for performance of

the domestic varieties increases too. Thereafter domestic producers must improve their

quality index by 0.8 per period rather than 0.6 per period simply in order to keep up. So

although relative quality trends downward for 40 periods after the AIM regime is

implemented, the per-period change in the level of domestic quality actually increases.

We demonstrate this with an extra trajectory in figures 2.2 and 2.3 (top line) that shows

the quality of the domestic goods relative to a hypothetical reference good that continues

to improve by 0.6 per period after the reform is implemented. This scenario is therefore

consistent with the stylized fact that intra-firm efficiency gains accelerate after

liberalization episodes.

       That domestic producers are able to increase the rate of improvement in their

goods reflects two forces. First, the mean life span of firms drops 23 percent when δ




                                                                                            21
increases from 0.6 to 0.8 (Table 3). Second, after the regime switch, new firms are able to

embody rapidly improving global best practice technologies in their plants at no

additional expense. Thus, although firms invest less in keeping up with import

innovations, each is more quickly replaced by an entrant near the technology frontier.12

This type of induced innovation provides some micro foundations for the common

finding that countries with high-tech trading partners enjoy relatively rapid growth (Coe

and Helpman, 1995).

         The AIM shock immediately improves producer surplus because domestic firms

don’t lose much relative quality initially, and they spend less of their gross revenue on

investment (figure 2.7). However, the cost savings from reduced investments are

gradually swamped by the revenue losses induced by persistently higher rates of quality

improvements among imports.

         How do consumers fare? Figure 2.8 suggests that they to do worse than they did

under the RPM experiment because the relative quality of imported goods has fallen.

However, this figure is drawn under the extreme assumption that consumers only care

about the variety of goods available and their relative quality, and not about the average

level of quality. (That is, g ′(ω 0t ) = 0 .) If we had allowed g (ω 0t ) to grow with

improvements in the quality of imports, we could easily have demonstrated large

consumer gains due to the more rapid rate of quality improvement among both domestic

and imported goods. The interested reader may choose his favorite g( ) specification and

perform this exercise for himself.

12
  If new firms were allowed to endogenously invest in order to influence their initial product quality, the
AIM shock would increase entrants’ initial investments and thus increase their relative size. That is, given
the choice, entrepreneurs adjust by shifting their investments away from post-entry expenditures toward




                                                                                                          22
IV.     Summary and Conclusions

        The existing literature on industrial responses to trade liberalization documents

consistent patterns of correlation between openness proxies and several measures of

performance: price-cost mark-ups, intra-plant productivity gains, and reallocation-based

productivity gains. These stylized facts are useful, but they don’t tell us much about the

underlying behavior of producers, nor do they link firms’ performances to welfare

measures, so they are of limited use for policy analysis. We have sketched an alternative

approach to the analysis of trade liberalization that does both, and we have demonstrated

this approach using fabricated data.

        Lessons from the simulation exercises

        Although our simulations are not calibrated to actual data, they make several

basic points. First, when outward-oriented trade reforms reduce price-cost mark-ups, the

less successful producers are likely to shut down or eliminate some product lines. This

one-time adjustment in the set of firms and products is a quick source of efficiency gains,

particularly when the new policy regime involves a sudden, significant departure from

the previous environment. But it dissipates after 5 or 6 periods (10 to 12 years). Thus

panel-based econometric studies of liberalization-based productivity gainswhich

typically span a decade, or lessare probably not representative of longer term effects.

        Second, the same forces that induce exit tend to discourage innovation, so after

liberalization, the quality of domestic products may well decline relative to imports. This


pre-entry expenditures. Experiments that demonstrate this reaction are available from the authors upon
request.


                                                                                                         23
effect is gradual, but in our simulations it eventually swamps the efficiency-enhancing

effects of the initial wave of exits. In principle, other characterizations of market

equilibria might have led to different conclusions concerning the effects of foreign

competition on domestic innovationBoone (2000) and Aghion et al (2002) provide

some examples. But we found it difficult to identify plausible specifications that reverse

this finding.

         Third, falling behind in relative quality need not lead to deceleration in the

absolute rate of innovation. Deceleration is less likely if trade liberalization increases the

rate at which embodied technologies become available through capital goods imports.

The more rapid these arrivals, the better new entrants are positioned to produce near the

technological frontier.

         Fourth, plant and job turnover rates are likely to be permanently higher after

liberalization. This effect is particularly marked when the reforms allow new, embodied

technologies arrive to arrive relatively rapidly through capital goods imports. Such an

environment creates ongoing incentives to introduce new plants or assembly lines, rather

than continually to upgrade existing facilities. The resultant higher turnover works to the

detriment of labor, which is more frequently displaced.13

         Fifth, although all of our figures represent averages over 100 trajectories, they still

reflect a large role for idiosyncratic shocks. Thus the consequences of policy reforms may




13
  Heightened foreign competition may have had this effect in India. A recent study of India’s post-
liberalization period finds that “firms subject to external exposure . . . face higher earnings variability and
job insecurity. At the same time, though, the employees of foreign owned and import-competing firms are
more frequently involved in training programs than firms not subject to foreign competition.” (Daveri et al,
2002).. Similarly, Levinsohn (1999) finds that tradeable goods sectors exhibited relatively high job
turnover rates in post-liberalization Chile.


                                                                                                            24
remain obscured by noise for substantial periods of time, particularly when one is

studying variables that respond to expectations like investment, entry and exit.



       Future directions

       There are at least two important limitations to the strategy we have demonstrated

in this paper. The first is that it involves many modeling assumptions. We would

naturally prefer to avoid using so much structure, but we do not believe it is possible to

perform welfare-based policy analysis without it. Our view is: if the calibrated models

generate patterns of turnover, pricing and efficiency gains that match observed patterns,

they simply provide a coherent interpretation for observed experiences. One of our

objectives is develop enough experience with computable industrial evolution models

that we have a good sense for the practical importance of the various modeling

assumptions.

       The second limitation of our approach to analysis is that it is computationally

intensive. The solution algorithms currently available for PEM models handle about a

dozen firms, at most, and can take hours to solve for value functions at a given set of

parameter values. Thus they can be calibrated to small industries using actual data on

market shares, turnover patterns, prices and efficiency gains, but they are unlikely to

serve as a basis for econometric estimation of all parameters. (Entry costs and scrap

values are particularly difficult to identify.) We are currently exploring alternative

solution algorithms that will allow us to handle more firms, and we are attempting to

calibrate PEM-type models more tightly to actual liberalization experiences.




                                                                                             25
                                     Bibliography

Aghion, Philippe, Nicolas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith and Peter Howitt,
      “Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Department of
      Economics, Harvard University, September 2002.

Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding, and Fabricio Zilibotti, “The Unequal
      Effects of Liberalization: Theory and Evidence from India,” Department of
      Economics, Harvard University, March 2003.

Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen and Samuel Kortum, “Plants and
       Productivity in International Trade,” American Econmic Review, forthcoming.

Berry, Steven, “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” RAND
       Journal Vol. 25(2) (1994), pp. 242-262.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Voluntary Export Restraints on
       Automobiles: Evaluating a Trade Policy,” American Economic Review Vol. 89,
       No. 3 (June, 1999), pp. 400-430.

Boone, Jan, “Competitive Pressure: the Effects on Investments in Product and Process
       Innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics Vol. 31, No. 3 (Autumn, 2000), pp.
       549-569.

Coe, David and Elhanan Helpman, “International R&D Spillovers,” European Economic
      Review, (1995), pp. 859-887.

De Melo, Jaime and Shujiro Urata, “The Influence of Increased Foreign Competition on
      Industrial Concentration and Profitability,” International Journal of Industrial
      Organization, Vol. 4 (1986), pp. 287-304.

Ericson, Richard, and Ariel Pakes, “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework
       for Empirical Work, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 62 (1995), pp. 53-82.

Daveri, Franceso, Paolo Manasse and Danila Serra. “The Twin Effects of Globalization,”
       Centro Studi Luca d’Agliano, Development Studies Working Paper No. 171,
       November 2002.

Goldberg, Pinelopi. “Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets: The
      Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry.” Econometrica, July 1995, Vol. 63, No. 4,
      pp. 891-952.

Grether, Jean-Marie, “Mexico: 1985-90: Trade Liberalization, Market Structure and
       Manufacturing Performance", in Mark Roberts, and James Tybout (eds.),
       Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
       1996.



                                                                                       26
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
      Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Harrison, Ann, “Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade Reform: Theory and
       Evidence, Journal of International Economics 36 (1994), pp. 53-73

Harrison, Ann, "Determinants and Effects of Direct Foreign Investment in Cote d'Ivoire,
       Morocco, and Venezuela", in Mark Roberts, and James Tybout (eds.), Industrial
       Evolution in Developing Countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Hart, Oliver, “The Market Mechanism as an Incentive Scheme,” Bell Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 14 (1983), pp. 366-382.

Hay, Donald “The Post-1990 Brazilian Trade Liberalization and the Performance of
      Large Manufacturing Firms: Productivity, Market Share and Profits,” The
      Economic Journal Vol. 111 (2001), pp. 620-41.

Katayama, Hajime, Shihua Lu and James Tybout, “Why Plant-Level Productivity Studies
      are Often Misleading, and an Alternative Approach to Inference,” NBER
      Working Paper No. 9617, 2003.

Krishna, Pravin and Devashish Mitra, “Trade Liberalization, Market Discipline and
       Productivity Growth: New Evidence from India, Journal of Development
       Economics Vol. 56 (1998), pp. 447-462.

Levinsohn, James, “Employment Responses to International Liberalization in Chile,”
       Journal of International Economics Vol. 47 (April 1999), pp. 321-344.

Liu, Lili, “Entry-Exit, Learning and Productivity Change: Evidence from Chile,” Journal
        of Development Economics, Vol. 42 (1993), pp., 217-42.

Martin, S., “Endogenous Firm Efficiency in a Cournot Principal-Agent Model,” Journal
       of Economic Theory, Vol. 59 (1993), pp. 445-450.

McFadden, Daniel, “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in Paul
     Zarembka, ed., Frontiers in Econometrics. New York: Academic Press, 1974.

Melitz, Marc, "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
        Productivity," Econometrica, forthcoming.

Muendler, Marc, “Trade, Technology, and Productivity: A Study of Brazilian
      Manufacturers, 1986-1998, Department of Economics, University of California at
      San Diego, 2002.




                                                                                     27
Pakes, Ariel and Paul McGuire, “Computing Mark-Perfect Nash Equilibria: Numerical
       Implications of a Dynamic Differentiated Product Model,” RAND Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 25, No. 4 (Winter 1994), pp. 555-589.

Pakes, Ariel and Paul McGuire, “Stochastic Algorithms, Symmetric Markov Perfect
       Equilbrium, and the ‘Curse’ of Dimensionality,” Econometrica, Vol. 69, No. 5
       (September 2001), pp. 1261-1282.

Pavcnik, Nina, “Trade Liberalization, Exit and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
       from Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 69 (2002), pp. 245-276.

Roberts, Mark and James Tybout, Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries, New
       York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1996.

Rodrik, Dani, “Closing the Technology Gap: Does Trade Liberalization Really Help?” in
       Gerald Helleiner, ed., Trade Policy, Industrialization and Development: New
       Perspectives, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.

Scharfstein, D., “Product Market Competition and Managerial Slack,” RAND Journal of
       Economics Vol. 19 (1988), pp. 549-569.

Tybout, James, “Linking Trade and Productivity: New Research Directions,” World Bank
      Economic Review, Vol. 6, No. 2 (1992), pp. 189-211.

Tybout, James, Jaime de Melo and Vittorio Corbo, “The Effects of Trade Reforms on
      Scale and Technical Efficiency,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 31
      (1991), pp. 231-50.

Tybout, James and M. Daniel Westbrook, “Trade Liberalization and the Dimensions of
      Efficiency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries,” Journal of
      International Economics, Vol. 39 (1991), pp. 53-78.

Tybout, James, “Chile 1979-86: Trade Liberalization and its Aftermath,” in Mark
      Roberts, and James Tybout (eds.), Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries,
      Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Vousten, Neil and Neil Campbell, “The Organizational Cost of Protection,” Journal of
      International Economics, Vol. 37 (1994), pp. 219-38.




                                                                                       28
                                         Table 1: Openness, Mark-ups and Productivity Growth

 Country and        Performance Measure Performance             Intra-plant              Entry, Exit and       Mark-up Effects
 liberalization                         Determinant             productivity growth      Market Share
 episode                                                                                 Reallocation
 Chile, 1973-79
 DeMelo and         Price-cost margin        Import                                                            Post-reform penetration of
 Urata (1986)                                penetration rate                                                  imports reduced mark-ups
                                                                                                               most in highly concen-
                                                                                                               trated sectors.
 Tybout et al       Econometrically          Effective          Sectors undergoing
 (1991)             estimated TFP            protection rates   large reductions in
                    residuals                                   protection exhibit the
                                                                largest gains
 Tybout* (1996)     Price-cost margin        Import                                                            Margins are negatively
                                             penetration rate                                                  affected by import
                                                                                                               penetration, especially
                                                                                                               among large plants.
 Liu* (1993)        Econometrically                                                      Entry/exit a
                    estimated TFP                                                        significant
                    residuals                                                            determinant of
                                                                                         productivity growth
 Pavcnik* (2002)    Olley-Pakes (1996)       Tariff rates       Productivity grew        Most of the post-
                    estimates of TFP                            faster in import-        liberalization
                    residuals                                   competing sectors        productivity gains
                                                                with trade               came from market
                                                                liberalization           share reallocations
                                                                                         and entry/exit

*Based on data from post-reform years only (1979-1986)




                                                                                                                                         29
                                  Table 1, continued: Openness, Mark-ups and Productivity Growth

Country and       Performance Measure Performance                 Intra-plant             Entry, Exit and        Mark-up Effects
liberalization                        Determinant                 productivity growth     Market Share
episode                                                                                   Reallocation
Brazil, 1991-94
Muendler (2003)   Olley-Pakes (1996)       Tariff rates, market   Import competition     Exit significantly
                  estimates of TFP         penetration rates      substantially          contributed to
                  residuals                                       increases productivity efficiency gains;
                                                                                         other forms of market
                                                                                         share reallocation not
                                                                                         studied
Hay (2001)        Econometrically          Tariff rates,          Import competition                            Operating profits are
                  estimated TFP            effective rates of     increases productivity                        positively associated with
                  residuals; operating     protection,                                                          nominal protection rates.
                  profits                  Exchange rate
Mexico, 1984-89
Tybout and       Production function-      Effective              Sectors with most
Westbrook (1995) based TFP residuals       protection, import     exposure to import
                                           penetration, license   competition showed
                                           coverage ratios        the most gain
Grether (1996)    Price cost margin        Effective protection                                                  Big firms undergoing the
                                           rates, official                                                       most reduction in
                                           protection rates,                                                     protection show the
                                           license coverage                                                      biggest reduction in
                                           rates                                                                 margins
India, 1991-97
Krishna and Mitra Hall (1988)-type         Trade liberalization   Productivity gains                             Significant reductions in
(1998)            estimates of TFP         dummy                  with trade                                     mark-ups after trade
                  residuals and mark-ups                          liberalization                                 liberalization
Cote d’Ivoire
Harrison (1994)   Hall (1988)-type                                Productivity growth                            Weak evidence that price-
                  estimates of TFP                                tripled after trade                            cost margins fell with
                  residuals and mark-ups                          liberalization                                 trade liberalization
Harrison (1996)   Production function-     Tariff rates,          High tariffs are                               High tariffs are associated
                  based TFP residuals;     controlling for FDI    negatively associated                          with high margins and low
                  price-cost margins       in plants, sector      with productivity,                             productivity.
                                                                  controlling for FDI

                                                                                                                                             30
                               Table 2: Parameter Values for Policy Experiments

                                                                 Reduced Price for       Accelerated Innovation
  Parameters                                                      Imports (RPM)            for Imports (AIM)
  Marginal costs of production (domestic firms)                         1                           1
  Market Size (M)                                                      10                          10
  Discount factor ( β )                                               0.925                      0.925
  Scrap Value ( φ )                                                    0.1                        0.1
  Max Efficiency ( i max )                                              21                         21
  Investment efficiency (a)                                              2                          2
  Price sensitivity of consumers ( θ )                                   5                         5
  Degree of substitution between nests ( σ )                           0.5                        0.5
  Price of the imported good ( P0 )                                  1.5 to 0                     1.5
  Probability of Innovation in the Imported good ( δ )                 0.6                     0.6 to 0.8


                           Table 3: Summary Statistics for RPM and AIM regimes*

                                                                        Reduced Price for   Accelerated Import
                                                     Base case           Imports (RPM)       Innovation (AIM)
                                                      P0 =1.5,              P0 = 0.0 ,            P0 =1.5
                                                      δ = 0 .6               δ = 0 .6            δ = 0 .8
  Percentage of periods with entry and exit*           55.8                   57.8                 72.1
  Mean number of firms active*                          3.8                    3.6                  2.9
  Mean lifespan*                                        5.3                    5.0                  4.2

  Mean consumer surplus**                                855.3                  1045.9           686.5***
  Mean producer surplus**                                 27.9                   25.0              30.1
  Mean total surplus**                                   882.8                  1072.0           716.6***

* Means taken across 100 trajectories of 5,000 periods each
** Means taken across 100 trajectories of 100 periods each, discounted back to initial year of regime
***Excludes gains due to more rapid growth in the average quality of goods.

                                                                                                                  31
                    Figure 1.1:
                                                                                                               Figure 1.2:
      Domestic Market Share, RPM Experiment
                                                                                                Unweighted Mean Efficiency, RPM Experiment

1.05
                                                                                              4.9
      1                                                                                       4.8
                                                                                              4.7
0.95
                                                                                              4.6
                                                                           rho=0 after t=50                                                                           rho=0 after t=50
 0.9                                                                                          4.5
                                                                           rho=1.5            4.4                                                                     rho=1.5
0.85                                                                                          4.3
 0.8                                                                                          4.2
                                                                                              4.1
0.75                                                                                            4
          1




                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                       33
                                                                                                                            41
                                                                                                                                 49
                                                                                                                                      57
                                                                                                                                           65
                                                                                                                                                73
                                                                                                                                                     81
                                                                                                                                                          89
                                                                                                                                                               97
              10
                   19
                        28
                                 37
                                      46
                                           55
                                                64
                                                     73
                                                          82
                                                               91
                                                                     100

                                       time                                                                                      time



                                                                                                                        Figure 1.4:
                     Figure 1.3:
                                                                                                        Unweighted Mean Investment, RPM Experiment
      Weighted Mean Efficiency, RPM Experiment

                                                                                              0.9
7.8                                                                                           0.8
7.6
                                                                                              0.7
7.4
                                                                                              0.6
7.2
                                                                           rho=0 after t=50   0.5                                                                     rho=0 after t=50
  7
                                                                           rho=1.5            0.4                                                                     rho=1.5
6.8
6.6                                                                                           0.3
6.4                                                                                           0.2
6.2                                                                                           0.1
  6                                                                                             0
                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                        10

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                   28

                                                                                                                        37

                                                                                                                             46
                                                                                                                                      55

                                                                                                                                           64

                                                                                                                                                73

                                                                                                                                                     82

                                                                                                                                                          91
      1
              9
                  17
                       25
                            33
                                 41
                                      49
                                           57
                                                65
                                                     73
                                                          81
                                                               89
                                                                    97




                                                                                                                                                                100
                                      time                                                                                       time


                                                                                                                                                                                         32
                             Figure 1.5:                                                                       Figure 1.6:
                 Price-Cost Margin, RPM Experiment                                               One Firm Concentration, RPM Experiment


          1.32                                                                                           0.73
                                                                                                         0.72
           1.3                                                                                           0.71
                                                                                                          0.7
          1.28                                                              rho=0 after t=50             0.69                                                         rho=0 after t=50
          1.26                                                              rho=1.5                      0.68                                                         rho=1.5
                                                                                                         0.67
          1.24                                                                                           0.66
                                                                                                         0.65
          1.22                                                                                           0.64
                 1

                      12

                           23
                                34

                                      45

                                            56

                                                  67
                                                       78

                                                                89

                                                                      100




                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                         23
                                                                                                                              34
                                                                                                                                   45
                                                                                                                                           56
                                                                                                                                                 67
                                                                                                                                                      78
                                                                                                                                                           89
                                                                                                                                                                100
                                          time                                                                                        time



                      Figure 1.7:                                                                                            Figure 1.8:
           Producer Surplus, RPM Experiment                                                                       Consumer Surplus, RPM Experiment

2.5                                                                                            120

                                                                                               100
 2

                                                                                                80
1.5
                                                                                rho=0 after                                                                             rh=0 after t=50
                                                                                t=50            60
                                                                                rho=1.5                                                                                 rho=1.5
 1
                                                                                                40

0.5
                                                                                                20

 0                                                                                               0
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                             17
                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                       33
                                                                                                                            41
                                                                                                                                 49
                                                                                                                                      57
                                                                                                                                            65
                                                                                                                                                 73
                                                                                                                                                      81
                                                                                                                                                           89
                                                                                                                                                                97
      1
          9
                 17
                      25
                           33
                                41
                                     49
                                           57
                                                 65
                                                      73
                                                           81
                                                                 89
                                                                       97




                                                                                                                                                                                          33
                            Figure 2.1:                                                                              Figure 2.2:
               Domestic Market Share, AIM Experiment                                                  Unweighted Mean Efficiency, AIM Experiment


                                                                                            16
1.2
                                                                                            14
 1                                                                                          12                                                                  delta=.8 after t=50

0.8                                                                                         10
                                                                    delta=.8 after t=4950                                                                       delta=.6
                                                                                             8
0.6                                                                 delta=.6
                                                                                             6
0.4                                                                                                                                                             delta=.8 after t=50,
                                                                                             4                                                                  counterfactual
0.2                                                                                          2
                                                                                             0
 0




                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                      11

                                                                                                           21

                                                                                                                31

                                                                                                                      41

                                                                                                                            51

                                                                                                                                  61

                                                                                                                                          71

                                                                                                                                                81

                                                                                                                                                     91
          11

                21

                      31

                           41

                                    51

                                          61

                                               71

                                                    81

                                                         91
      1




                                tim e                                                                                      time




               Figure 2.3:                                                                                      Figure 2.4:
 Weighted Mean Efficiency, AIM Experiment                                                        Unweighted Mean Investment, AIM Experiment

                                                                                            0.9
16                                                                                          0.8
14                                                                   delta=.8 after t=50    0.7
12                                                                                          0.6
10                                                                   delta=.6               0.5                                                                 delta=.8 after t=50
 8                                                                                          0.4                                                                 delta=.6

 6                                                                   delta=.8 after t=50,   0.3
 4                                                                   relative to            0.2
                                                                     counterfactual
 2                                                                                          0.1
 0                                                                                           0
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                28
                                                                                                                     37
                                                                                                                           46
                                                                                                                                55
                                                                                                                                     64
                                                                                                                                           73
                                                                                                                                                82
                                                                                                                                                     91
                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                              100
          10
               19
                     28
                          37
                               46
                                     55
                                          64
                                               73
                                                    82
                                                         91
      1




                                time                                                                                       time



                                                                                                                                                                                       34
                                Figure 2.5:                                                                           Figure 2.6:
                    Price-Cost Margin, AIM Experiment                                                    One Firm Concentration, AIM Experiment


          1.34                                                                                 0.8
          1.32                                                                                 0.7
           1.3                                                                                 0.6
          1.28
                                                                                               0.5
          1.26                                                     delta=.8 after t=50                                                                       delta=.8 after t=50
                                                                                               0.4
          1.24                                                     delta=.6                                                                                  delta=.6
          1.22                                                                                 0.3
           1.2                                                                                 0.2
          1.18                                                                                 0.1
          1.16                                                                                   0




                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                23
                                                                                                                     34
                                                                                                                          45
                                                                                                                                56
                                                                                                                                        67
                                                                                                                                             78
                                                                                                                                                  89
                                                                                                                                                       100
                 1
                      13
                           25
                                37
                                         49
                                              61
                                                   73
                                                        85
                                                             97

                                     time                                                                                     time



                     Figure 2.7:                                                                                        Figure 2.8:
          Producer Surplus, AIM Experiment                                                                    Consumer Surplus, AIM Experiment

3.5                                                                                      100
 3                                                                                        90
                                                                                          80
2.5                                                                                       70
 2                                                                 delta=.8 after t=50    60
                                                                                                                                                             delta=.8 after t=50
                                                                   delta=.6               50
1.5                                                                                                                                                          delta=.6
                                                                                          40
 1                                                                                        30
                                                                                          20
0.5
                                                                                          10
 0                                                                                         0
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                               28
                                                                                                                    37
                                                                                                                         46
                                                                                                                              55
                                                                                                                                   64
                                                                                                                                        73
                                                                                                                                             82
                                                                                                                                                  91
                                                                                                                                                       100
      1
          10
               19
                     28
                          37
                               46
                                    55
                                         64
                                              73
                                                   82
                                                        91
                                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                   35
