                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     CHILD CARE IN POOR COMMUNITIES:
           EARLY LEARNING EFFECTS OF TYPE, QUALITY, AND STABILITY

                                            Susanna Loeb
                                             Bruce Fuller
                                          Sharon Lynn Kagan
                                            Bidemi Carrol
                                            Judith Carroll
                                             Jan McCarthy

                                         Working Paper 9954
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9954


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Susanna Loeb, Bruce Fuller, Sharon Lynn, Kagan, Bidemi Carrol, Judith Carroll, and Jan
McCarthy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Child Care in Poor Communities: Early Learning Affects of Type, Quality, and Stability
Susanna Loeb, Bruce Fuller, Sharon Lynn, Kagan, Bidemi Carrol, Judith Carroll,
and Jan McCarthy
NBER Working Paper No. 9954
September 2003
JEL No. I0, I2, I3

                                            ABSTRACT

Young children in poor communities are spending more hours in non-parental care due to policy

reforms and expansion of early childhood programs. Studies show positive effects of high-quality

center-based care on children's cognitive growth. Yet we know little about the effects of center care

typically available in poor communities or the effects of home-based care. Using a sample of

children age 12 to 42 months when their mothers entered welfare-to-work programs, this paper finds

positive cognitive effects for children in center care. Children also display stronger cognitive growth

when caregivers are more sensitive and responsive, and stronger social development when providers

have education beyond high school. Children in family child care homes show more behavioral

problems but no cognitive differences.


Susanna Loeb                                           Bidemi Carrol
Stanford University                                    Stanford University
224 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
Stanford University                                    Judith Carroll
Stanford, CA 94305                                     Yale University
and NBER
sloeb@stanford.edu                                     Jan McCarthy
                                                       University of South Florida
Bruce Fuller
University of California, Berkeley

Sharon Lynn Kagan
Teachers College, Columbia University
                                                                                                   1


                                       INTRODUCTION1
       In recent years, policy shifts that encourage mothers to leave home and enter paid jobs
have influenced the number of parents selecting nonparental child care and the types of settings
children enter. In addition, growth in federal child care vouchers for a wider range of low-
income and working-class families has spurred demand for both center and home-based care,
including licensed child care homes and subsidized individual caregivers (Blau, 2001; Collins,
Layzer, Kreader, Werner, & Glantz, 2000). High-quality early childhood programs, typically
situated within centers or preschools, have demonstrated significant effects on early language
and cognitive development for children from low-income families (for review, Barnett, 1995;
Burchinal, 1999; Currie, 2001). Yet, effects for similar children in “naturally” varying centers
across poor communities are more mixed, likely due to wide variation in program quality
(Phillips, Voran, Kisker, Howes, & Whitebook, 1994). Center care for infants that manifests low
quality may even depress early cognitive growth, relative to parental care (Vandell & Corasaniti,
1990; NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 1997). The limited observational evidence
available reveals highly variable quality of care in poor communities (Coley, Li-Grining, &
Chase-Lansdale, in press; Phillips et al., 1994). We know little about the quality of care selected
under the new policy regime by mothers moving from welfare to work. We also know little
about the effects of these settings on their young children’s development.
       This paper reports on the observed quality of center and home-based child care settings
selected by single mothers soon after they entered welfare reform programs in 1998. We
estimate how young children’s exposure to center versus home-based care, care quality, and care
stability affect early cognitive and social development, net baseline levels of cognitive and social
proficiencies, the mother’s own cognitive ability and education level, and several other
background factors. We also report a selection analysis to determine whether self-selection of
care may be biasing our estimates.


                     Developmental Effects of Child Care Type and Quality
       Carefully crafted preschool programs repeatedly have shown significant effects on young
children’s cognitive growth and, occasionally, on their social development. Such effects from
small demonstration programs were first found with the Perry Preschool Project (Schweinhart,
Barnes, Weikart, Barnett, & Epstein, 1993) and elaborated in similarly controlled interventions,
                                                                                                      2


such as the Abecedarian full-day preschool program (Campbell & Ramey, 1994), the Infant
Health and Development Project (McCarton, Brooks-Gunn, Wallace, & Bauer, 1997), and the
Chicago Child-Parent Centers (Reynolds & Temple, 1998). Random-assignment designs have
been used more recently, revealing discrete developmental effects within a portion of Early
Head Start sites (Love et al., 2002) and for welfare-reform experiments when they attend to
parents’ child care needs and increase the selection of center-based programs. The New Hope
experiment in Milwaukee is one example (Huston et al., 2001; Zaslow et al., 2002).
       Generalizing effects from these demonstration programs to broadly available child care
programs is difficult. Studies assessing the impact of centers – within both middle-class and
low-income neighborhoods – tends to show less consistent effects on young children’s cognitive
growth. These estimates also tend to diminish when more extensive selection controls are
included in estimation models (Burchinal, 1999; Fuller, Holloway, & Liang, 1996). Some
investigators have found no significant effects from children’s participation in center programs
when they have drawn samples which presumably capture wider variability in center quality
than was observed in the earlier demonstration projects (Clarke-Stewart, Gruber, & Fitzgerald,
1994; Kontos, 1991). The magnitude with which center care affects cognitive growth has been
an issue with Head Start, given that positive effects have been modest and at times short lived,
as children enter elementary schools of uneven quality (Lee & Loeb, 1995; NICHD Early Child
Care Research Network, 1999).
       In contrast to studies assessing child care type, studies looking at the influence of center
quality on children’s outcomes tend to find effects. The Cost, Quality, and Outcomes Study,
tracking children who attended centers in widely varying communities in four states, finds that
quality indicators predict cognitive and social developmental gains into kindergarten and, for
some outcomes, into second grade (Peisner-Feinberg et al., 2001). Effect sizes, though modest in
most cases, are stronger for children from low-income families, even though the average quality
of centers the children attended was moderate to low (Peisner-Feinberg & Burchinal, 1997). In
one welfare reform experiment, when mothers facing stiff work requirements were able to find
high-quality center care, their young children displayed higher levels of school readiness,
compared to those in the control group whose mothers faced little employment pressure
(Zaslow, McGroder, Moore, & Le Menestrel, 1999; Zaslow, Oldham, Moore, & Magenheim,
1998). The NICHD (1997) study of early child care also found positive cognitive-developmental
                                                                                                  3


effects and mixed social-developmental effects from quality levels and time spent in center-
based programs, even for toddlers. Yet this study tracked only a small number of children from
poor families.


           Maternal Employment, Child Care Selection, and Local Supply Conditions
       Marked shifts in family policy over the past decade have influenced demand for child
care and the mix of organizations and individuals that provide care in poor communities. The
process of child care selection, the availability of home-based providers, and care quality may all
be changing as welfare reforms become institutionalized, spurring greater demand for child care
and sizeable infusions of new funding (Fuller, Kagan, Caspary, & Gauthier, 2002). One federal
study reported that over one million additional families now receive public child care support
each year, compared to before the 1996 reforms (Collins et al., 2000). Initial observational
studies of centers selected by welfare and working-poor families reveal widely varying levels of
quality (Coley, Li-Grining, & Chase-Lansdale, in press; Fuller, Kagan, & Loeb, 2002). As the
mix of providers evolves in poor communities and additional families express demand for
nonparental care, it becomes more difficult to generalize from the early evaluations of the
preschool demonstration programs. Findings of positive effects from high-quality centers alone
cannot answer the question: On average, do children in poor communities benefit
developmentally when placed in centers as their mothers are encouraged to move from home
into paid jobs?
       We know even less about the quality or impact of home-based care – licensed family
child care homes (FCCHs) and kith or kin providers. One rare observational study found mixed
but generally low quality in home-based settings (Kontos, 1991). The NICHD study found that
the quality of center versus home-based care may depend upon the child's age (Clarke-Stewart,
1999). In-home care provided by grandparents and fathers was determined to be of higher
quality, compared to center-based programs, for toddlers at 15 and 24 months of age. But for
preschoolers, center-based programs surpassed home-based settings on a variety of indicators.
But, again, the NICHD sample includes only a modest share of low income families.
       In order to accurately estimate the impact of child care on children’s development, we
must consider the process by which mothers select child care settings for their children. Under
strong and immediate pressure to work outside the home, low-income mothers may be
                                                                                                       4


constrained in their choices, depending on the stock of care options available locally. In this
case, the mother’s own attributes may have little effect on child care choice. If children are
allocated into center slots by caseworkers, traditional conceptions of demand factors operating
solely at the individual level are not sufficient. In addition, state regulatory policies may affect
the distribution of center quality. Two studies have shown that the quality of centers situated in
low-income neighborhoods, at least along structural measures (e.g., child-staff ratios), can be
moderate to high, compared to unregulated or non-subsidized centers (Phillips, Voran, Kisker,
Howes, & Whitebook, 1994; Fuller & Holloway, in press). Alternatively, children exposed to
risk factors at home may display a higher likelihood of being placed in home-based settings or in
poorer quality centers (Belsky, Spritz, & Crnic, 1996; Tresch Owen & Cox, 1988), leading to
selection bias when estimating discrete effects of nonparental child care. We focus considerable
analytic attention on detecting potential bias arising from selection


                                        Empirical Questions
       Earlier studies and evolving family policies prompt four empirical questions. First, what
is the quality of child care available to women in the welfare system? Second, how does the
type and quality of child care attended influence childrens’ cognitive development? Early
evidence suggests that high-quality center programs more effectively contribute to children’s
cognitive and language development than home-based providers; but these data are sparse, stem
from controlled demonstrations, and were collected prior to implementation of the 1996 welfare
reforms. Third, how does the type and quality of child care influence young children’s social
development? Earlier evidence on social-developmental effects of child care settings is mixed.
We know little about possible effects in poor communities. Finally, do differences in
developmental effects hold up to extensive controls for family differences in children’s baseline
proficiencies, mothers’ own cognitive skills, home practices, and other family attributes? The
magnitude of observed center effects has been moderate in naturalistic settings and typically
diminishes when more thorough selection controls are included in estimation models.


                                             METHOD
       Our analysis stems from a five-year study that is following low-income mothers and
young children who, in 1998, entered state welfare-to-work programs, under the new federal
                                                                                                      5


Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. Our overall goal is to understand
how home and child care environments change for children as their mothers face new pressures
and incentives to work outside the home.


                                    Procedure and Participants
       The present paper reports on data collected from maternal interviews, child assessments,
and observations of center care and home-based care settings for 451 families residing in San
Francisco or San Jose, California, or Tampa, Florida. We selected research sites based on
demographic diversity, variation in local policy conditions, variation in the stock of center
programs among the census tracts in which low-income families resided, and cooperation of
county welfare officials. We conducted maternal interviews and child assessments primarily in
1998 (baseline, wave 1), when the mean child was 2½ years of age, and in 2000 (wave 2), when
the mean child was approximately four years old.
       We invited mothers into the study during their first visit to the local welfare office after
TANF eligibility was determined by each county. All mothers were TANF-eligible at baseline
(wave 1), were a single head of household, and had at least one resident child 12-42 months of
age. Eighty-nine percent of the women meeting these sampling requirements agreed to join the
study. We conducted maternal interviews at both waves 1 and 2, covering several child care
topics as well as questions about the development of their child. At wave 1, we assessed
children’s baseline cognitive, language, and social-developmental proficiencies and conducted
child care observations. At wave 2, we conducted home visits, allowing a wider battery of child-
assessment measures.
       The 451 families who participated in wave 2 comprise 77 percent of the original baseline
(wave 1) sample. A sample-attrition analysis reveals that families who left the wave 1 sample
did not differ significantly from the retained sample in terms of mother’s age and school
attainment, employment status, or children’s wave 1 cognitive and language development
scores. Children who exited the sample were about 3 months older than those retained; this
should not affect our estimation models, since we control for age in the analyses. Due to a low
response rate in wave 2 of Vietnamese-American families in San Jose, we omitted this subgroup
from the present analysis.
                                                                                                    6


       Table 1 reports characteristics of the 451 California and Florida families who
participated in both wave 1 and wave 2 data collection. The families are evenly distributed
across the three research sites as follows: 31 percent San Jose (n=139), 35 percent San Francisco
(n=159), and 34 percent Tampa (n=153). Forty-one percent of mothers are African American,
32 percent are Latina, and 24 percent are white. Eighty-three percent of mothers were employed
at some point in the year before the wave 2 interview. Their average monthly income (from
earnings plus cash benefits) was $1,008, despite their success in finding jobs.
                                         [Table 1 about here]
       During the baseline (wave 1) interviews, 68 percent of the mothers used some type of
nonparental child care at least 10 hours a week. As maternal employment rose, so did child care
use. By wave 2, 83 percent of mothers were using nonparental care. The share of women using
center care increased markedly, rising from 29 percent to 40 percent between waves 1 and 2. In
part this increase is due to children’s aging over time: national surveys show that as children
reach age three or four, enrollment in center programs increases (Smith, 2000). Over the two
waves of data collection, many mothers changed child care at least once. Twenty-one percent of
children were in center care at both waves; 19 percent moved to a center between waves 1 and 2;
four percent were in a family child care home (FCCH) at both waves; 16 percent were with an
individual nonparental provider; 31 percent were in a mixed arrangement; and nine percent
reported not using care at either wave 1 or wave 2.


                                             Measures
   Maternal and home characteristics. The interviews with mothers, conducted at wave 1
(baseline) and wave 2, covered a variety of individual attributes and features of the home
environment. For the present analyses, we draw on several of these variables as predictors of
developmental outcomes. We control for these factors in our analyses to distinguish the effect of
different types of child care from the selection of families into child care settings (Burchinal,
1999; Peisner-Feinberg et al., 2001). Demographic controls include mother’s age, ethnicity,
monthly income, and school attainment level. We asked a series of questions regarding the
mother’s work experiences over the prior 12 months and involvement in the welfare system. We
sort women into four groups, based on whether they were currently working and whether they
were still drawing cash aid under the TANF program, and include controls for these groups in
                                                                                                      7


our analyses. In addition, we employed questions from the HOME Inventory on parenting
practices, including the mother’s reported reading behaviors and engagement with the focus
child in activities related to positive development (e.g., reading with the child; Bradley, 1993).
Such practices might influence both child development and child care selection, and thus their
omission could bias estimates of child care effects (Fuller, Holloway, & Liang, 1996).
        In addition to controlling for the factors discussed above, we adjust for mothers’
cognitive proficiency and mental health. During our wave 2 home visits, we administered the
adult version of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test in English or Spanish, assessing the
mother’s cognitive and language proficiency (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 1997). To assess mental
health, we used the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Inventory (CES-D; McDowell
& Newell, 1996), consisting of self-reported items such as “you felt lonely”; “you were happy”;
and “you could not shake off blues, even with help from family and friends.” Just over two in
every five mothers in our sample displayed depressive symptoms at waves 1 and 2.2
        Child care exposure, type, and stability. Children’s exposure to differing types of child
care is indicated by a series of dummy variables measuring: whether a child attended a center at
both wave 1 and wave 2, attended a licensed FCCH at both waves, had no nonparental care
arrangement in both waves, moved to a center by wave 2, or experienced another mix of child
care types over the two waves. The base group includes children who were cared for by
individual kith or kin members in waves 1 and 2. We asked mothers how many child care
providers they currently were utilizing, and for how many months the focal child had been
attending the current provider setting. These two measures assess the stability of the primary
child care arrangement, enabling us to differentiate the effects of quality from the effects of
stability.
        Observed child care quality. During wave 1 data collection, we accessed child care
settings to conduct half-day observations of quality features. We observed 158 centers (out of
196) and 136 home-based settings (out of 228), 69 percent of the settings attended by children in
care for at least 10 hours per week. We measured quality using standard measures, such as the
Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS). The ECERS gauges a variety of structural
and physical aspects of centers, such as the quality of facilities, availability of developmentally
appropriate learning and play materials, the arrangement of child-centered activities, and the
nature of child-caregiver interaction (Harms, Clifford, & Cryer, 1997). We used the counter-part
                                                                                                     8


instrument for family child care homes, the Family Day Care Rating Scale (FDCRS), in all
home-based settings, including kith or kin providers. Early in our project, we conducted a
validation study to see how these instruments performed in center and home settings in low-
income communities (authors’ citation). We decided to use the ECERS, rather than the
Infant/Toddler Environment Rating Scale (ITERS) for our wave 1 child care observations,
assuming that most children would be at the upper end of our age distribution. This proved to be
true: two-thirds of the 55 children enrolled in centers at wave 1 were 24 months or older. Since
our sample was already split between children in center care and those in home-based care, we
did not want to introduce another quality measure for this small subgroup of young toddlers, for
whom the ITERS may have been preferable.
       We also administered the Arnett Scale of Caregiver Behavior (Arnett, 1989). This scale
focuses on the character of social interaction between child and caregiver, including the
caregiver’s attentiveness and responsiveness, capacity to explain misbehavior and reason, and
warmth and generalized affect. Items coded by the field researcher include, “(caregiver) speaks
warmly to the children” and “pays positive attention to the children as individuals.” It also
measures the extent to which caregivers engage children in problem solving activities, rather
than being directive.
       Field staff were trained centrally on the observations measures, and all were required to
reach a 90 percent level of inter-rater agreement on individual scales within the ECERS,
FDCRS, and the Arnett measures. Finally, we obtained structural measures of quality (Phillips,
et al., 1994) through an interview with the child care provider. These measures include child-
staff ratios, maximum group size, number of child groups at the setting, and the provider’s
education level and past participation in child development training and inservice workshops.
       Table 2 reports mean scores on the quality measures for centers and home-based settings,
split by research site. Caregivers in centers have higher educational attainment than those in
home-based settings; though, as expected, the ratio of children to adults is higher in centers. In
our sample, both child care types exhibited similar scores on the Arnett scale. Note that the
ECERS and FDCRS are not directly comparable, especially given limited experience using the
FDCRS in kith and kin settings. We, however, can compare the ECERS and FDCRS across
sites. The California counties, especially San Jose, exhibit higher ECERS scores and appear to
be of higher quality across all the measures. In an earlier paper, we separated licensed FCCHs
                                                                                                    9


from individual providers, but detected few differences between these two groups (authors’
citation). The multivariate analysis below does distinguish between FCCHs and kith or kin
providers.
                                          [Table 2 about here]
       Children’s cognitive and language proficiencies. During both waves of data collection,
we assessed children with the two subscales of the MacArthur Communicative Development
Inventory (CDI, Fenson, 1994). These measures rely on mother’s report of her child’s language
and communicative proficiencies.3 We utilized the two versions of the CDI at baseline (wave 1),
the infant-toddler version for sampled children, 12 to 23 months old, and the toddler-preschooler
version, for children 24 to 42 months. The CDI is one of a few instruments for which reliability
and validity studies have been completed for this age range (Fenson et al., 1994). Two CDI
subscales for both age groups prove predictive of wave 2 cognitive and language proficiency:
word knowledge or usage and communicative complexity. From raw scores we derive
standardized performance scores for each subscale in each age group. We then combine the
standardized scores across the two age cohorts and use these as controls for children’s baseline
levels of cognitive and language proficiency.4 All estimation models control on child age.
       During the wave 2 home visits we administered the Bracken Basic Concept Scale, a
measure of children's basic language and cognitive proficiency in a variety of domains
(Psychological Corporation, 1998). The Bracken instrument, administered in English or Spanish,
consists of six subscales that yield a “school readiness composite” and five additional subscales
pertaining to self and social awareness, understanding of direction and position; understanding
of texture and physical materials; understanding of quantity; and understanding of time and
sequences of events. We use the Bracken scaled scores, adjusted for child age.
       To further assess children’s school readiness skills at wave 2, interviewers administered
the story and print concepts portion of the Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES),
developed for the current national evaluation of Head Start.5 These items involve reading a
simple storybook, Where’s My Teddy, to the focus child, then assessing the child’s familiarity
with the structure and print conventions of children’s books, comprehension of the story, and
recognition of basic words. We also assessed school readiness skills through a series of
questions within the maternal interview related to whether the child could write his or her name,
how far the child was able to count, and proficiency in drawing letters and pictures rather than
                                                                                                   10


scribbling on paper. These items were drawn from National Household Education Survey
(NHES; Zill, Collins, West, & Hausken, 1995). We derived an internally reliable composite
measuring “mother-assessed cognition” from these individual items.
       Children’s social development. In both waves, mothers completed subscales of the Child
Behavior Checklist (CBCL 2/3) which assesses behavioral and emotional problems of toddlers
and preschoolers (derived from Achenbach, 1992). The CBCL includes items such as “(child)
cries a lot,” and “(child) destroys (his/her) own things.” We combined individual items to create
a social problems composite and two complete subscales for aggressive and destructive
behaviors (Achenbach, Edelbrookm, & Howell, 1987).6 The CBCL has been used in large
national surveys such as the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY) (Baker, Keck, Mott,
& Quinlan, 1993). It has also been shown to be predictive of outcomes in later childhood
(Achenbach, Edelbrookem, & Howell, 1987; Shaw, Winslow, Owens, & Hood, 1998; Zaslow,
McGroder, Moore, & Le Menestrel, 1999).
       Table 3 details children’s cognitive proficiencies and social-developmental levels. The
four-year olds participating in our study score predictably lower on the Bracken scales,
compared to national norms.7 Our sample of four year-olds also showed lower proficiency on
basic school readiness items, such as the ability to write one’s first name or count out loud to 20,
compared to children sampled for the national Head Start evaluation. Compared to the CBCL
scores of four-year olds in the NLSY, our participating mothers reported a higher incidence of
behavioral problems for their four-year olds on certain items, but these differences were not as
consistent as gaps in the cognitive and school readiness measures.8
                                         [Table 3 about here]


                                           Data Analysis
       Examining possible selection effects. Since mothers in our study were not randomly
assigned to different types of child care or quality conditions, selection bias is a concern.
Maternal or home attributes may influence both the selection of center care and children’s rate
of development. For example, if more highly educated mothers choose center-based care for
their children, rather than home-based care, a mean difference in child outcomes could be due to
parental differences, not to causal effects of child care settings. The same selection process may
apply to the quality and stability of care arrangements selected by parents, independent of type.
                                                                                                    11


We know this is likely in national probability samples (Burchinal, 1999; Singer, Fuller, Keiley,
& Wolf, 1998); but, we don’t know the extent to which family demand factors or institutional
allocation accounts for the type and quality of care that low-income children receive.
       We employ three strategies to address potential selection bias. First, we include a number
of statistical controls for mother, child, and family attributes that may be associated with both
children’s developmental outcomes and care selection. These include the mother’s school
attainment (a dummy variable indicating that the mother did not complete high school),
mother’s cognitive and language proficiency (PPVT score), ethnicity, mental health, work status
and earnings, the parenting practices identified in the HOME Inventory, child’s age, and child’s
earlier cognitive, language, and social-developmental outcomes (at baseline, wave 1). We also
control for mother’s location (San Jose and San Francisco, with Tampa as the base). Second, we
explicitly model child care selection by examining whether an array of variables related to
family background, mother’s income, work and welfare experience, local availability of center
enrollment slots, and child outcomes predict the type of care selected. We conducted a similar
analysis for the level of child care quality selected by mothers. Finally, we examine the
possibility of using local enrollment capacity of child care centers as an instrument for whether a
child attended a center.9 Unfortunately, local availability proved to be a poor instrument: it did
not predict child care use or type at the census tract level.
       Estimating child care effects over time. We begin by employing ordinary least squares
regression to determine the effects of child care settings on children’s cognitive and social
outcomes, after taking into account the control variables described above. We consider three
models, each one adding additional predictors to the basic model. In the first step, we include
only the controls for the child’s cognitive proficiency (or social-developmental) levels at
baseline (wave 1), maternal and family attributes, and site. The second step adds predictors for
work-welfare group membership, income, and parenting practices. The third model adds
interactions between site and center use to the basic model. These interactions capture any
differential child-development effects stemming from differences in mean center quality levels
among the sites. To investigate the self-selection issues, we model mother’s selection into
different types of child care using multinomial logit regressions.
       Similar to other longitudinal field studies, we encounter missing data in our sample due
to none responses to some questions. Among families participating at wave 2, we were unable to
                                                                                                  12


complete home visits, and thus complete child assessments, for 11 percent of the cases. When
children were unable to perform at minimal levels on the Bracken, usually the youngest children
in the sample, field staff did not attempt the child assessment battery.10 The Bracken is thus
more likely to be missing for the youngest children. There is no difference between those with
missing and non-missing data on the Bracken in terms of social problems, wave 1 cognitive
measures, or mother’s PPVT scores. There are some missing data on the control variables, as
well. So as to include as many observations as possible, we recode missing values to the mean
and include a dummy indicating missing data for the following control variables: children’s
baseline cognitive scores, mother’s PPVT scores, mother’s mental health, and children’s social
problems in wave 1. This adjustment does not change the substance of our results.


                                            RESULTS
                            Positive Effects From Center Participation
       We begin by reporting on the estimated effects of participation in different types of care
on children’s cognitive proficiencies at wave 2, controlling for background characteristics and
proficiency levels at baseline (wave 1). Table 4 details results for the Bracken scales, and Table
5 reports the corresponding models for the FACES storybook assessment and mother-reported
cognitive skills related to school readiness. We observe a strong, significant, and positive effect
of participation in center-based programs on almost all cognitive outcomes, relative to children
who remained with individual kith or kin providers (the base). Only the Bracken subscales
related to direction and time are not significantly predicted by center use.
       We compute effect sizes in standard deviation units to gauge the magnitude of the
effects. These estimates suggest that experience in a center at both waves increases Bracken total
and school readiness composite scores by 0.6 and 0.4 standard deviations (SD), respectively. In
comparison to individual kith and kin providers, center participation in both waves also
increases children’s scores on the FACES storybook scales. The results are reported in Table 5.
The effect sizes for knowledge of book mechanics, comprehension, and book familiarity
subscales are 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 SD, respectively. Mother-assessed cognition scores were 0.3 SD
higher for children in center care at both waves 1 and 2 than for children in kith and kin
arrangements.
                                        [Tables 4 and 5 about here]
                                                                                                        13


         The large effects from center participation are evident not only for those attending
centers during both data waves, but also for the subset of children that moved to a center
program between wave 1 and wave 2. On the FACES subscale, children who moved to a center
scored 0.4 to 0.5 SD higher, compared with those cared for by kith or kin at both waves. A
positive relationship between cognitive development and moving to a center is evident on the
Bracken measures as well, yet the magnitude is smaller compared to children participating in
centers at both waves. In general, the effects of center participation are strongest for school
readiness measures, such as the Bracken school readiness composite and the FACES storybook
items.
         The center effects remain positive and significant (except for the Bracken direction and
time subscales) after controlling for mother’s education, children’s baseline cognitive outcomes,
site effects, age of the children, and mother’s cognitive proficiency (PPVT score). Mother’s
PPVT displays a positive and significant impact on almost all of the child’s cognitive
proficiencies. However, the magnitude of this impact is on average only about 0.15 SD,
approximately half as strong as the impact of center enrollment. After adjusting for mother’s
cognitive ability, mothers having a high school diploma does not significantly affect children’s
cognitive development. Children with African American or Latina mothers tend to score lower
on the cognitive outcomes. Those children in San Jose and San Francisco show higher cognitive
growth than those in Florida, especially on school readiness measures. This local difference may
be due to the higher center quality observed in the two California sites. As expected, the wave 1
measures of children’s cognitive proficiency are strongly predictive of wave 2 outcomes.
         Effects of child care type on social development are less consistent. We report in Table 6
similar regressions predicting social-developmental outcomes (CBCL scales). The point
estimates indicate that children participating in FCCHs exhibit more behavioral problems than
those in other types of care settings; but the only statistically significant effect is that children
attending FCCHs have more aggressive behaviors than children cared for by kith or kin in both
waves. This relationship is large, 0.42 SD.
                                           [Table 6 about here]
         Consistent with other studies, we find that the mother’s emotional depression is
associated with a higher incidence of children’s social problems (Graham, 1989; Zaslow et al.,
1998). Given the high proportion of mothers exhibiting depressive symptoms in our sample, the
                                                                                                  14


link between depression and social development provides evidence that mothers’ poor mental
health may significantly hinder the social development of many low-income children. Mother’s
mental health, however, does not significantly influence children’s cognitive outcomes (results
not shown). African-American children, those with early social problems as measured in wave
1, and those with mothers who did not complete high school also are more likely to display
social problems.


                        Including Proximal Determinants of Development
       The next set of models includes additional determinants of children’s development
related to mother’s income, work and welfare status, and parenting practices, controlling for the
effects of all previous predictors. We separate these additional factors from the earlier set
because of the possibility that they are jointly determined with the choice of child care settings.
All variables included in the models in Tables 4, 5, and 6 are included in these analyses as well.
In Table 7 we see that the number of books in the home has a positive and significant effect on
the FACES and mother-assessed school readiness measures. Children whose mothers read with
them and take them to the library or museum more frequently also display fewer social problems
(effect sizes of 0.14 and 0.19 SD, respectively). Children exhibit fewer social problems when
their mothers are receiving welfare income and not working for wages at wave 2 (marginally
significant at p<.10). Mother’s monthly income (from earnings and welfare) shows little effect
on children’s outcomes when all other variables are taken into account, though earnings is
marginally negatively related to mother’s assessment of the child. Importantly, the center effect
remains strong even after the addition of these variables. The center effect for the scores on the
Bracken, FACES, and mother-assessed cognition and readiness are 0.6, 0.6, and 0.2 SD,
respectively.
                                         [Table 7 about here]


                                Site, Quality, and Stability Effects
       The results in Table 2 suggest that the quality of center care may be higher in California
counties, especially in San Jose. Because of this, we might expect the effect of centers on
children’s outcomes to be greater in these counties. Table 8 shows that the center effect for the
Bracken school readiness composite, mother-assessed cognition and social development is
                                                                                                   15


stronger for children in San Jose, after taking into account all previous predictors. To get
beneath these site differences, we next directly examine the effect of several measures of quality
on child outcomes after additionally taking into account indicators of provider stability.
                                           [Table 8 about here]
       In Table 9 we report estimated effects of child care stability and quality, net the effects of
all previously entered predictors. The comparison group for child care settings remains kith and
kin caregivers during both waves of data collection. To simplify this display, we report on our
four major composites: total Bracken score, Bracken school readiness composite, FACES
storybook assessment, and the social problems index (CBCL). We see that children who had
attended their current setting for more months, prior to the wave 2 interview, displayed higher
cognitive proficiencies at wave 2. In other words, stability of care has a strong and consistent
positive impact on child outcomes. The Arnett caregiver interaction scale, administered in
center and home settings, significantly predicts scores on the FACES composite and on the
CBCL composite. Children in settings with higher Arnett scores display greater reading
readiness and fewer social problems. The provider’s education level is consistently and strongly
related to the Bracken composites. Children in settings with more educated providers score
higher on both the total Bracken index and the school readiness composite.
                                           [Table 9 about here]
       Note that exposure to a center continues to display a positive effect on the Bracken total
score and the FACES composite, and exposure to a FCCH continues to display increased social
problems, even after taking into account these stability and quality factors. Unfortunately, we
do not have direct observational data on classroom activities or the “intended curriculum” of the
centers in which children participated. That data may have enabled us to explain the positive
center effect. Overall, the positive effects for cognitive and language development are
consistent with earlier work with low-income populations.


                                        Selection Findings
       Results from multinomial logit models that predict type of care selected appear in Table
10. The first model includes as predictors mother’s ethnicity, site, mother’s educational
attainment and cognitive proficiency (PPVT), along with maternal income and employment
status. The second model includes additional predictors of the availability of center enrollment
                                                                                                       16


slots (within each mother’s census tract) and child proficiencies at baseline (wave 1). Results
from the first model show that mothers who live in San Francisco or San Jose are less likely to
choose center care than those in Tampa, possibly due to higher center availability in Tampa
(authors’ citation). We also see some difference by background characteristics. African
American mothers are more likely to choose centers and FCCHs over kith and kin providers,
and Asian American mothers are more likely to choose FCCHs over individual providers.
Center care is also preferred for older children. Employed mothers are more likely to choose
FCCHs than kith or kin.
                                           [Table 10 about here]
       In the second model we see that the observed availability of center enrollment slots in the
mother’s census tract does not predict type of care selected. This rules out using the capacity
measure as an instrument for center use. Mothers with high PPVT scores are more likely to
select some type of nonparental child care, perhaps because they are more likely to be employed.
But within the set of nonparental care choices they are no more likely to select centers. The same
pattern holds for mothers without a high school diploma: they are less likely to care for their
own child. We ran the same models for the quality of care selected. Mothers in San Jose were
more likely to enroll their child in a higher quality setting, perhaps linked to the availability of
higher quality programs in this site. No family-level factors were significantly related to the
quality measures.


                                           DISCUSSION
       This study examined the effects of child care participation, quality, and stability on
children’s cognitive and social outcomes. We find a consistent, positive, and strong relationship
between rates of child development in the cognitive domain and participation in center-based
programs. These developmental effects are strongest for measures of school readiness and for
children who were in a center at both wave 1 and wave 2 of our study. The center effect remains
sizable even in models that include other possible determinants of development, such as age,
ethnicity, mother’s education, mother’s work and welfare status, and income. By directly
assessing the mother’s cognitive proficiency (PPVT) and other proximal determinants of child
development, including parenting practices, we are able to minimize the likelihood of selection
bias when modeling the discrete effect of center-based care.
                                                                                                     17


       In addition to exposure to center-based care, child care quality also affects children’s
cognitive and language development. This effect appears to stem partially from the character of
social interaction between the caregiver and the child (the Arnett measure) in both center and
home-based arrangements. Positive effects from the provider’s education level were also
evident. Future work might attempt to identify how provider education operates through
mediators – such as increased sensitivity to, or more careful communication with, children – to
advance youngsters’ cognitive growth.
       We also found that the Arnett interaction measure was predictive of fewer social-
behavior problems, and this applied to children in center and home-based arrangements. This is
a promising finding, but more work is necessary to understand how these child-caregiver
interactions would lead to less aggression and problematic behavior in the home, the setting in
which mothers assess these behaviors. Also, children showed more social problems when in the
care of providers with less than a high school education. Similarly, children attending FCCHs
tended to exhibit higher levels of aggression than those staying with individual kith or kin
members.
       Our selection analysis lends support to a causal interpretation of the results, though we
can not be sure that we have accounted for all factors that affect both the choices of care and
child outcomes. The selection results in Table 10, including the lack of effect from mother’s
education or cognitive ability, or from the child’s cognitive proficiency, suggest that the most
obvious sources of bias – more able mothers choosing centers or more able children being
placed in centers – are not likely to be driving the results. In addition, the stronger effect of
centers on school readiness, in comparison to other measures, lends further support to the causal
claim (for relative effects sizes see Table 11)
                                           [Tables 11 about here]
       Why might selection not be as important in our sample as it has been shown to be in
middle income samples (Belsky, Spritz, & Crnic, 1996; Tresch Owen & Cox, 1988)? The
weakness of maternal and family-level factors in explaining the type or quality of care selected
may be linked to the rising strength of allocation processes within welfare and child care
agencies. That is, as the share of families receiving subsidized child care rises (Collins et al.,
2000), institutional practices may become more influential in determining which families are
allocated slots in centers or child care vouchers. At the same time, states and counties vary
                                                                                                   18


widely in their funding for center-based programs and the distribution of quality across centers
(Fuller, Kagan, Caspary, & Gauthier, 2002). In these ways, family-level demand factors in this
subsidized portion of the sector may be eclipsed by institutional practices.
       While selection may not be biasing our results, our family sample is restricted to three
counties; generalizing these results to the national population of families moving from welfare to
work is difficult. The advantage of sampling families in contrasting communities is that we can
illuminate how the availability and quality of child care options vary systematically across local
areas. Our initial descriptive findings demonstrate that child care quality varies substantially
across our three research sites, with Tampa having the lowest quality care. These organizational
conditions may act to mediate the influence of new work pressures and rising levels of maternal
employment on the early development of children (Fuller, Kagan, Caspary, & Gauthier, 2002).
Single mothers in Tampa and San Jose, for example, may face similar pressures to move from
welfare to work. Yet when mothers in San Jose find a center slot, their children are much more
likely to experience high-quality care than those in Tampa.
       This study contributes to the literature on child care effects by focusing on low-income
families moving from welfare to work. Earlier work on child care effects either focused on
middle-class families or drew from diverse samples with only a small subset of low-income
households. There are few longitudinal studies of young children from low-income families,
outside of studies such as the Perry Preschool Program that focused on a particular, high-quality
care setting, rather than a range of care available in poor communities. Our findings complement
previous work that has found positive effects of center care and quality on children’s cognitive
development (Burchinal et.al, 1997; NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 2000). It also
provides new evidence on the benefits of care stability and the possible negative impact of
family child care homes on children’s social development. The strong positive effects stemming
from center care (relative to kith and kin arrangements), as well as from quality and stability,
suggest that as government invests more resources in child care, greater attention should be paid
to the quality of care and ensuring center-based options for more families.
                                                                                                         19


                                             REFERENCES

Achenbach, T. M. (1992). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/2-3 and 1992 Profile. Burlington,
      VT: University of Vermont Department of Psychiatry.

Achenbach, T.M., Edelbrookm, C., & Howell, C. (1987). Empirically based assessment of the behavioral
      and emotional problems of 2-3 year old children. Journal of Abnormal and Child Psychology, 15,
      629-650.

Arnett, J. (1989). Caregivers in day-care centers: Does training matter? Journal of Applied
         Developmental Psychology, 10, 541-552.

Baker, P., Keck, C., Mott, F., & Quinlan, S. (1993). NLSY child handbook revised edition: A guide to
        the 1986-1990 NLSY child data. Columbus, OH: Center for Human Resource Research.

Barnett, W. S. (1995). Long-term effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and school outcomes.
        Future of Children, 5(3), 25-50.

Belsky, J., Spritz, B., & Crnic, K. (1996). Infant attachment security and affective-cognitive information
        processing at age 3. Psychological Science, 7(2), 111-114.

Blau, D. M. (2001). The child care problem: An economic analysis. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Bradley, R. (1993). Children’s home environments, health, behavior, and intervention efforts: A review
       using the HOME Inventory as a marker measure. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology
       Monographs, 119, 439-490.

Burchinal, M. R. (1999). Child care experiences and developmental outcomes. In S.Helburn (Ed.), The
       silent crisis in U.S. child care, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
       563, 73-97.

Burchinal, M., Campbell, F., Bryant, D. Wasik, B., & Ramey, C. (1997). Early intervention and
       mediating processes in cognitive performance of children of low-income African American
       families. Child Development, 68, 935-954.

Campbell, F. A., & Ramey, C. T. (1994). Effects of early intervention on intellectual and academic
      achievement: A follow-up study of children from low-income families. Child Development,
      65(2), 684-698.

Center for Human Resource Research (2000). NLSY79: The 1998 Child and young adult data users
        guide. Columbus: Ohio State University.

Clarke-Stewart, A. (1999). Characteristics and quality of child care for toddlers and preschoolers.
       Washington DC: NICHD Early Child Care Research Network.

Clarke-Stewart, K. A., Gruber, C. P., & Fitzgerald, L. M. (1994). Children at home and in day care.
       Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Coley, R. L., Li-Grining, C., & Chase-Lansdale, L. (in press). Low-income families' child care
        experiences. In H. E. Peters (Ed.), From Welfare to Child Care. New York: Russell Sage.
                                                                                                             20


Collins, A., Layzer, J., Kreader, J. L., Werner, A., & Glantz, F. (2000). National Study of child care for
         low-income families: State and community substudy interim report. Cambridge, MA: Abt.
         Associates.

Currie, J. (2001). Early childhood education programs. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 213-238.

Dunn,L. & Dunn, L. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Third Edition. Circle Pines, MN:
       American Guidance Service.

Fenson, L. et al. (1994). Variability in Early Communicative Development. Monographs of the Society
        for Research in Child Development, 59(5), 1-173.

Fuller, B., Holloway, S. D., & Liang, X. (1996). Family selection of child-care centers: The influence of
         household support, ethnicity, and parental practices. Child Development, 67(6), 3320-3337.

Fuller, B., Kagan, S. L., & Loeb, S. (2002). New Lives for Poor Families: Mothers and Young Children
         Move Through Welfare Reform. Technical Report.

Fuller, B., Kagan, S. L., Caspary, G., & Gauthier, C. (2002). Welfare reform and child care options for
         low-income families. Future of Children, 12, 97-119.

Graham, P. (1989). Maternal depression and its impact on early child development, Early influences
      shaping the individual (Vol. 160, pp. 183-191). New York: Plenum Press.

Harms, T., Clifford, R., & Cryer, D. (1997). Published ECERS and FDCRS Scales. New York: Teachers
       College Press.

Huston, A. C., Duncan, G. J., Granger, R., Bos, J., McLoyd, V., Mistry, R., Crosby, D., Gibson, C.,
        Magnuson, K., Romich, J., & Ventura, A. (2001). Work-based antipoverty programs for parents
        can enhance the school performance and social behavior of children. Child Development, 72(1),
        318-336.

Kontos, S. J. (1991). Child care quality, family background, and children's development. Early
        Childhood Research Quarterly, 6(2), 249-262.

Lee, V. E., & Loeb, S. (1995). Where do head start attendees end up? One reason why preschool effects
        fade out. Educational Evaluation & Policy Analysis, 17(1), 62-82.

Love, J. M., Kisker, E., Ross, C. M., Schochet, P. Z., Brooks-Gunn, J., Paulsell, K. B., Constantine, J.,
        Vogel, C., Fuligni, A. S., & Brady-Smith, C. (2002). Making a Difference in the Lives of Infants
        and Toddlers and Their Families: The Impacts of Early Head Start. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica
        Policy Research, Inc.

McCarton, C. M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Wallace, I. F., & Bauer, C. R. (1997). Results at age 8 years of early
      intervention for low-birth-weight premature infants: The infant health and development program.
      Journal of the American Medical Association, 277(2), 126-132.

McDowell, I., & Newell, C. (1996). Measuring Health: A Guide to Rating Scales and Questionnaires.
     New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                                                         21


NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (1997). Poverty and patterns of child care. In G. J. Duncan
     (Ed.), Consequences of Growing Up Poor (pp. 100-131). New York: Russell Sage.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (1999, April). Effects sizes from the NICHD study of early
     child care. Paper presented at the Society for Research in Child Development, Albuquerque.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (2000). The relation of child care to cognitive and language
     development. Child Development, 71(4), 960-980.

Peisner-Feinberg, E. S., & Burchinal, M. R. (1997). Relations between preschool children's child-care
        experiences and concurrent development: The Cost, Quality, and Outcomes Study. Merrill-
        Palmer Quarterly, 43(3), 451-477.

Peisner-Feinberg, E. S., Burchinal, M. R., Clifford, R. M., Culkin, M. L., Howes, C., Kagan, S. L., &
        Yazejian, N. (2001). The relation of preschool child-care quality to children's cognitive and
        social developmental trajectories through second grade. Child Development, 72(5), 1534-1553.

Phillips, D. A., Voran, M., Kisker, E., Howes, C., & Whitebook, M. (1994). Child care for children in
         poverty: Opportunity or inequity? Child Development, 65(2), 472-492.

Psychological Corporation (1998). Bracken Basic Concept Scale, Revised. San Antonio: Harcourt Brace.

Reynolds, A. J., & Temple, J. A. (1998). Extended early childhood intervention and school achievement:
       Age thirteen findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study. Child Development, 69(1), 231-246.

Schweinhart, L., Barnes, H., Weikart, D., Barnett, W. S., & Epstein, A. (1993). Significant benefits: The
       High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 27 (Vol. 10). Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press.

Shaw, D., Winslow, E., Owens, E., & Hood, N. (1998). Young children's adjustment to chronic Family
       adversity: A longitudinal study of low-income families. Journal of the American Academy of
       Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 545-553.

Singer, J., Fuller, B., Keiley, M., & Wolf, A. (1998). Early child care selection: Variation by geographic
        location, maternal characteristics, and family structure. Developmental Psychology, 34, 1129-
        1144.

Smith, K. (2000). Who's minding the children? Child care arrangement. Washington, DC: United States
        Census Bureau (Household Economic Studies, P70-70).

Tresch Owen, M., & Cox, M. J. (1988). Maternal employment and the transition to parenthood. In A. W.
       Gottfried (Ed.), Maternal Employment and Children's Development: Longitudinal Research (pp.
       85-119). New York: Plenum Press.

Vandell, D. L., & Corasaniti, M. A. (1990). Variations in early child care: Do they predict subsequent
       social, emotional, and cognitive differences? Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 5(4), 555-
       572.

Zaslow, M. J., McGroder, S. M., Moore, K. A., & Le Menestrel, S. (1999, April). Behavior problems and
       cognitive school readiness among children in families with a history of welfare receipt:
       Diverging patterns and their predictors. Paper presented at the Society for Research in Child
       Development, Albuquerque.
                                                                                                          22



Zaslow, M. J., Moore, K. A., Brooks, J. L., Morris, P. A., Tout, K., Redd, Z. A., & Emig, C. A. (2002).
       Experimental studies of welfare reform and children. Future of Children, 12(1), 79-96.

Zaslow, M. J., Oldham, E., Moore, K. A., & Magenheim, E. (1998). Welfare families' use of early
       childhood care and education programs, and implications for their children's development. Early
       Childhood Research Quarterly, 13(4), 535-563.

Zill, N., Collins, M., West, J., & Hausken, E. (1995). Approaching kindergarten: A look at preschools in
         the United States. Washington DC: National Center for Educational Statistics (No. 95-280).
                                                                    23


Table 1
Selected Mother and Child Characteristics
Variables                                      N     Mean    SD
                      Family Background
Child’s age at Maternal Interview in months    451   28.32   9.24
Mother’s Education and Cognitive Proficiency
      Did not complete High School             451   0.44
      Mother’s PPVT score                      356   19.7    12.3
Race/Ethnicity
      Black                                    451   0.41
      Hispanic                                 451   0.32
      Asian                                    451   0.03
Sites
       San Jose                                451   0.31
       San Francisco                           451   0.35
                    Child Outcomes, Wave 1
Word Knowledge                                 418   0.00    1.00
Complex Communication                          402   0.00    0.92
                   Income and Employment
Worked for pay in prior year                   451   0.83    0.37
Earned Monthly Income ($)                      438   1008    737
On welfare during last year                    448   0.82
On welfare and working                         451   0.22
Not on welfare and working                     451   0.31
Not on welfare and not working                 451   0.16
On welfare and not working                     451   0.31
                       Parenting Practices
Library/Museum                                 397   0.47
Number of books in the home                    398   4.13    1.04
Read often                                     398   2.94    1.07
                         Child Care Use
Wave 1: Child care at least 10 hrs/week        451   0.68
         Center Care                           451   0.29
         Family Child Care Home                451   0.09
         Kith and Kin                          451   0.30
Wave 2: Child care at least 10 hrs/week        451   0.83
         Center Care                           451   0.40
         Family Child Care Home                451   0.10
         Kith and Kin                          451   0.32
Both Waves:
         Center Care                           451   0.21
         Family Child Care Home                451   0.04
         Kith and Kin                          451   0.16
         Moved to Center in Wave 2             451   0.19
         Other                                 451   0.31
         No Care                               451   0.09
                                                                                                                  24



   Table 2
   Observed Child Care Quality for Centers and Home-Based Settings, by Site
    Variables                                           San Francisco    San Jose        Tampa         f-value

    Centers [n=158]
    Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS)      4.6 (1.11)    5.8 (0.80)     3.2 (1.40)      52.01***
    Arnett Social Interaction Scale                       3.0 (0.78)    2.4 (0.43)     2.6 (0.69)      13.86***
    Caregiver completed high school [%]                    97 (18)       94 (25)        88 (32)
    Children in setting [group size]                     15.6 (7.29)    14.5 (6.13)    11.8 (7.18)      4.18*
    Ratio of children per adult caregiver                 4.5 (2.13)    5.9 (3.64)     7.8 (5.06)       7.38***

    Home-based settings [n=136]
    Family Day Care Rating Scale (FDCRS)                  2.7 (1.29)     2.8 (1.18)    3.0 (1.46)        0.49
    Arnett Social Interaction Scale                       2.9 (0.77)     3.0 (0.63)    2.6 (0.77)        3.05
    Caregiver completed high school [%]                    77 (43)        53 (50)       49 (51)          4.31*
    Children in setting [group size]                      4.3 (4.27)     3.5 (3.06)    4.1 (4.83)        0.69
    Ratio of children per adult caregiver                 2.0 (1.42)     2.2 (1.62)    2.7 (2.15)        1.60

Note: Values are means with SDs in parentheses. Average item scores reported for ECERS and Arnett measures.
*p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001
                                                                                                                            25


         Table 3.
         Mean Scores for Children’s Cognitive and Social-Developmental Outcomes
           Composite measure / selected items             Study sample                           National norms
                                                       N      Mean SD                            Mean       SD
           Bracken Basic Concepts Scales [age adjusted; children’s mean age, 4 years]
           Total scaled score                         314      90.4 (14.0)                         100.0    (15.3)
           Direction & position                      318         8.9 (5.3)                          10.3    (3.0)
           Self & social awareness                    317        9.0 (2.9)                          10.4    (3.0)
           Texture & materials                        316        8.5 (2.9)                          10.4    (3.2)
           Quantity                                   316        9.2 (2.9)                          10.5    (2.9)
           Time & sequence                            314        9.0 (6.5)                          10.3    (3.0)
           School readiness composite                 321      89.7 (16.8)                         100.7    (15.8)
           Composite national percentile score        314         31                                  50

           FACES school readiness items [4 year-olds’ scores]
           Children’s story book itemsa
           Book mechanics                             365             0.5   (0.9)
           Familiarity with story book                366             1.3   (1.1)
           Comprehension of read story                362             1.1   (1.2)
           Total scores on four study items           362             2.4   (2.6)

           Mother-reported cognitive, school readiness items [%]
           Child can count out load to 20             363       33                                  53
           Child can write first name                 362       29                                  66
           Can write or draw rather than scribble     364       58                                  72
           Identifies primary colors by name          365       90                                  80

           Child behavior problems [CBCL items, 4 year-olds]
           Social problems compositeb               370      82.6           (14.6)
           Aggressiveness subscale                  385      25.8           (6.2)
           Destructive subscale                     394       8.7           (2.1)

            Selected item comparisons [3-point scale]
            Destroys his/her own things                    379         1.6 (0.8)                      1.2 (0.4)
            Is disobedient                                 382         1.7 (0.6)                      1.8 (0.5)
            Is stubborn, irritable                         380         1.9 (0.7)                      1.7 (0.6)
            Child can’t sit still, restless                381         2.0 (0.8)                      1.8 (0.7)
            Has temper tantrums                            381         1.8 (0.8)                      1.6 (0.7)
Notes: National comparative data are from Psychological Corporation (1998, Bracken manual), national Head Start
evaluation (Resnick & Tarullo, personal communication, 2002); and Achenbach (1994) and Center (2000).
a
  Response categories differed slightly, so comparative data not available from national Head Start evaluation. This
comparison is against children from low-income families enrolled in Head Start programs.
b
  National comparisons not available for the composites derived from the selected CBCL items administered. This
comparison is against a national representative sample of 4 year-olds participating in the National Longitudinal Study of
Youth.
                                                                                                                    26


     Table 4
     Effects of Child Care Type on Cognitive Outcomes – Bracken Subscales
                          Total       Direction        Self-       Texture      Quantity      Time       School
                          Score                       Esteem                                            Readiness
                                                                                                        Composite
Child Outcomes,          (N=314)     (N=318)       (N=316)        (N=316)      (N=316)      (N=314)    (N=321)
Wave 1
Word Knowledge             3.01**        .28          .57**         .61**         .56**        .37       3.17**
                           (.93)         (.41)         (.20)         (.20)         (.21)      (.50)      (1.11)
Complex Communic.          1.91*         .53           .33+          .35+           .25        -.28       2.34*
                           (.91)        (.39)          (.20)         (.19)         (.20)      (.49)      (1.08)
Family Background
Child Age                     .03         -.04           .01           .00       -6.2e-4       -.03       .21*
                            (.09)        (.04)           (.02)       (.02)         (.02)      (.05)        (.10)
African American          -4.72*          -.84        -.90*        -1.36***         -.55     -2.47*      -4.84*
                           (1.95)        (.85)         (.42)         (.41)         (.43)     (1.05)      (2.31)
Latina                    -3.68+        -1.10           -.70          -.65          -.73     -2.25*      -4.24+
                           (2.04)        (.89)         (.45)         (.44)         (.45)     (1.10)      (2.46)
Asian American              -1.38       -1.46           .42           -.01         -.34       -2.94       1.03
                           (4.50)       (1.98)           (.98)       (.96)        (1.00)     (2.42)      (5.43)
Mother’s PPVT Score       3.07***         .15         .52**         .67***        .53**        -.28      2.69**
                            (.83)          (.36)       (.18)         (.18)         (.18)      (.45)       (.99)
Did not complete H.S.        -.69         .18           .15           -.00          .09       -1.06      -3.48+
                           (1.59)          (.70)       (.35)         (.34)         (.35)     (2.39)      (1.90)
Sites
San Jose                  3.64+          .45          .930*         1.21**         .55        -.694      5.96*
                          (2.02)         (.88)        (.439)        (.429)        (.45)      (1.09)      (2.41)
San Francisco             3.59*          .55           .502         .647+          .20         -.13     7.22***
                          (1.80)         (.78)        (.389)        (.382)          (.40)     (.96)      (2.15)
Child Care
Center both waves        8.10***         1.52        2.01***        1.37**       1.59**        .85       5.88*
                          (2.41)        (1.05)        (.521)        (.511)        (.53)       (1.29)     (2.88)
Family child care         7.61+          2.41           .96           -.45        1.37        2.36        6.73
   home both waves        (4.17)        (1.83)          (.91)        (.89)        (.93)      (2.24)      (5.02)
No care waves              2.15          -.44           .56            .87       1.34+         .03        -3.65
   both waves             (3.15)        (1.36)         (.69)         (.67)        (.70)      (1.69)      (3.72)
Moved to Center           4.84*          1.21          .90+            .35         .26         .51       5.61*
   in wave 2              (2.36)        (1.03)         (.51)           (.50)      (.52)      (1.27)      (2.81)
Other                     4.21+          1.61          .87+            .59       1.21+        1.72         1.06
                          (2.28)         (.99)         (.49)           (.48)      (.50)      (1.22)      (2.70)
Missing
Mother’s PPVT Score          -1.5         -.71            .28           .67       -1.01       -1.06        2.69
                           (4.45)       (1.96)            (.97)         (.18)     (.99)      (2.39)      (.991)
Word Knowledge              -3.67        -1.06           -.79           .04        -.16       -1.06      -6.12+
                           (2.92)       (1.28)            (.64)         (.62)       (.65)    (1.57)      (3.53)
Complex Communic.         -4.91+         1.00            -.91          -.36      -1.18*        -.89       -1.01
                           (2.61)       (1.15)          (.57)         (.56)       (.58)      (1.40)      (3.15)
Adj. R2                      .24           .0             .18           .22         .14         .00         .23
     Note: Coefficients and standard errors reported. +p<.1; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
                                                                                                                 27


Table 5
Effects of Child Care Type on Cognitive Outcomes - FACES Assessments and Baseline Child
Cognitive Proficiencies
                                     FACES           Book           Story              Book          Mother-
                                     Total           Mechanics      Comprehens         Familiarity   Assessed
                                                                    ion.                             Cognition
Child Outcomes, Wave 1                 (N=451)         (N=365)        (N=362)            (N-366)      (N=398)
Word Knowledge                           .23+             .09             .11              .12+        .20***
                                          (.13)          (.06)           (.07)              (.07)       (.05)
Complex communication                    -.41             -.00            .07               .06        .16***
                                          (.40)          (.06)           (.07)            (.07)         (.05)
Family Background
Child Age                               .12***          .03***         .06***            .05***        .05***
                                          (.01)          (.01)          (.01)             (.01)         (.01)
African American                         -.53+          -.36**           -.25              -.18         -.26*
                                          (.29)          (.12)          (.16)             (.14)         (.11)
Latina                                     -.36         -.39**          -.27+               .00         -.22+
                                           (.30)         (.13)          (.16)             (.15)          (.12)
Asian American                             -.84           -.38           -.10              -.47         -.47*
                                            (.61)        (.28)            (.34)              (.32)      (.23)
Mother’s PPVT Score                      .39**            .07            .12+             .13*           .03
                                          (.13)          (.05)          (.07)              (.06)        (.05)
Did not complete High School                .22           .01             .19              -.15         -.19*
                                          (.23)          (.10)          (.12)               (.11)        (.09)
Sites
San Jose                                 .56+             .17            .07               .18          .29**
                                          (.30)          (.12)          (.16)             (.15)          (.11)
San Francisco                            -.05             -.18           -.03             -.05         .33***
                                          (.26)          (.11)            (.14)            (.13)         (.10)
Child Care
Center both waves                       .87**            .28+           .47*              .51**         .29*
                                         (.35)            (.14)          (.19)              (.17)        (.13)
Family child care home both waves         .58             -.03           .11                .29         -.01
                                         (.58)           (.24)          (.31)              (.28)         (.22)
No care waves both waves                  .46              .14           .22               .45*          .02
                                         (.43)           (.19)          (.24)              (.22)        (.17)
Moved to center in wave 2               1.01**           .32*           .48*             .62***        .34**
                                         (.34)           (.15)           (.19)             (.17)        (.13)
Other                                   .90**            .24+           .35*              .42**          .05
                                         (.31)           (.13)          (.17)              (.16)        (.12)
Missing
Word Knowledge                              -.41           .05            -.24             .07          .059
                                             (.40)        (.18)            (.23)          (.21)        (.153)
Complex Communication                        .06           .26             .11             -.06         -.21
                                           (.38)          (.17)           (.21)           (.19)          (.15)
Mother’s PPVT Score                      -1.73***          -.09           -.02              .08        -.32*
                                           (.25)            (.16)          (.20)          (.18)         (.13)
Adj. R2                                      .35           .17             .27              .27          .43
 Note: Coefficients and standard errors reported. +p<.1; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
                                                                                                                28


Table 6
Estimates of the Effect of Child Care Type on Social Development (CBCL)
                                                             Social       Aggressive   Destructive     Other
                                                            Problems       Behavior     Behavior     Problems
    Child Outcomes, Wave 1                                  (N=370)        (N=385)      (N=394)      (N=388)
    Word Knowledge                                            -1.11          -.169        -.070        -.325
                                                             (.808)         (.353)       (.124)       (.283)
    Complex communication                                     -.631          -.188       -.239+        -.091
                                                             (.813)         (.358)       (.125)       (.286)
    Early Social Problems                                   .663***        .261***      .091***      .189***
                                                             (.068)         (.030)       (.011)       (.024)
    Family Background
    Child Age                                                 -.050          -.084+       -.002        .002
                                                             (.115)          (.050)      (.018)       (.040)
    African American                                         4.88**           1.47+       .385        1.19+
                                                             (1.74)          (.764)      (.269)       (.613)
    Latina                                                     1.08           -.202       -.015        .259
                                                             (1.88)          (.821)      (.290)       (.667)
    Asian American                                             2.34            .000       -.238        1.57
                                                             (3.84)          (1.65)      (.585)       (1.38)
    Mother’s PPVT score                                       -.624           -.046       -.134        -.209
                                                             (.767)          (.337)      (.118)       (.269)
    Did not complete High School                             2.72*            1.36*       -.020        .518
                                                             (1.39)          (.610)      (.215)       (.491)
    Mother’s Mental Health                                  .347***         .127***     .020***      .124***
                                                             (.060)          (.026)      (.009)       (.021)
    Sites
    San Jose                                                  -.535          -1.02        .042        -.088
                                                             (1.81)         (.795)       (.280)       (.643)
    San Francisco                                            -3.24*         -1.41*       -.597*       -.827
                                                             (1.64)         (.715)       (.251)       (.574)
    Child Care, both waves
    Center both waves                                          1.55           .144       -.177         .167
                                                             (2.16)          (.939)      (.335)       (.762)
    Family child care home both waves                          4.84          2.59+        .715         .149
                                                             (3.50)          (1.56)      (.554)       (1.26)
    No Care both waves                                         1.24          -.203        .136         .517
                                                             (2.65)          (1.17)      (.414)       (.938)
    Moved to Center in wave 2                                 -1.00          -.455       -.187        -.413
                                                             (2.13)          (.929)      (.326)       (.749)
    Other                                                     -2.29          -.964       -.179        -.474
                                                             (1.93)          (.840)      (.300)       (.682)
    Missing
    Word Knowledge                                              -.003         -.934       .193         .758
                                                               (2.55)         (1.13)     (.388)       (.886)
    Complex Communication                                        3.78          .855       .516         .395
                                                               (2.49)         (1.08)     (.372)       (.858)
    Mother’s PPVT Score                                         -2.70         -.878      -.315        -1.09
                                                               (2.09)         (.929)     (.326)       (.740)
    Mother’s Mental Health                                     8.85*           3.09       .761        3.14*
                                                               (4.21)         (1.88)     (.667)       (1.51)
    Early Social Problems                                     42.0***        15.4***    5.83***      11.7***
                                                               (4.55)         (2.02)     (.716)       (1.62)
    Adj. R2                                                      .35            .27        .23          .24
Note: Coefficients and standard errors reported. +p<.1; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
                                                                                                                             29


Table 7
Regression Estimates of the Effect of Parenting Practices and Income on Child Outcomes
                                              Total          School           FACES            Mother             Social
                                             Bracken        Readiness        Summary          Assessed           Problems
                                              Score         Composite
                                             (N=314)         (N=321)         (N=451)         (N=398)             (N=370)
    Child Care, both waves
    Center both waves                        8.74***           6.17*           .94**            .30*               2.02
                                              (2.45)           (2.94)           (.34)           (.13)             (2.13)
    Family Child Care Home                    7.05+             5.72             .43             -.06              4.82
      both waves                              (4.21)            (5.1)           (.57)           (.22)             (3.47)
    No Care both waves                         2.88            -1.87            .80+             .08                .56
                                              (3.30)           (3.95)           (.43)           (.17)             (2.75)
    Moved to Center in wave 2                 4.78*            5.64*           .99**           .33**              -1.09
                                              (2.40)           (2.87)           (.33)           (.13)             (2.11)
    Other                                     4.62*             1.24           .92**             ..06             -2.73
                                              (2.32)           (2.75)           (.30)           (.12)             (1.90)
    Work/Welfare Group
    On aid, working                             2.21            .214             .30          .5.84E-3             -1.17
                                               (2.84)          (3.42)           (.38)           (.14)             (2.32)
    On aid, not working                        -1.97           -5.15             -.56            -.27             -4.83+
                                               (3.27)          (3.95)           (.44)           (.17)             (2.81)
    Off aid, not working                        .330            -.45             .04            -.22+              2.10
                                               (2.42)          (2.88)           (.32)           (.13)             (2.10)
    Income
    Monthly earnings                         -8.85E-4         2.57E-6         2.32E-4        -1.1E-4+              -5.21
                                             (1.18E-3)       (1.42E-3)       (1.64E-4)       (6.36E-5)             (3.60)
    Welfare income                            6.09E-4         .3.58E-3        3.43E-4        -2.22E-4            (7.62E-3)
                                             (5.45E-3)       (6.60E-3)       (7.12E-4)        (2.7E-4)           (4.41E-3)
    Parenting Practices
    Library                                     .271            -.33             .36            .20*              -2.96*
                                               (1.51)         (1.81)            (.22)           (.08)             (1.33)
    Number of books                             .920            .57           .38***            .09*                -.21
                                               (.808)          (.97)            (.11)           (.04)              (.67)
    Read with child                             -.314           .44              -.11            .03              -1.69*
                                               (.766)          (.92)            (.11)           (.04)              (.67)
    Adj. R2                                      .25             .22              .39            .46                 .38
Note: Regression includes all control variables in previous models. Coefficients and standard errors reported.
+p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
                                                                                                                         30


Table 8
Effects of Child Care on Children’s Outcomes with Interactions between Site and Center
                                             Total             School          FACES          Mother-          Social
                                            Bracken          Readiness        Summary        Assessed         Problems
                                                             Composite                       Cognition
                                            (N=314)           (N=321)         (N=451)        (N=398)          (N=370)
    Sites
    San Jose                                   2.86            4.56+            0.47            0.12            1.22
                                              (2.27)           (2.68)           (0.33)         (0.12)          (1.98)
    San Francisco                             4.01+            7.81**          0.040           0.27*            -2.12
                                              (2.14)           (2.54)          (0.30)          (0.11)          (1.90)
    Child Care, both waves
    Center both waves                        7.69**             5.01            0.85*           0.04           4.53+
                                             (3.02)            (3.60)           (.44)          (0.17)          (2.70)
    Family child care home                   8.03+              7.43             0.63           0.03            4.68
      both waves                             (4.18)            (5.02)           (.58)          (0.22)          (3.49)
    No care both waves                         1.95             -4.01            0.45           -0.01           1.42
                                             (3.15)            (3.71)           (.42)          (0.16)          (2.64)
    Moved to center in wave 2                 4.68*             5.35           0.99**           0.31             -.80
                                             (2.36)            (2.80)           (.34)          (0.13)          (2.12)
    Other                                    4.00+               .71           0.88**           0.01            -1.96
                                              (2.29)           (2.70)           (.31)            (0.12)        (1.93)
    Site/Center Interactions
    San Jose*Center                            5.45             9.76+           0.82          1.01***          -9.27*
                                              (4.85)           (5.81)            (.69)         (0.26)          (4.27)
    San Francisco * Center                     -1.63           -2.47            -0.43           0.17            -3.52
                                              (3.78)           (4.52)            (.57)         (0.21)          (3.63)

    Adj. R2                                    0.24             0.24            0.35            0.45             0.36
Note: Regression includes all control variables from previous models. Coefficients and standard errors reported.
+p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
                                                                                                                                                          31
Table 9
Effects of Child Care Quality on Children’s Outcomes
                             Bracken Total             Bracken School Readiness                  FACES Total                   Social Problems
                   (N=123)     (N=123) (N=123)       (N=125) (N=125) (N=125)           (N=171)     (N=171) (N=171)       (N=144) (N=144) (N=144)
Months in           0.17*      0.17*       0.18+      0.26*       0.27*      0.26*     0.035**      0.032*    0.039**     0.014       0.012      0.017
Setting             (0.08)     (0.08)      (0.09)     (0.11)     (0.12)      (0.13)    (0.013)     (0.013)    (0.014)    (0.099)     (0.101)    (0.109)
Number of                       0.098      0.078                  0.21        0.18                 -0.0001    -0.0021                0.071      -0.002
Settings                       (0.096)    (0.097)                (0.13)      (0.14)                (0.015)    (0.015)                (0.12)     (0.12)
Child Care Quality
Average Arnett      0.10        0.12        1.05       1.13       1.09        1.66      0.66**      0.54*       0.52*     -3.05+     -3.35+     -3.65*
Score              (1.45)      (1.50)      (1.57)     (1.99)     (2.06)      (2.18)     (0.25)     (0.25)      (0.25)     (1.78)     (1.82)     (1.87)
Ratio                           0.48        0.42                  0.31        0.13                 0.13*        0.12+                 0.47        0.54
                               (0.39)      (0.39)                (0.54)      (0.55)                (0.07)      (0.07)                (0.49)      (0.49)
# in setting                    -0.24     -0.43+                  .005       0.043                 -0.061+    -0.092*                 -0.16       -0.19
                               (0.22)     (0.23)                 (0.30)      (0.33)                (0.036)    (0.039)                (0.27)      (0.29)
Provider Education
< High School     -9.55**                            -12.44**                            -0.51                             -3.46
                   (3.18)                            (4.32)                             (0.47)                            (3.49)
High School                    8.29*       7.18*                 11.22*     10.62*                  0.32        0.27                 7.35+       6.89+
                               (3.64)      (3.65)                (4.99)     (5.09)                 (0.54)      (0.54)                (4.02)      (4.02)
Some College                   12.09**    9.82**                 11.49*     11.75*                  0.32        0.11                  0.35        1.62
                                (3.80)    (3.90)                 (5.22)     (5.44)                 (0.55)      (0.56)                (4.16)      (4.30)
College +                      9.40*       6.74+                 10.13+      9.14+                 1.43*        1.29*                 2.56        2.99
                               (3.90)      (4.01)                (5.30)      (5.54)                (0.61)      (0.63)                (4.55)      (4.66)
Other                          10.21        6.15                 13.07        9.60                 2.01*        2.08*                 3.98        5.80
                               (6.84)      (6.94)                (9.46)      (9.74)                (0.90)      (0.92)                (6.93)      (7.11)
Child Care, both waves
Center both waves                          8.43*                              2.09                             1.23*                              2.66
                                           (3.85)                            (5.45)                            (0.60)                            (4.52)
Family child care home                      0.18                              -3.78                             0.54                            10.22*
  both waves                               (4.60)                            (6.47)                            (0.69)                           (5.15)
Moved to center                             1.86                              1.38                              0.65                              2.42
  in wave 2                                (3.93)                            (5.56)                            (0.62)                            (4.76)
Other                                       3.80                              -6.36                             1.37*                             -1.91
                                           (4.27)                            (6.00)                            (0.63)                            (4.79)
Adj. R2              0.23        0.23        0.26      0.25       0.23        0.23        0.38       0.40      0.41        0.09        0.10       0.11
All models include controls for wave 1 child outcomes (word knowledge and complex communication), child age, race/ethnicity (white, African-American,
Latina, Asian-American), mother’s PPVT score, mother’s education, and site (San Jose, San Francisco or Tampa). +p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
                                                                                                           32


Table 10
Multinomial Logit Estimates of the Relationship between Family Characteristics on Child Care
Selection
                             Center   Family    No     Moved Other Center      Family    No Moved Other
                                       Child    Care     to                     Child    Care  To
                                       Care            Center                   Care          Center
Sites
San Jose                      .14***      1.52      0.76      .38  .28* .17**       2.50      .22    .45 .33+
San Francisco                  .21**      0.00      0.66      .42   .48 .20**        .00      .36    .50  .38
Family Background
African American               2.59+     6.26+      1.62     1.00 1.62 1.71         4.63     1.86    .72 1.07
Latina                           .58      1.03      0.71     0.58 1.06      .62      .99     2.48    .57  .89
Asian American                  3.45     6.79*      5.27     2.51 4.97 1.81        40.4+ 14.30 2.27 2.84
Did not complete high school .54          0.76      0.53     .62   1.25 .39+         .75     .28+    .62  .86
Child’s Age                  1.07*** 1.05           0.99 1.05** 1.04+ 1.07**        1.05      .98 1.06* 1.04+
Mother’s PPVT Score             1.23      1.46      0.56+ .95       .85    1.13     1.38     .44*    .97  .78
Income and Work
Working                         .70 5.6E7*** 1.27            .61    .59     .77 2.6E7*** .59         .61  .37
Weekly Earnings                 1.00      1.00 0.99*** 1.00         .99    1.00     1.00    .99** 1.00    .99
Months on Welfare               1.05      0.97      1.00 1.11* 1.02 1.07             .98     1.08 1.13* 1.05
Capacity                                                                   1.00     1.00      .99  1.00 1.00
Word Knowledge                                                             1.07      .63      .75  1.10   .82
Complex Communication                                                       .77     1.74     1.15    .79  .86
Note: Capacity measures availability of centers in Census tract. +p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
                                                                                                     33


   Table 11
   Effect Sizes: Child Care Type and Quality and other Family Characteristics for Children’s
   Cognitive and Social Outcomes
                  Center    Family      No     Moved    Other   Mom’s    Mom’s    Num.    Child     Child
                  Care      Child       Care   to       Care    PPVT     Mental   of      Care      Age
                            Care               Center           Score    Health   books   Quality
Bracken Tests
Total             .57***    .54+        .15    .34*     .30+    .22***            .04     .09
School            .35*      .40         -.22   .33*     .06     .16**                     .21*
Readiness
Composite
FACES Tests
Total             .33**     .22         .18    .39**    .34**   .15**             .19*    .20*      .05***
Book Mechanics    .32+      -.03        .15    .36*     .28+    .08                       .22*      .03***
Story             .39*      .09         .18    .40*     .29*    .10+                      .19+      .05***
Comprehension
Book              .46**     .26         .40*   .55***   .47**   .11*                      .23*      .05***
Familiarity
Mother-           .29*      -.01        .02    .37**    .05     .03               .13*    .08       .05***
Assessed
Cognition
Social
Problems
Composite         .11       .33         .08    -.07     .16              .02***                     3.4e-3
Aggressive        .02       .42+        -.03   -.07     .15              .02***                     .01*
Destructive       .08       .34         .06    -.09     -.08             .01***                     9.4e-4
Other Problems    .03       .03         .11    -.08     -.10             .03***                     .03
   +p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001
                                                                                                                      34




1
  Add acknowledgment to the participating mothers, field coordinators, and funders.
2
  We use a cutoff of 16 for depressive symptoms.
3
  We also converted the CDI word usage scales into a picture version, directly administered by field staff, to help
validate mother reports (authors’ citation).
4
  The correlation between word knowledge or usage and complex communication subscales were 0.39 for the
younger cohort and 0.56 for the older cohort, both significant at p<.05 or stronger.
5
  Used with the permission of the Head Start Bureau, Department of Health and Human Services. Special thanks to
Gary Resnick at Westat Inc. and Louisa Turillo at the Bureau for their steady cooperation. Comparative data for
Head Start children appear in (authors’ citation).
6
  A complete list of items used from the CBCL is available from the authors in addition to these two complete
subscales.
7
  It is usually only appropriate to discuss differences when significance tests have been computed. Unfortunately
we do not have the standard errors on the national means, so we cannot conduct these tests. However, the standard
deviations, together with the sample size in our sample, indicate that the differences between our sample and the
national averages are likely to be significant. In the case of the Bracken test, for example, the standard errors of the
sample means for the first six measures are 2.12, 0.74, 0.53, 0.47, 0.39, and 3.98. The standard errors are likely to
be smaller for the national means (given larger sample sizes). Even if they were the same size, the differences
between the national norms and our sample would be significant at conventional levels.
8
  Detailed comparisons on child outcomes for participating children, relative to national samples, appear in
(authors’ citation).
9
  In an earlier paper, utilizing data from a Connecticut welfare reform experiment, we found that local availability
contributed mildly and significantly to the likelihood that mothers selected center care for their young children
(authors’ citation).
10
   Sample attrition did result in a slight loss of younger children who performed at significantly lower levels on the
MacArthur-CDI at wave 1. The complete sample attrition analysis appears in (authors’ citation).
