                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    BANKS’ ADVANTAGE IN HEDGING LIQUIDITY RISK:
                          THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE
                            COMMERCIAL PAPER MARKET

                                              Evan Gatev
                                            Philip E. Strahan

                                          Working Paper 9956
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9956


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




We thank Viral Acharya, Pierluigi Balduzzi, Daniel Covitz, Wayne Ferson, Mark Flannery, Ed Kane, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, George Pennacchi, Jeff Pontiff, and Jeremy Stein for helpful comments, as well as seminar
participants at Boston College, the NBER, the Western Finance Association 2003 Annual Meeting, and the
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Evan Gatev and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Banks’ Advantage in Hedging Liquidity Risk:
Theory and Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market
Evan Gatev and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 9956
September 2003
JEL No. G2

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper argues that banks have a unique ability to hedge against market-wide liquidity shocks.

Deposit inflows provide funding for loan demand shocks that follow declines in market liquidity.

Consequently, one dimension of bank “specialness” is that banks can insure firms against systematic

declines in market liquidity at lower cost than other financial institutions. We provide supporting

empirical evidence from the commercial paper (CP) market. When market liquidity dries up and CP

spreads increase, banks experience funding inflows. These flows allow banks to meet increased loan

demand from borrowers drawing funds from pre-existing commercial paper backup lines, without

running down their holdings of liquid assets. Moreover, the supply of cheap funds is sufficiently

large so that pricing on new lines of credit actually falls as market spreads widen.

Evan Gatev
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
Fulton Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
evan.gatev@bc.edu

Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
Fulton Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

         The rise of the commercial paper market, which resumed following the demise of the

Penn Central Railroad in the early 1970s, followed by the growth of the junk bond market in the

1980s and 1990s, has seemingly reduced the role of banks in providing financing to large

businesses (Mishkin and Strahan, 1998). This much-remarked-upon evolution away from banks

and toward the securities markets, though, has not rendered banks irrelevant (Boyd and Gertler,

1994). While they do provide less funding than before, banks remain important, even for large

firms, as the “liquidity provider of last resort.”1 This liquidity insurance role is notable in the

commercial paper market, where issuers invariably secure a backup line of credit from their bank

as protection against market pullbacks. Banks have also traditionally provided liquidity

insurance in the form of loan commitments to many classes of borrowers. In the case of the

commercial paper backup lines, these contracts allow firms to borrow (or “take down”) up to a

pre-determined amount of funds at a fixed spread over a safe market benchmark interest rate such

as LIBOR. This liquidity insurance softens the blow of reduced liquidity, where liquidity can be

defined as the firm’s ability to access the capital markets at attractive (fair) prices.2

         Why do commercial banks, as opposed to some other kind of financial institutions,

provide this liquidity insurance? In this paper, we argue that banks can provide firms insurance

against market-wide liquidity shocks at lower cost than other financial intermediaries because

deposit inflows provide a hedge for loan demand shocks. Figure 1 illustrates our main argument


   1
    Banks also continue to bear significant credit risk through off-balance sheet guarantees such as standby letters of
credit.

   2
    According to this definition, a decline of liquidity is typically caused by an increase in arm’s length investors’
perceived opaqueness of firms. Asymmetric information can lead to equilibrium credit rationing in the commercial paper
market. Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) show that credit rationing is optimal due to both adverse selection and moral hazard.

                                                            -1-
graphically. During normal times (high liquidity), funds flow directly from investors to firms

(broken line in Figure 1). Because banks are viewed as a safe haven by investors, funding tends

to become available to them during periods of market stress (low liquidity), just when borrowers

want to draw funds from their loan commitments. Hence, the funding flows within a bank

complement each other, with deposit inflows serving as a hedge for outflows from loan

commitment take-downs (solid lines in Figure 1). Because of this hedge, banks can offer the

lowest-cost insurance against a systematic shock to liquidity. The banks’ ability to sell liquidity

insurance more cheaply than other financial institutions provides an explanation for the viability

of their business in this particular market.

         Our argument complements Kashyap, Rajan and Stein (2002), who propose a risk-

management motive as a defining characteristic of a commercial bank: a financial intermediary

that combines demand deposits with loan commitments and lines of credit (we use these two

terms synonymously).3 In effect, banks offer liquidity to both households and firms with these

two products. As long as the demand for liquidity from depositors and borrowers is not too

highly correlated, the intermediary will pool these two classes of customers together to conserve

on its need to hold costly liquid assets – the buffer against unexpected deposit withdrawals and

loan take downs.4 Our argument extends the KRS rationale to highlight an additional specialty of



   3
    Some early studies analyzed loan commitments as a hedge against changes in interest rates or credit quality (see, for
example Thakor (1982) and Kanatas (1987)), and others analyzed the pricing structure of loan commitments as a way to
separate high-quality from low-quality borrowers (see, for example, Boot, Thakor and Udell (1987) and Thakor and Udell
(1987)). Other studies have emphasized loan commitments as protection for borrowers against credit rationing by their
bank (see, for example, Berger and Udell (1992) and Morgan (1998)). For more recent studies on pricing of loan
commitments as options, see Shockley and Thakor (1997) and Chava (2002).

    4
      Holding liquid assets is costly because these assets earn low returns and create additional agency problems for the
financial institution (Myers and Rajan, 1998).

                                                            -2-
banks – their unique ability to hedge against systematic liquidity shocks. As a result, banks can

insure firms against market-wide declines in the availability of liquidity at lower cost than other

institutions. While the KRS risk-management argument is quite general, it applies to any firm

that can diversify efficiently across different lines of business. Our contribution is to uncover a

new dimension of bank “specialness” that has not been emphasized in the literature.5

         Section II below provides some background by describing banks’ liquidity insurance role

in the commercial paper market. The main argument is presented Section III, where a simple

model shows how the correlation between a lender’s funding cost and the availability of market

liquidity affects its ability to price this insurance. In a competitive equilibrium, the price of loan

commitments varies negatively with the covariance between the cost funds to the lender and the

availability of market liquidity. This is the main testable implication of the model.

         In Sections IV and V, we show empirically that bank fund costs decrease when market

liquidity becomes scarce, where liquidity is measured by the difference between the commercial

paper rate to high-grade borrowers and the Treasury Bill rate (the “paper-bill spread”). We

provide three pieces of supporting evidence. First, we show that bank asset growth increases in

response to widening of spreads in the commercial paper market, controlling for the overall level

of interest rates. Moreover, the increase in assets occurs not only in the loan and C&I loan

portfolio, but also among banks’ holdings of liquid assets (cash and securities). Thus, rather than


   5
     Previous research has identified several other dimensions of bank specialness, emphasizing a link between the
liability and asset sides of the banking. For example, Fama (1985) suggested that information stemming from the
business checking account could give banks an advantage in lending over other financial intermediaries; for recent
empirical evidence, see Mester, Nakamura and Renault (2002). Mester and Berlin (1999) argue that banks’ access to
inelastically supplied funds (core deposits) allows them to offer borrowers insurance against changes in interest rates.
Other studies suggest that because bank loans are illiquid, and thus make “bad” collateral against which to borrow, the
optimal capital structure is one characterized by very liquid (or short-term) liabilities that subject the bank to the
possibility of a run (e.g. Calomiris and Kahn, 1991, Flannery, 1994, and Diamond and Rajan, 2001).

                                                           -3-
running down their buffer of liquid assets in response to market shocks, as banks would do in the

face of unexpected increases in loan demand alone, banks increase their holding of liquid assets.

This increase in liquid assets is strong evidence of greater availability of funding to banks.

Second, we show that the quantity of assets funded with deposits (particularly transactions

deposits) increases with the paper-bill spread, reflecting the increased availability of deposit

finance during periods of high spreads. Third, we test how the funding costs of banks versus

finance companies changes with the commercial paper spread. We find that yields on bank-

issued paper (i.e., large negotiable CDs) decreases with the commercial paper spread, whereas

the yields on finance-company-issued paper do not. This differential response to commercial

paper shocks is our most direct evidence that banks have a comparative advantage over their

closest competitor in offering liquidity insurance.

       In our last set of results, we estimate how the price of new commercial paper backup lines

of credit vary with changes in the price of market-provided liquidity, again as measured by the

paper-bill spread. Consistent with our findings on banking funding, we show that the price of the

new lines decreases with the paper-bill spread. Thus, when credit markets tighten, the increased

availability of funding to banks seems to be large enough to allow banks to fund their obligations

under existing lines of credit and to issue new lines at low prices.



II. BANKS’ INSURING LIQUIDITY IN THE COMMERCIAL PAPER MARKET

       Under normal circumstances, commercial paper offers the lowest cost source of short-

term financing for large, well-established firms. The commercial paper backup line of credit,

however, allows a firm to borrow from its bank at a pre-determined spread, thus providing


                                                 -4-
insurance against the possibility of having to borrow when commercial paper is expensive (e.g.

because outstanding paper is maturing). Borrowing in the commercial paper market may be

expensive either because a firm’s credit quality has declined, or because the overall supply of

liquidity has declined.6 Firms pay their bank an annual fee for this insurance.

         Banks’ functioning as liquidity insurance providers originated early in the development of

the commercial paper market. In 1970, Penn Central Transportation Company filed for

bankruptcy with more than $80 million in commercial paper outstanding. As a result of their

default, investors lost confidence in other large commercial paper issuers, making it difficult for

some of these firms to refinance their paper as it matured. The Federal Reserve responded to the

Penn Central crisis by lending aggressively to banks through the discount window and

encouraging them, in turn, to provide liquidity to their large borrowers (Kane, 1974). In response

to this difficulty, commercial paper issuers thereafter began purchasing backup lines of credit

from banks to insure against future funding disruptions (Saidenberg and Strahan, 1999).

         Similar market shocks have happened periodically since the Penn Central debacle.

Typically, some event in the markets hampers investor confidence in their ability to sort out high-

quality from low-quality firms. During the recent Enron crisis, for example, the accuracy of

financial statements came into question and, as a result, many firms faced difficulty borrowing in

the commercial paper market. In March of 2002, the Wall Street Journal reported the following:

“For years, the commercial-paper market has served as the corporate world's automated teller

machine, spitting out a seemingly endless supply of cash for businesses at super-low interest


   6
    Banks protect themselves from large declines in credit quality with the “material adverse change” covenant. This
covenant allows a bank to get out of its obligations to provide funds to a borrower that has experienced a significant
downgrade.

                                                           -5-
rates... But now, amid financial jitters caused by Enron Corp.'s collapse, that machine is

sputtering, sending a surprising number of companies of all sizes scrambling to find money for

their most basic needs, from paying salaries to buying office supplies. Some are paying higher

interest rates so they can keep selling paper. But others, after getting the cold shoulder from

commercial-paper investors, have turned to raising debt by other, costlier, means... Like running

water, it's (commercial paper) only missed when it stops flowing. The market first began

experiencing difficulties about a year ago, as the economy slowed. Enron's collapse fueled more

worry -- in part because it caused credit-rating agencies to become more hawkish. Stung by

criticism that both Moody's and Standard & Poor's kept Enron at investment grade until just five

days before it filed for bankruptcy last fall, the rating agencies started poring over balance sheets,

looking for companies that seem over-dependent on commercial paper.”7

        Before Enron, the Russian default in late summer of 1998 followed by the failure of the

hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) created a similar increase in uncertainty,

leading to a so-called “flight to quality.” During these episodes, investor funds flow toward safe

investments such as bank deposits (and government securities), rather than to risky investments

such as commercial paper, corporate bonds or equities. As we show below, banks experience

inflows of funds during these periods, and, at the same time, firms have a high demand to take

down funds from pre-existing lines of credit. Said in a slightly different way, when market

liquidity dries up, the supply of bank loans increases (because funding flows into banks) at the

same time that demand for bank loans increases (because firms want to take down funds). Re-



   7
     See “Cash Drought: A Dwindling Supply of Short-Term Credit Plagues Corporations-Market in Commercial Paper
hurt by Enron Fears,” Gregory Zuckerman, Wall Street Journal, March 28, 2002.

                                                       -6-
intermediation occurs during periods of market turmoil because investors trust banks, perhaps

because banks are explicitly and implicitly insured by the government or because banks have the

information to sort out high-quality and low-quality firms. In short, when investments are

perceived as opaque, firms have to finance indirectly through the banks.



III. A MODEL OF LOAN-COMMITMENT PRICING

         Our goal is to construct a simple asset-pricing model of loan commitments that highlights

the main thesis of this paper: an intermediary whose funding cost declines when market liquidity

becomes scarce has a comparative advantage over competing intermediaries in issuing this

product.8 We then offer supporting evidence that banks, have access to funding that exhibits this

property.

         Assume for simplicity that market liquidity is the only systematic risk factor.9 The

present value of a 1-period loan with $1 commitment, PLC, is determined according to a general

asset-pricing model of the form:




                                                                                      ,


   8
     Note that the risk management motive of Kashyap et al. (2002) is subsumed in our model. However, our focus is not
on the capital structure, but on the bank’s exposure to external shocks in the capital markets. Thus, our starting point is
not the deviation from the Modigliani-Miller paradigm, but modeling the external liquidity shocks.

   9
     Covitz and Downing (2002) argue that movements in yields on short- and long-term corporate debt can only be
explained by accounting for liquidity risk as well as default risk. As evidence, they show that yields on commercial paper
reflect firm-level liquidity risk as well as default risk, whereas yields on long-term corporate bonds reflect only firm-level
characteristics related to default risk. Note also that other risk factors can be added to our model without changing the
basic story, although they would not contribute to banks’ comparative advantage in commitment lending. To the extent
that a decline in market liquidity captures a systematic widening of spreads, the latter can be due to any number of
underlying factors. In effect we can interpret a single priced systematic liquidity factor as the projection of the stochastic
discount factor that captures a number of underlying systematic factors on the commercial paper market.

                                                             -7-
where L is the liquidity risk factor, ( is the equilibrium price of L-risk and r is the riskless rate.

        The realized return on a loan commitment, rLC , is random and has two components. The

first is a fixed return, rUD, which is derived from the pre-paid fee on undrawn funds. The risky

part of the return can itself be decomposed into two further parts, the return on the drawn funds

(rL) and the cost to the intermediary of funding the loan, i.e. the yield on deposits, (rD). The

return on the loan is risky because of the possibility of default; the cost of funding the loan is

risky because it varies systematically with the availability of liquidity in the market (L).

Moreover, the fraction of funds taken down, denoted as ", also is a random variable with values

between 0 and 1. We can write the return on the loan commitment as follows:

                                                                       .


        To simplify the exposition, we will assume that the take-down rate, ", is a decreasing

deterministic function of L. In words, when liquidity is plentiful (L is high), the take-down rate

is low because borrowers use the commercial paper markets, and when liquidity is scarce, the

take-down rate is high because commercial paper borrowing is expensive. We can decompose

the systematic risk associated with a loan commitment into three parts, as follows:



                                                                                   .


The first two covariance terms depend only on the actions taken by the borrower – that is, the

sensitivity of the borrower’s take-down behavior to liquidity (") and the return on the loan

conditional on funds being drawn (rL). Thus, the magnitudes of these two terms are independent

of the type of intermediary that has sold the loan commitment. The third term depends on how



                                                  -8-
the intermediary’s funding costs (rD) varies with L. Analytically, we are interested in the sign of

the following expression:




                                                                .




We assumed above that the take-down fraction is a deterministic function of the liquidity shock;

we also assume that the joint distribution of rD and L is normal:10


                                                                              .




Now, using the normality of L we can write (see the Appendix A)




                                                                                          .




Notice that this is a linear function of             , with a negative intercept (because " is decreasing


and E[L]=0). The key result is that the slope is positive:




   10
     This assumption is made for tractability, since we are concerned with the first two moments. The argument is
general and can be applied using the second-order approximation of any distribution where the moments are finite.

                                                          -9-
                                                                 ,




because the integrand in the expectation is non-negative (because 0 # " # 1 ). If the market for

loan commitment is competitive, profits are eliminated (i.e PLC = 0), so that we have:




                                                                            ,




and finally, we get the main result:

Proposition 1: The expected return decreases with an increasing covariance between funding

costs and liquidity:




                                                                     .




         Proposition 1 implies that only an intermediary with a high covariance between its

funding cost and the availability of market liquidity (call it a “bank” for the moment) will be able

to offer this product in equilibrium. Other intermediaries offering the product at prevailing prices

would find the business unprofitable (negative NPV). Because these “non-bank” intermediaries

experience more systematic risk when offering loan commitments, they would implicitly

discount the expected returns at a higher rate than “banks.”


                                                -10-
       A finance company such as GE Capital is a real-world example of a “non-bank”

intermediary. These intermediaries offer some similarities to banks on the asset side of their

business because they lend (and lease) to borrowers with information problems. In fact, Carey,

Post and Sharpe (1998) find no difference in measures of opacity for finance-company borrowers

and bank borrowers, so they seem to solve the same kinds of information problems as banks.

Most lines of credit, however, are issued by commercial banks rather than finance companies

(Kashyap, Rajan and Stein, 2002). This difference makes sense in the context of our model

because finance-company liabilities are composed mainly of commercial paper and bonds, thus

their funding costs would tend to covary negatively with the availability of market liquidity, just

the opposite of our theoretical “bank.” In the next section, we will show that funding costs of

real-world banks covary positively with market liquidity (i.e. F rD,L > 0), whereas funding costs to

finance companies do not.

       By making one additional simplifying assumption, we can derive some cross-sectional

implications from our model. Consider functions "(L) that are twice-differentiable such that

                                              .

Intuitively, since " is non-increasing, the first derivative is always non-positive, and since higher

values for -"’ correspond to faster change in ", writing the condition as                    shows

that the faster increase in draw-downs occurs, on average, for negative shocks L. In this way, the

assumption rules out pathological cases but includes the desirable functional forms for ".

Now, using the normality of L we can write (see the Appendix A):

                                                                                 .



                                                  -11-
The positive slope is


                                                                               .




       The last equation shows how the sensitivity of the loan commitment expected return to

the covariance between the funding cost and the liquidity shocks depends on the particulars of

borrower behavior, i.e. on the exact functional form for ". We can illustrate this through some

simple examples. First, we consider a constant function ".

Case A: Constant withdrawals: "(L)="0=E(") .

       This function corresponds to the case of low-quality borrowers who draw their lines

idiosyncratically (say, in response to a downgrade), regardless of the state of the economy (i.e.

regardless of liquidity). In this case, we have:


       (1)                                                   .




Note that the intermediary with access to cheap funding still has a competitive advantage, which

depends on both the price of liquidity risk and the expected frequency of loan takedowns.

Case B: Piecewise-linear withdrawals:                                 for Llow # L # Lhi<0.


       For this example, we assume that the commitments are always drawn (" = 1) under a

certain threshold level for the shock (L < Llow), corresponding to the notion of “big” liquidity

shocks, and always remain undrawn (" = 0) if the shock L is above a certain threshold level, L >

Lhi > Llow (e.g. if the credit market is “good”). This simplification includes “natural” functional


                                                   -12-
forms for ", like gradual transition functions of the form:



                                                , for Llow # L # Lhi< 0.


When a = 1, the function becomes truncated linear, and we can also model a step function as the

limiting case where Llow 6 Lh. Since this function is not differentiable at Lhi and Llow, we will

show that the derivative is positive. We have (see the Appendix A)




                                                                                           ,




where M and N are the normal cumulative distribution and density functions, respectively. At the

limit Llow 6 Lhi, " becomes the step function P[-4,Lhi], that has value 1 on the interval [-4,Lhi] and 0

otherwise, and in that case:




                                                                      ,




which can also be written as follows:




        (2)                                                     .




                                                  -13-
       Now, we can compare how the strength of the bank’s funding hedge varies across two

different sorts of borrowers: idiosyncratic borrowers and systematic borrowers. Idiosyncratic

borrowers are those borrowers whose take-down behavior does not depend on liquidity (Case A);

for example, high-risk borrowers whose behavior will depend mainly on changes in their own

credit quality, independent of market conditions. Systematic borrowers, in contrast, are firms

whose take-down behavior is predicated on the availability of market liquidity (Case B); for

example, highly rated firms that would only draw funds in response to shocks to the supply of

liquidity in the commercial paper market as a whole. If we consider two borrowers with the

same expected take-down behavior (i.e. the same E(")="0), then equations (1) and (2) show that

the borrower whose behavior is systematically related to market liquidity benefits more from

access to bank-issued lines of credit, relative to the idiosyncratic borrower (assuming the these

two borrowers draw on their lines with probability less than ½; or, in the case of the idiosyncratic

borrower, Lhi < 0). Thus, banks, with their funding hedge, would be even more likely to dominate

the market for lines of credit to high-grade firms whose take-down behavior is dominated by the

systematic L-factor. In contrast, other financial institutions without access to bank-style funding

(i.e. funding that flows in during periods of tight markets) might be better able to compete for

lower-grade borrowers whose take-down behavior depends more on idiosyncratic credit shocks.

       This cross-sectional implication of our model may help explain the empirical findings of

Carey et al (1998), who show that finance-company borrowers are riskier than bank borrowers in

observable ways (they have higher leverage), but not in ways suggesting that either banks or

finance companies possess a comparative advantage in solving information problems. According

to our model, they key difference has to do with liquidity risk. Banks have an especially large


                                                -14-
advantage among the class of borrowers where the main risk of making a loan commitment

comes from liquidity risk – the risk of having to fund the loan when market spreads are high –

rather than default risk. When take-down behavior tends to be idiosyncratic, reflecting largely

changes in a high-risk borrower’s credit quality, the main risk of making a loan commitment

stems from default; the liquidity advantage of banks for these borrower is less pronounced, thus

helping to explain why finance companies tend to lend more to this kind of firm.



IV. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE: BANKS’ FUNDING ADVANTAGE IN OFFERING BACKUP LINES

       In this section, we test how the banking system responds to increases in the price of

market-provided liquidity. We report aggregate time-series evidence that bank assets grow faster

when the paper-bill spread is high than when it is low. This increased growth occurs not only in

lending, but in banks’ holdings of cash and securities as well. The increases in asset growth

suggest that as demand for bank loans increases (in response to higher cost of borrowing in

markets), so does the supply of funding (hence liquid assets rise rather than fall). [We also find

that asset growth increases with spreads at all banks, whereas lending grows faster in response to

tight spreads only at banks with high level of pre-existing loan commitments. See Appendix B.]

We then look at the other side of the balance sheet, testing how banks’ fund their increase in

growth. We find deposits overall, especially transactions deposits, grow faster as the paper-bill

spread widens; other aspects of bank funding, however, do not grow faster when spreads widen.

Third, we show that yields on large time deposits decrease with the spread, suggesting better

funding availability to banks, whereas yields on finance company paper do not decrease.




                                               -15-
Methods and Data

         The difficulty empirically with our tests is that shocks in the commercial paper market

have historically been dramatic but brief. In Section II, we described instances in which

commercial paper availability declined in response to market turmoil, such as the Penn Central

default in the early 1970s. These spikes have occurred periodically over the past 25 years.

         Figure 2 plots the paper-bill spread during our sample period, from 1988 to 2002. As the

chart shows, the spikes in the spread tend to be dramatic but short-lived. For example, at the

beginning of the U.S. air attack against Iraq in the middle of January of 1991, commercial paper

spreads shot up above 100 basis points very briefly. Later, in the last week of September 1998,

the Federal Reserve unexpectedly reduced its target for the Fed Funds rate in response to the

LTCM debacle and rising concern of contagion. In response, commercial paper spreads rose

from 68 basis points to 118 basis points in just two weeks. But by the beginning of November,

the spreads had fallen back to 65 basis points.

         Because of the way the markets have responded to events during our sample period, we

think it is important to look at high-frequency data; with monthly or quarterly data one would run

the risk of missing all of the interesting variation in the interest-rate spreads. We therefore

explore how weekly banking data respond to the paper-bill spread. These data come from the

Federal Reserve’s H.8 statistical release. Although the H.8 data contain much less detail than,

for example, data from the Reports of Income and Condition (the “Call Report”), they do offer

the highest frequency look at banking system that is available.11 The weekly banking data are



   11
     We use the data from the 50 weekly reporting banks, not seasonally adjusted, from 1988 to 2002. These data come
from the Federal Reserve Board’s website, reflecting the activity of the 50 largest US banks.

                                                        -16-
matched to interest rates on short-term government securities (3-months) and commercial paper

rates. Our measure of market tightness, or the cost of market-provided liquidity, equals the

spread between the 3-month commercial paper rate for highly rated (AA) non-financial

borrowers and the 3-month T-Bill rate.

          To test how market liquidity affects the banking system, we estimate a series of vector

auto-regressions (VARs), each including three variables, one representing growth in the banking

system and the other two reflecting interest rates (level and spreads). In particular, on the asset

side we model the change in bank assets, the change in loans (total loans and C&I loans), or the

change in liquid assets (cash plus securities); on the liability side we model the change in

deposits, the change in transactions deposits, the change in large time deposits and the change in

non-transactions deposits. Each of these change variables is normalized by beginning-of-period

assets.

          We also report VARs with the change in the yield on large, negotiable certificates of

deposit and with the change in the yield on short-term borrowing by finance companies. These

results allow us to test how banks’ cost of funds varies with market liquidity in comparison with

their closest competitors.12 As the most direct comparison of funding costs for banks versus

finance companies, we also test how the difference between the yield on large CDs and finance-

company paper responds to market liquidity shocks.

          The interest rate variables that we include in each VAR system are the change in short-

term interest rates (the three-month Treasury rate), and the spread between the commercial paper



   12
     We first difference all of the interest rate series because each has a very high degree of persistence. Differencing
removes the possibility of generating spurious results stemming from the presence of a unit root.

                                                           -17-
rate and this short-term interest rate.13 Summary statistics for the banking-system growth rates

and the interest rate variables appear in Table 1.

Results

          Table 2 summarizes the VAR results for growth in the banking system, Panel A for asset-

side growth and Panel B for liability-side growth. Table 3 then reports the VAR statistics for the

models of bank and finance company funding costs. For each VAR, we also report the Impulse

Response Function for a shock to the CP spread as a convenient way to understand the economic

magnitude and timing of how liquidity shocks affect the banking system (Figure 3).

          The first set of results (Table 2, Panel A) indicates that there is a substantial effect of the

paper-bill spread on subsequent growth in the banking system. For example, the Granger-

causality tests show that the paper-bill spread is useful in predicting subsequent bank asset

growth, as well as growth in particular assets. The increased growth rates of both lending and

liquid assets (cash+securities) strongly suggests that funding supply increases when market

spreads widen; otherwise, banks would fund the increased demand for loans (by firms wanting to

take down funds from CP backup lines) by running down their holdings of liquid assets.

          To understand the magnitude of these effects, the impulse response of the asset growth

rate suggests that an increase of 26 basis points (the difference between the 75th and 25th

percentiles) in the paper-bill spread would be associated with an increase in asset growth of 0.40

percent in the following week. This asset growth increase is large relative to the median weekly

growth rate in bank assets of 0.10 percent. For the growth of liquid assets, a 26 basis point rise



   13
     We have also tried including a term structure variable equal to the difference in the yields on five-year Treasury
Notes and the three-month Treasury Bill. Adding this variable has little effect on the results.

                                                           -18-
in the spread is associated with an increase in the growth liquid assets of 0.17 percent.

       The impulse responses also indicate little persistence in the effects of tightening spreads

on lending. In the lending equations, the responses beyond one week are small: the second week

response of loan growth to the 26 bp paper-bill rate increase is only about -0.004 percent.

Overall, periods further out into the future have rapidly declining responses. Increases in market

spreads only raise the growth rate of bank loans during the period of tight markets; once the

market spreads decline, the growth rates quickly revert to their average levels. In the liquid asset

growth equation, the subsequent impulse response effects are also negative but much larger, with

a second week response of about -0.09 percent. This suggests that banks attempt to bring the

level of liquid assets back to a target level very quickly following an unexpected increase or

decrease due to change in market spreads. The declining responses mean that once the spread

reverts to normal, liquid assets actually grow substantially more slowly than normal or even

shrink thus allowing the banking system to return to the desired holdings of liquid assets rapidly.

       In Panel B of Table 2, we test how bank funding changes with the paper-bill spread.

These results suggest that the increase in asset growth is funded with additional deposits,

particularly transaction deposits, consistent with our basic story of funding availability shifting

from the capital markets to the banking system.

       In Table 3, we estimate a VAR that includes the change in the yield on large, three-month

negotiable certificates of deposit and the change in the Treasury Bill rate, along with the paper-

bill spread. In addition, we estimate a parallel VAR using the change in the three-month finance

paper rate. The results provide further evidence that bank funding availability increases as the

commercial paper spreads widen. Banks’ reliance on transaction deposits increases with the


                                                -19-
paper-bill spread and, at the same time, the yield on large CDs declines. The coefficient suggest

that a 26 basis point increase in the CP spread is followed by a decline in the bank CD rate of

about six basis points. In contrast, funding costs for finance companies (such as GE Capital)

actually increase slightly just after the shock.14 In the VAR with the difference between the CD

rate and the finance company rate changes, we find declines in the first two weeks following the

shock to the CP spread, after which time the spread change increases, bringing it back to its long-

run level.

Robustness

         Taken as a whole, our results so far suggest a shift in the willingness of investors to hold

bank deposits, presumably perceived to be safe, relative to commercial paper (or finance-

company paper), during periods of weak investor confidence. What explains the simultaneous

widening of market spreads and funding flows into the banking system? Our view is that during

periods of concern about market integrity (i.e. when spreads rise), the perceived value of the

government safety net increases, as does the perceived likelihood of a bailout (or support of) the

banking system. This idea seems particularly relevant to understanding the events following the

Russian default and the fall of LTCM. [As further support for this safety net view, we show in

the Appendix that increased funding following shocks to the CP spread are no greater at banks

with high capital-asset ratios (safe banks) than at banks with low capital-asset ratios (risky

banks)]. In addition, this notion can explain both increases in deposit funding (because

concerned investor flee to banks) and declines in yields on uninsured deposits (because an


   14
     We know of no high-frequency data (e.g. weekly) on finance company, or other financial institution, balance sheets
that would allow us to observe how their assets and funding sources respond to changes in the paper-bill spread. All
pricing effects documented here are transitory, consistent with the notion of accommodating a supply shock.

                                                         -20-
increased bailout probability reduces the risk of uninsured deposits). Of course, funding flows

into the banking system can be directly facilitated by the central bank though its operation of

monetary policy, either directly (with discount window lending) or with open market operations

(to support increases in bank deposits).15 Increases in credit risk or, more generally, declines in

market sentiment, could also play a role in explaining why investors might seek a safe haven for

their funds.

          Table 4 shows that our results are robust to variables that could potentially explain the

funding supply shifting from the capital markets to the banking system having to do with changes

in monetary policy, “transaction” liquidity (understood as availability of a willing counter-party),

general credit risk, or “sentiment”. We rule out alternatives empirically by testing whether our

main findings are robust to including the following proxy variables: (1) for monetary policy, the

growth in total reserves at the Fed; (2) as a measure of transaction liquidity, the on/off-the-run

bill spread for the 30-year bond; (3) as a proxy for credit risk, the AAA-Baa bond spread; (4) as a

measure of “sentiment”, the implied volatility of the S&P 100 from options prices (the VIX

index).

          The results show that the paper-bill spread continues to drive the results in the presence

of these potentially omitted factors. The proxy variables are generally not useful in predicting the

variables of interest.16 The exceptions are the on/off-the-run spread and the credit spread, which

are both useful in predicting overall bank asset growth. Inclusion of these variables, however,


   15
     Discount window lending by the Fed to commercial banks is almost never quantitatively significant throughout our
sample period. The one exception is that the Fed did use the discount window to supply a significant quantity of liquidity
during the days following the attack on the World Trade Center (McAndrews and Potter, 2003).

   16
      The results (not reported here) also show that overall, the proxy variables are not useful in predicting the paper-bill
spread.

                                                            -21-
does not eliminate the importance of the paper-bill spread, nor does it change the shape or

magnitude of the impulse response function.



V. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE: PRICING OF NEW LOAN COMMITMENTS

       In this last section, we estimate how the pricing of new loan commitments responds to

conditions in the commercial paper market. We have seen that when the paper-bill spread

increases, funding availability increases so much that banks can actually increase their holding of

liquid assets in the face of strong loan take-down demand. This result raises the possibility that

the equilibrium price of new lines of credit may fall during periods of market tightness.

Methods and Data

       To test this idea, we use the Dealscan database, compiled by the Loan Pricing

Corporation (LPC). LPC is a private firm that collects up-to-date information on lending for its

institutional clients. LPC also maintains a historical database, Dealscan, that contains

information on the pricing and non-price terms of a large number of loans made over the past 10

years. The historical data in Dealscan come primarily from SEC filings, although LPC also

receives data from large loan syndicators as well as from a staff of reporters. According to LPC,

most loans made to large publicly traded companies (e.g. the Forbes 500) appear in Dealscan.

There is very little information, however, on lending to small and middle-market firms (see

Strahan, 1999), although this non-random selection of firms poses little trouble for our study

because we will focus only on commercial paper borrowers.

       Dealscan provides detailed information on bank loans to large corporations from 1988 to

the present. Coverage in the database is sparse during the late 1980s, however, so we begin our


                                                -22-
sample in 1991. The Dealscan data have both price and non-price terms of loans at origination,

along with information on borrower rating and borrower sales, but there is no information about

pricing in the secondary market.17 The pricing terms include both the “drawn all-in spread”,

which equals the annual cost to a borrower for drawn funds, inclusive of all fees. The drawn

spread is defined as a markup over LIBOR. Dealscan also contains the “undrawn spread”, equal

to the annual fees that the borrower must pay its bank for funds committed under the line but not

taken down.18

         In addition to the two pricing variables, Dealscan includes limited information on the

borrower, allowing us to control for borrower risk with a set of Moody’s senior-debt ratings

indicators, and for borrower size by including the log of sales during the year prior to loan

origination. We match the Dealscan data to three daily interest rate variables, the yield on the

three-month Treasury Bill, a term structure variable equal to the difference between the yield on

the five-year Treasury Note and the three-month Bill, and the paper-bill spread. The coefficient

on the paper-bill spread allows us to test whether the price of new CP backup lines declines when

the price of market-provided liquidity increases, as suggested by the strong funding availability to

banks.

         Beside the three interest rates and the variables controlling for borrower attributes, we

also control for the non-price terms of the lines by including the log of the commitment amount,

the log of maturity, and a secured indicator variable. Because these terms may be jointly



   17
    For information on loan trading in the secondary market, see Carey and Bhasin (1999).

    18
      LPC’s use of the word “spread” when referring to fees on undrawn commitments is puzzling because these fees are
not markups over market interest rates.

                                                        -23-
determined with the prices, we estimate our models both with and without these variables.

Finally, we introduce a log-linear trend variable into some specifications to rule out the

possibility that common trends in interest rates can explain the results.19

          We build our sample from the set of all commercial paper backup lines of credit on

Dealscan originated between January 1, 1991 and the end of first quarter of 2002, for a total of

2,695 commitments. Of these, Dealscan contains information on the drawn spread for 2,155

commitments, and information on the undrawn fees for 1,882 commitments. Borrower sales is

also missing for some of these loans, so our regression samples include between 1,520 and 1,720

observations. Also, because we sometimes have multiple observations on a single day, we report

standard errors that account for possible correlation in the error across loans made on the same

day.

          Table 5 reports the summary statistics for all of the variables in the models. The average

drawn spread over LIBOR equals about 61 basis points (compared to a mean paper-bill spread of

30 basis points), and the average undrawn spread equals about 13 basis points. Most of the lines

are secured (84 percent), and their average maturity equals 18 months. The backup lines tend to

be large, with a mean commitment amount of $635 million, reflecting the large size of the typical

commercial paper issuer (average sales size equals $8.6 billion). More that half of the borrowers

have an S&P senior debt rating, although 43 percent of the borrowers do not have a rating.

Results

          Tables 6 and 7 report the results from the loan pricing regressions. In Table 6, we omit



   19
     Note that we can not use standard time series techniques because we do not have lagged values of the variables;
each loan is made only once, and the loans are not homogeneous.

                                                         -24-
the non-price term variables from the regressions (log of commitment amount, log of maturity

and the secured indicator), while the specifications in Table 7 include these variables. Also, for

each table we include two panels. Panel A reports the results with all of the available

observations, including the 43 percent of borrowers without a debt rating and thus no way to

control for borrower risk; in these regressions, we include an indicator equal to one for the un-

rated borrowers. Panel B reports the results with only the set of borrowers with a Moody’s

rating. We also report two specifications in each panel, one that includes a log-linear time trend,

and one without this variable. There are 16 specifications in all.

       Before turning to the interest rate results, notice that the other variables enter the

regressions with sensible coefficients. Larger borrowers, for example, pay lower drawn and

undrawn spreads on their lines of credit. Also, the coefficients on the ratings indicators, which

we do not report in the tables, suggest that higher-rated firms pay lower spreads than lower-rated

firms. For example, a borrower rated Aa or better would pay, on average, about 8 basis points

less for undrawn funds than a borrower rated below Baa and about 50 basis points less for funds

drawn off of these lines.

       The coefficients on the non-price terms suggest that larger loans come with lower

spreads; longer term loans have higher undrawn spreads but lower drawn spreads; and, secured

loans come with higher spreads than unsecured loans. These last three results, however, are

especially hard to interpret because the price and non-price terms are jointly determined. So, for

example, risky firms tend to pay high interest rates for funds and their loans tend to be secured,

explaining the positive coefficient on the secured indicator even though the identical loan secured




                                                -25-
would be safer than if it were not secured.20

        Looking now at the interest rate coefficients, in all 16 specifications in the two tables

(eight for the drawn spread and eight for the undrawn spread), we find a statistically significant,

negative relationship between the market price of liquidity (the paper-bill spread) and the price

charged for liquidity insurance by banks. The result is robust across several dimensions. First,

the coefficient on the paper-bill spread does not change appreciably when we add the non-price

terms to the model; second, this coefficient does not change when we control for time trends;

third, it does not change when we drop the un-rated firms. Moreover, the paper-bill spread is the

only interest rate variable with a consistent impact on the pricing of these lines of credit. The

other interest rate variables – the short-term interest rate and the term structure spread – do not

have a consistent impact on either the drawn or the undrawn spread. (The coefficient on the term

structure variable becomes indistinguishable from zero when we control for the time trend.)

        The coefficient on the paper-bill spread is not only statistically significant, but it is

economically significant as well. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the paper-bill

spread (20 basis points) is associated with an decrease in the drawn spread of about 3.2 basis

points, or about 5 percent of the unconditional mean (60 basis points). A 20 basis point increase

in the paper-bill spread comes with a decline of about 0.5 basis points in the undrawn spread,

again about 5 percent of the unconditional mean (13 basis points).

        While we have shown that the price of new commercial paper backup lines of credit

declines with market spreads, even controlling for the non-price terms of the loans, Table 8

explores how these non-price terms themselves co-vary with the paper-bill spread. The results


   20
    See Berger and Udell (1990) for evidence that secured borrowers are riskier than unsecured borrowers.

                                                        -26-
suggest no effect of spreads on either the commitment size or the likelihood that a loan

commitment is secured. We do find, however, that the maturity of the backup lines declines with

the paper-bill spread. According to the coefficients, a 20 basis point increase in the spread is

associated with a decline in average maturity of about four percent (the dependent variables is in

logs). So, banks offer new lines of credit more cheaply during periods of wide spreads, we argue,

because of the inflow of funds. This last result on maturity suggests, however, that these new

lines tend to be somewhat shorter lived than average, perhaps because banks anticipate that the

strong funding availability is temporary.



VI. CONCLUSIONS

       We have shown why banks are well suited to providing liquidity insurance to large

borrowers. During periods when commercial paper spreads widen – periods when borrowing in

the markets is expensive – banks are flush with funds. As evidence, we document that both loans

and liquid assets grow faster at banks when the paper-bill spread widens and, at the same time,

yields on large CDs fall. Borrowers are also more apt to take funds down from pre-existing lines

of credit established during these tight times. Thus, because the funding is there when it is

needed, banks can offer this liquidity insurance without having to carry a large bucket of liquid

assets – assets that are costly to hold both because they earn low returns and because they

exacerbate managerial agency problems. The funding inflows are not only useful in helping

banks meet their obligations to customers when liquidity demands are high, but they are also

large enough to allow banks to make new loan commitments at lower-than-average prices.

       In our view, arguments about “bank specialness” must have something to do with a link


                                                -27-
or “synergy” between the funding and lending sides of the business. Otherwise, the specialness

has to do with intermediation generally rather than with banking. Our results find such a link.

Because banks are viewed as a safe haven for funds, during periods of market uncertainty both

the supply of bank funds and the demand for bank loans tend to move up together. We do not

find, however, that finance companies experience better funding supply during these periods of

tight markets. In our view, funding flows into the banking system during periods of high spreads

because implicit and explicit government support of banks enhances investors’ willingness to

hold deposits. An increased level of (implicit) support during crises is consistent not only with

greater funding flows, but also with lower yields on large deposits that are not explicitly insured

by the government. It is difficult to know, however, whether similar funding flows could occur

in the absence of government safety nets. We simply have not lived in such a world for a long

time. An interesting extension of this research would be to study the time-series response of the

banking system to market shocks before and after the establishment of the FDIC in 1933.




                                                -28-
                                         References

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, 1992, “Some Evidence on the Empirical Significance of
Credit Rationing,” Journal of Political Economy.

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, 1990, “Collateral, Loan Quality and Bank Risk,” Journal
of Monetary Economics.

Boyd, John and Mark Gertler, 1994, “Are Banks Dead? Or, Are the Reports Greatly
Exagerrated?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Quarterly Review (Summer 1994), 1-19.

Boot, Arnaud, Anjan Thakor and Gregory Udell, 1987, “Competition, Risk Neutrality and Loan
Commitments,” Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 449-471.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles M. Kahn, 1991, “The Role of Demandable Debt in
Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements, American Economic Review 81(3), 497-513.

Carey, Mark S., and Vijay Bhasin, 1999, “The Determinants of Corporate Loan Liquidity,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Proceedings of the 35th Conference on Bank Structure and
Competition.

Carey, Mark S., Mitch Post, and Steven Sharpe, 1998, “Does Corporate Lending by Banks and
Finance Companies Differ? Evidence on Specialization in Private Debt Contracting, Journal of
Finance, 53.

Chava, Sudheer, 2002, “Modeling Loan Commitments and Liquidity Crisis: Theory and
Estimation,” mimeo, November 19, 2002.

Covitz, Daniel and Chris Downing, 2002, “Insolvency or Liquidity Squeeze? Explaining
Short-Term Corporate Yield Spreads,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2002-45,
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Diamond, Douglas and Ragurham G. Rajan, 2001, “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and
Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking,” Journal of Political Economy 109(2), 287-327.

Fama, Eugene, 1985, “What’s Different about Banks?” Journal of Monetary Economics
(January).

Flannery, Mark, 1994, “Debt Maturity Structure and the Debtweight Cost of Leverage: Optimally
Financing Banking Firms,” American Economic Review (March), 320-331.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1998, “Risk Management, Capital Budgeting, and
Capital Structure Policy for Financial Institutions: An Integrated Approach,” Journal of


                                             -29-
Financial Economics, 47, 55-82.

Kanatas, George, 1987, “Commercial Paper, Bank Reserve Requirements and the Informational
Role of Loan Commitments,” Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 425-448.

Kane, Edward, 1974, “All for the Best: The Federal Reserve Board’s 60th Annual Report,”
American Economic Review, December, 835-850.

Kashyap, Anil K, Raghuram G. Rajan and Jeremy C. Stein, 2002, “Banks as Liquidity Providers:
An Explanation for the Co-existence of Lending and Deposit-Taking,” Journal of Finance 57(1),
33-74.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2001, “The Bond/Old Bond Spread,” mimeo, June 13, 2001.

McAndrews, James J. and Simon M. Potter, 2002, “Liquidity Effects Surrounding the Events of
September 11, 2001,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, November
2002.

Mishkin, Frederic and Philip E. Strahan, “What will Technology do to Financial Structure?”
1998, in The Effect of Technology on the Financial Sector, Brookings-Wharton Papers on
Financial Services, edited by Robert Litan and Anthony Santomero, 249-87.

Mester, Loretta J., and Mitchell Berlin, 1999, “Deposits and Lending Relationships,” Review of
Financial Studies 12, 579-608.

Mester, Loretta J., Leonard Nakamura and Micheline Renault, 2002, “Checking Accounts and
Bank Monitoring,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia WP no. 01-3/R.

Morgan, Donald P., 1998, “The Credit Effects of Monetary Policy: Evidence Using Loan
Commitments,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.

Myers, Stewart C. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1998, “The Paradox of Liquidity,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 113, 733-71.

Saidenberg, Marc R. and Philip E. Strahan, 1999, “Are Banks Still Important for Financing Large
Businesses?” 1999, Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Current Issues in Economics and
Finance 5(12), 1-6.

Shockley, Richard and Anjan Thakor, 1997, “Bank Loan Commitments: Data, Theory, Tests,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29.

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss 1981, “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information” American Economic Review 71, (3), 393-410.


                                              -30-
Strahan, Philip E., 1999, “Borrower Risk and the Price and Non-Price Terms of Bank Loans,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report no. 90.

Thakor, Anjan, and Gregory Udell, 1987, “An Economic Rationale for the Pricing Structure of
Bank Loan Commitments,” Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 271-289.




                                            -31-
                                          Table 1
              Summary Statistics for Weekly U.S. Banking-System Growth Rates
This table reports summary statistics for weekly growth rates in bank assets, deposits, loans and liquid assets
(cash+securities). The sample is based on the aggregation of large U.S. banks that report weekly, from the
Federal Reserve’s H.8 statistical release, 1988 to 2002. Also reported is the paper-bill spread, defined as the 3-
month commercial paper rate for highly rated borrowers minus the 3-month Treasury Bill rate, the 3-month
Treasury Bill rate, and the rates on large bank CDs and finance-company paper. Interest rate data are from the
Federal Reserve Board of Governors. All measured in percentage points

                                                                        25th                             75th
                                                                      Percentile       Median         Percentile
)Assets / Assetst-1                                                      -0.73           0.10             0.87
)Loans / Assetst-1                                                       -0.16           0.02             0.24
)C&I Loans / Assetst-1                                                   -0.06          -0.004            0.07
)Liquid assets (Cash+Securities) / Assetst-1                             -0.43           0.01             0.53
)Deposits / Assetst-1                                                    -0.77          -0.05             0.94
)Transactions Deposits / Assetst-1                                       -0.68           0.02             0.67
)Non-Transactions / Assetst-1                                            -0.25          -0.04             0.18
)Large Time Deposits / Assetst-1                                         -0.06          -0.005            0.05
)Annual Yield on 3-Month Treasury Bill                                   -0.06             0              0.05
)Annual Yield on 3-Month Rate on Negotiable CDs                          -0.04             0              0.03
)Annual Yield on 3-Month Rate on Finance Paper                           -0.03             0              0.04
)(Yield on Negotiable CDs - Yield on Finance Paper)                      -0.02             0              0.02
Paper - Bill Spread                                                       0.18           0.29             0.44




                                                       -32-
                                             Table 2
             Vector Auto-Regressions of Weekly U.S. Banking System Growth Rates
                          on the Paper-Bill Spread and Interest Rates
                                     Panel A: Asset Growth
Granger causality Wald tests and impulse response functions for VARs with three equations. There is one equation for the asset variable.
The other two equations are for the paper-bill spread and the change in the three month Treasury Bill rate. Each VAR is estimated with four
lags. We report the P2 statistic testing the null that all of the coefficients equal zero. For each VAR, we also report a corresponding impulse
response function to quantify the impact of a standard-deviation innovation in the paper-bill spread on the growth in bank balance sheets.
The sample is based on weekly data over the 1988 to 2002 period, from the Federal Reserve Board’s H.8 statistical release. See Table 1 for
summary statistics.

                                                  Granger causality Wald tests
       Equation                                               Excluded                                   P2                  (p-value)
                                                         Asset Growth VAR
)Assets / Assetst-1                                    Paper-Bill Spread                              19.19                    0.0007
Paper-Bill Spread                                      )Assets / Assetst-1                            10.38                    0.0344
                                                              Loans VAR:
)Loans / Assetst-1                                     Paper-Bill Spread                              20.53                    0.0004
Paper-Bill Spread                                      )Loans / Assetst-1                             11.81                    0.0188
                                                           C&I Loans VAR
)C&I Loans / Assetst-1                                 Paper-Bill Spread                              14.75                    0.0053
Paper-Bill Spread                                  )C&I Loans / Assetst-1                              7.59                    0.1080
                                                         Liquid assets VAR
)Liquid assets / Assetst-1                             Paper-Bill Spread                               8.45                    0.0765
Paper-Bill Spread                                 )Liquid assets / Assetst-1                          15.91                    0.0031
                                                 Impulse Response Functions
                                                   )Assets                   )Loans              )C&I Loans              )Liquid assets
                                Week              / Assetst-1               / Assetst-1           / Assetst-1              / Assetst-1
Impulse                         1                   0.01524                  0.00344                 0.00108                  0.00642
Responses                       2                  -0.00611                 -0.00015                -0.00036                 -0.00340
                                3                   0.00319                  0.00299                 0.00085                 -0.00157
                                4                  -0.00317                 -0.00029                 0.00004                 -0.00053




                                                                    -33-
                                             Table 2
             Vector Auto-Regressions of Weekly U.S. Banking System Growth Rates
                          on the Paper-Bill Spread and Interest Rates
                                   Panel B: Liability Growth
Granger causality Wald tests and impulse response functions for VARs with three equations. There is one equation for the asset variable.
The other two equations are for the paper-bill spread and the change in the three month Treasury Bill rate. Each VAR is estimated with four
lags. We report the P2 statistic testing the null that all of the coefficients equal zero. For each VAR, we also report a corresponding impulse
response function to quantify the impact of a standard-deviation innovation in the paper-bill spread on the growth in bank balance sheets.
The sample is based on weekly data over the 1988 to 2002 period, from the Federal Reserve Board’s H.8 statistical release. See Table 1 for
summary statistics.

                                                  Granger causality Wald tests
       Equation                                               Excluded                                    P2                   (p-value)
                                                             Deposits VAR
)Deposits /Assetst-1                                   Paper-Bill Spread                               22.87                    0.0001
Paper-Bill Spread                                    )Deposits / Assetst-1                             15.84                    0.0032
                                                  Transaction Deposits VAR:
)Transact Dep /Assetst-1                               Paper-Bill Spread                               24.68                    0.0001
Paper-Bill Spread                             )Transact Dep / Assetst-1                                13.82                    0.0079
                                               Non-Transaction Deposits VAR
)Non-Transact /Assetst-1                               Paper-Bill Spread                                8.45                    0.0765
Paper-Bill Spread                                )Non-Transact / Assetst-1                              5.25                    0.2628
                                                   Large Time Deposits VAR
)Large Time Dep /Assetst-1                             Paper-Bill Spread                               16.96                    0.0020
Paper-Bill Spread                              )Large Time Dep / Assetst-1                              1.39                    0.8456
                                                 Impulse Response Functions
                                               )Deposits /              )Transact              )Non-Transact/              )Large Time
                                Week            Assetst-1              Dep/Assetst-1             Assetst-1                 Dep/Assetst-1
Impulse                         1                  0.01396                 0.01388                   0.00077                   0.00056
Responses                       2                 -0.00261                -0.00392                   0.00065                   0.00085
                                3                  0.00151                -0.00154                   0.00254                   0.00098
                                4                 -0.00735                -0.00431                  -0.00073                   0.00025




                                                                    -34-
                                       Table 3
  Vector Auto-Regressions of Weekly Changes in Bank and Finance Company Marginal
               Funding Cost on the Paper-Bill Spread and Interest Rates

Granger causality Wald tests and impulse response functions for VARs with three equations. There is one equation for the asset variable.
The other two equations are for the paper-bill spread and the change in the three month Treasury Bill rate. Each VAR is estimated with four
lags. We report the P2 statistic testing the null that all of the coefficients equal zero. For each VAR, we also report a corresponding impulse
response function to quantify the impact of a standard-deviation innovation in the paper-bill spread on the growth in bank balance sheets.
The sample is based on weekly data over the 1988 to 2002 period, from the Federal Reserve Board’s H.8 statistical release. See Table 1 for
summary statistics.

                                                  Granger causality Wald tests
       Equation                                                   Excluded                                    P2               (p-value)
                                                             Deposits VAR
)Yield on Large CDs                                         Paper-Bill Spread                              12.75                0.0125
Paper-Bill Spread                                       )Yield on Large CDs                                57.65                0.0000
                                                  Transaction Deposits VAR:
)Yield on Finance                                           Paper-Bill Spread                              13.23                0.0102
Company Paper
Paper-Bill Spread                                         )Yield on Finance                                14.57                0.0057
                                                           Company Paper
                                               Non-Transaction Deposits VAR
Yield on Large CDs -                                        Paper-Bill Spread                              15.75                0.0034
Yield on Finance Paper
Paper-Bill Spread                                      Yield on Large CDs -                                15.96                0.0031
                                                       Yield on Finance Paper
                                                 Impulse Response Functions
                                                )Yield on              )Yield on Finance                  Yield on Large CDs -
                                Week            Large CDs               Company Paper                     Yield on Finance Paper
Impulse                         1                 -0.23776                     0.09730                               -0.01006
Responses                       2                 -0.08887                    -0.06112                               -0.09286
                                3                  0.19436                     0.15753                                0.08751
                                4                 -0.09037                    -0.06648                               -0.02617




                                                                    -35-
                                                       Table 4
                                       Robustness Tests for Omitted Variables
                                      Panel A: Asset Growth and Liability Growth
Granger causality Wald tests for VARs with four equations. Equation one is for one of the following potentially omitted variables: 1. the
growth in bank reserves; 2. the on-the-run/off-the-run spread for 30 years Treasuries; 3. the implied volatility for the S&P 100; 4. the spread
between AAA and Baa corporate bonds. There is one equation for the asset or liability variable. The other two equations are for the paper-bill
spread and the change in the three month Treasury Bill rate. Each VAR is estimated with four lags. We report the P2 statistic and p-value
testing the null that all of the coefficients equal zero. The sample is based on weekly data over the 1988 to 2002 period, from the Federal
Reserve Board’s H.8 statistical release. See Table 1 for summary statistics.

                                                                                     Equation
Potentially Omitted                         )Assets /                   )Loans /                  )Deposits             )Transact Dep
Variable (top row):                         Assetst-1                   Assetst-1                 /Assetst-1              /Assetst-1


Growth in Bank                                 5.79                        6.90                      3.38                     10.91
Reserves                                     (0.2154)                    (0.1411)                  (0.4963)                  (0.0275)
Paper-Bill Spread                             18.03                       20.27                     22.32                    23.3645
                                             (0.0012)                    (0.0004)                  (0.0002)                  (0.0001)


On-the-run / Off-the-                         14.96                        4.23                      6.54                     10.03
run Spread                                   (0.0048)                    (0.3763)                  (0.1626)                  (0.0399)
Paper-Bill Spread                             15.11                       19.26                     18.22                     26.08
                                             (0.0045)                    (0.0007)                  (0.0011)                  (0.0000)


Implied Volatility on                         3.8763                       4.62                      6.78                      4.31
S&P 100                                      (0.4230)                    (0.3282)                  (0.1481)                  (0.3659)
Paper-Bill Spread                             19.26                       19.71                     24.91                     27.95
                                             (0.0007)                    (0.0006)                  (0.0001)                  (0.0000)


Yield Spread AAA-                             14.49                       26.50                      2.93                      3.03
Baa Corporate Bonds                          (0.0059)                    (0.0000)                  (0.5698)                  (0.5534)
Paper-Bill Spread                             21.54                       33.05                     21.43                     22.96
                                             (0.0002)                    (0.0000)                  (0.0003)                  (0.0001)




                                                                   -36-
                                                Table 4
                                 Robustness Tests for Omitted Variables
                        Panel B: Bank and Finance Company Marginal Funding Cost
Granger causality Wald tests for VARs with four equations. Equation one is for one of the following potentially omitted variables: 1. the
growth in bank reserves; 2. the on-the-run/off-the-run spread for 30 years Treasuries; 3. the implied volatility for the S&P 500; 4. the spread
between AAA and Baa corporate bonds. There is one equation for the funding cost variable. The other two equations are for the paper-bill
spread and the change in the three month Treasury Bill rate. Each VAR is estimated with four lags. We report the P2 statistic and p-value
testing the null that all of the coefficients equal zero. The sample is based on weekly data over the 1988 to 2002 period, from the Federal
Reserve Board’s H.8 statistical release. See Table 1 for summary statistics.

                                                                                      Equation
Potentially Omitted                           Yield on Large                Yield on Finance                 Yield Large CD -
Variable (top row):                                CDs                           Paper                     Yield on Finance Paper


Growth in Bank                                       1.69                           3.89                                 3.81
Reserves                                           (0.7926)                       (0.4206)                             (0.4317)


Paper-Bill Spread                                   11.79                          13.91                                16.03
                                                   (0.0190)                       (0.0076)                             (0.0030)


On-the-run / Off-the-                                5.44                           6.20                                 3.79
run Spread                                         (0.2453)                       (0.1845)                             (0.4354)
Paper-Bill Spread                                   20.43                          23.12                                14.40
                                                   (0.0004)                       (0.0001)                             (0.0061)


Implied Volatility on                                3.81                           7.46                                 1.73
S&P 100                                            (0.4320)                       (0.1137)                             (0.7859)
Paper-Bill Spread                                   11.44                          12.30                                16.18
                                                   (0.0220)                       (0.0153)                             (0.0028)


Yield Spread AAA-                                     3.93                          5.86                                 0.67
Baa Corporate Bonds                                (0.4151)                       (0.2100)                             (0.9550)
Paper-Bill Spread                                    12.13                         11.69                                15.23
                                                   (0.0164)                       (0.0199)                             (0.0043)




                                                                    -37-
                                     Table 5
 Summary Statistics for New Commercial Paper Backup Lines of Credit, and Borrower
                              Credit Rating and Size
This table reports means and standard deviations for price and non-price terms for all new commercial paper
backup lines of credit that appear on the Loan Pricing Corporation’s Dealscan database, along with borrower
credit rating and sales size. The sample reflects loans made to borrowers between 1991 and 2002, although
Dealscan’s coverage of the market for lending to large firms grew substantially during the sample period.



                                                                                                   Standard
                                                                                   Mean            Deviation
Drawn spread over LIBOR (basis points)                                              61                  55
Undrawn Spread (basis points)                                                       13                   9
Three-Month Treasury (basis points)                                                 466                126
Paper-Bill Spread (basis points)                                                    30                  20
Term Structure: 5-Year Note - 3-Month Bill (basis points)                           98                  95
Secured Indicator                                                                  0.84                  -
Maturity (months)                                                                   18                  15
Loan size (Millions $s)                                                             635               1,032
Sales of borrower in year prior to loan (Millions $s)                              8,604             14,754
Moody’s Aa or better indicator                                                     0.059                 -
Moody’s A1 indicator                                                               0.056                 -
Moody’s A2 indicator                                                               0.093                 -
Moody’s A3 indicator                                                               0.086                 -
Moody’s Baa1 indicator                                                             0.081                 -
Moody’s Baa2 indicator                                                             0.070                 -
Moody’s Baa3 indicator                                                             0.051                 -
Moody’s Ba indicator                                                               0.045                 -
Moody’s B indicator                                                                0.016                 -
Un-rated indicator                                                                 0.430




                                                     -38-
                                                Table 6
                  Regressions of the Price of New Commercial Paper Lines of Credit
                             Panel A: All Commercial Paper Commitments
Each column in this table reports a regression of the drawn (undrawn) spread on new lines of credit issued to back commercial paper
borrowing. Data on loan characteristics come from the Loan Price Corporation’s Dealscan database. Standard errors take account of
clustering in the residual (i.e. non independence) that may occur for loans originated on the same day. Coefficients denoted ‘**’ are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level; those denoted ‘*’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10%
level.

                                                   Drawn all-in Spread                                      Undrawn Spread
Paper-Bill Spread                              -0.17**                   -0.16**                      -0.028**                    -0.034**
                                                (0.07)                    (0.06)                       (0.012)                     (0.013)
3-Month Treasury                                -0.01                       0.01                      0.007**                       -0.003
                                                (0.02)                     (0.02)                     (0.003)                       (0.004)
Term Structure Spread                           -0.02                       0.01                      0.016**                       -0.001
                                                (0.02)                     (0.02)                     (0.004)                       (0.005)
Log of Sales                                   -6.52**                   -6.49**                       -1.16**                     -1.17**
                                                (0.91)                    (0.91)                        (0.17)                      (0.16)
Moody’s Ratings                                          ----------------Included but not reported----------------
Indicators
Log-linear Time Trend                                -                     38.63                            -                     -25.45**
                                                                          (23.66)                                                   (5.43)
N                                                1,720                     1,720                        1,520                        1,520
R2                                              0.2102                    0.2120                       0.2095                       0.2338




                                                                      -39-
                                                Table 6
                  Regressions of the Price of New Commercial Paper Lines of Credit
                                   Panel B: Drop Unrated Borrowers
Each column in this table reports a regression of the drawn (undrawn) spread on new lines of credit issued to back commercial paper
borrowing. Data on loan characteristics come from the Loan Price Corporation’s Dealscan database. Standard errors take account of
clustering in the residual (i.e. non independence) that may occur for loans originated on the same day. Coefficients denoted ‘**’ are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level; those denoted ‘*’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10%
level.

                                                   Drawn all-in Spread                                         Undrawn Spread
Paper-Bill Spread                               -0.16*                   -0.14**                    -0.026**                     -0.032**
                                                (0.06)                    (0.06)                     (0.010)                      (0.010)
3-Month Treasury                               -0.03**                     -0.01                       0.004                      -0.004
                                                (0.01)                     (0.02)                     (0.003)                     (0.003)
Term Structure Spread                         -0.036**                     0.004                     0.015**                       0.001
                                               (0.017)                    (0.022)                    (0.004)                      (0.004)
Log of Sales                                   -3.42**                   -3.42**                     -0.86**                      -0.84**
                                                (0.72)                    (0.73)                      (0.15)                       (0.14)
Moody’s Ratings                                   -----------------------Included but not reported----------------
Indicators
Log-linear Time Trend                                -                   63.86**                           -                     -21.91**
                                                                         (21.55)                                                   (4.54)
N                                                1,294                     1,294                       1,181                        1,181
R2                                              0.2501                    0.2571                      0.2550                       0.2814




                                                                      -40-
                                                Table 7
                  Regressions of the Price of New Commercial Paper Lines of Credit
                                      Including Non-Price Terms
                             Panel A: All Commercial Paper Commitments
Each column in this table reports a regression of the drawn (undrawn) spread on new lines of credit issued to back commercial paper
borrowing. Data on loan characteristics come from the Loan Price Corporation’s Dealscan database. Standard errors take account of
clustering in the residual (i.e. non independence) that may occur for loans originated on the same day. Coefficients denoted ‘**’ are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level; those denoted ‘*’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10%
level.

                                                   Drawn all-in Spread                                      Undrawn Spread
Paper-Bill Spread                              -0.18**                   -0.16**                       -0.021*                    -0.027**
                                                (0.06)                    (0.06)                       (0.012)                     (0.012)
3-Month Treasury                               -0.014                      0.006                        0.004                       -0.004
                                               (0.015)                    (0.018)                      (0.003)                      (0.004)
Term Structure Spread                          -0.018                      0.014                      0.012**                       -0.001
                                               (0.020)                    (0.024)                     (0.004)                       (0.005)
Log of Sales                                   -3.87**                   -3.78**                       -0.77**                     -0.80**
                                                (0.79)                    (0.79)                        (0.17)                      (0.17)
Secured Indicator                               4.41**                    4.85**                        0.75*                         0.59
                                                (2.09)                    (2.08)                        (0.42)                       (0.41)
Log of Maturity                                 -3.07*                     -1.88                       1.53**                       1.12**
                                                (1.58)                     (1.59)                      (0.41)                       (0.35)
Log of Loan Size                               -8.87**                   -9.12**                       -1.37**                     -1.26**
                                                (1.30)                    (1.31)                        (0.23)                      (0.22)
Moody’s Ratings                                 -----------------------Included but not reported------------------
Indicators
Log-linear Time Trend                                -                   54.79**                            -                     -20.43**
                                                                         (23.42)                                                    (5.39)
N                                                1,638                     1,638                        1,462                        1,462
R2                                              0.2511                    0.2545                       0.2352                       0.2562




                                                                      -41-
                                                Table 7
                  Regressions of the Price of New Commercial Paper Lines of Credit
                                      Including Non-Price Terms
                                   Panel B: Drop Unrated Borrowers
Each column in this table reports a regression of the drawn (undrawn) spread on new lines of credit issued to back commercial paper
borrowing. Data on loan characteristics come from the Loan Price Corporation’s Dealscan database. Standard errors take account of
clustering in the residual (i.e. non independence) that may occur for loans originated on the same day. Coefficients denoted ‘**’ are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level; those denoted ‘*’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10%
level.

                                                   Drawn all-in Spread                                      Undrawn Spread
Paper-Bill Spread                              -0.17**                   -0.15**                      -0.023**                    -0.029**
                                                (0.06)                    (0.06)                       (0.010)                     (0.010)
3-Month Treasury                              -0.032**                    -0.008                         0.002                      -0.005
                                               (0.013)                    (0.016)                       (0.003                      (0.003)
Term Structure Spread                          -0.036*                     0.003                      0.010**                       -0.001
                                               (0.018)                    (0.022)                     (0.004)                       (0.004)
Log of Sales                                   -2.12**                   -2.02**                       -0.55**                     -0.56**
                                                (0.66)                    (0.66)                        (0.16)                      (0.16)
Secured Indicator                               4.28*                     4.94**                         0.60                         0.43
                                                (2.16)                    (2.14)                        (0.42)                       (0.41)
Log of Maturity                                 -2.63*                     -1.36                       1.29**                       0.97**
                                                (1.42)                     (1.42)                      (0.33)                       (0.30)
Log of Loan Size                               -3.85**                   -4.20**                       -0.94**                     -0.83**
                                                (1.22)                    (1.23)                        (0.24)                      (0.23)
Moody’s Ratings                                  ----------------------Included but not reported------------------
Indicators
Log-linear Time Trend                                -                   66.39**                            -                     -17.88**
                                                                         (22.21)                                                    (4.47)
N                                                1,244                     1,244                        1,140                        1,140
R2                                              0.2686                    0.2757                       0.2851                       0.3016




                                                                      -42-
                                           Table 8
           Regressions of Non-Price Terms of New Commercial Paper Lines of Credit
Each column in this table reports a regression of the log of commitment amount, whether or not the loan is secured (in a probit) and the log
of contractual maturity on new lines of credit issued to back commercial paper borrowing. Data on loan characteristics comes from the Loan
Price Corporation’s Dealscan database. Standard errors take account of clustering in the residual (i.e. non independence) that may occur for
loans originated on the same day. Coefficients denoted ‘**’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level; those denoted
‘*’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% level.

Explanatory                  Log of Commitment                           Fraction of loans                    Log of Contractual
Variables                         Amount                                     Secured                              Maturity
Paper-Bill                    0.001                0.001             -0.0003             -0.0005            -0.002**           -0.002**
Spread                       (0.001)              (0.001)            (0.0006)            (0.0005)           (0.0006)           (0.0006)
3-Month                    -0.0009**             -0.0002              0.0002             -0.0001            0.0007**          -0.0001**
Treasury                    (0.0003)             (0.0003)            (0.0002)            (0.0002)           (0.0002)           (0.0002)
Term Spread                -0.0014**             -0.0006            0.0004**             0.0001**           0.0017**            0.0003
                            (0.0004)             (0.0004)           (0.0001)             (0.0002)           (0.0002)           (0.0002)
Log of Sales                 0.272**             0.272**             -0.013**            -0.013**           0.024**            0.022**
                             (0.023)             (0.022)              (0.006)             (0.006)           (0.0085)           (0.0082)
Ratings                           --------------------------Included but not Reported-----------------------
Indicators
Log-linear                        -              1.834**                   -             -0.637**                 -            -2.003**
Time Trend                                       (0.432)                                  (0.179)                               (0.235)
N                              2,035               2,035               2,036                2,036              1,875             1,875
R2                            0.2531              0.2613              0.0476               0.0553             0.0641            0.1034




                                                                   -43-
                              Appendix A: Theoretical Derivations

A.1 The Basic equation.

Using E[L]=0 in the first line and the normality of L in the third and fourth lines yields




The second line uses the fact that for the bivariate normal random variables rD, L, we have




where                       is the standard normal density.

        When " is twice differentiable, the normality of L and Stein’s lemma imply




                                                -44-
A.2 The piecewise-linear case B)

Using the partial expectations of a function of the normally distributed L, we have




where M and N denote the standard normal cumulative distribution and density respectively. The

relevant partial expectation formulas are




                                               -45-
A.3 The step function

At the limit Llow 6 Lh " becomes the step function P[-4,Lhi] and in that case, we have




We used




and




                                                 -46-
                         Appendix B: Bank-level Reaction to Market Spreads

         The aggregate analysis offered in the text suggests that banks enjoy cheap funding when

the commercial paper market tightens. In this appendix, we test how loan takedown behavior

varies across banks in response to interest rates and the paper-bill spread.

         Direct data on actual loan take downs from loan commitments are not available. We can,

however, observe overall loan growth at quarterly frequency, and test whether those banks with

more pre-existing loan commitments experience greater increases in loan growth when market

spreads widen. If demand for loan take downs really increases with increases in the commercial

paper spread, then we ought to be able to show that banks with more pre-existing loan

commitments react more to market shocks than other banks. At the same time, the growth in

liquid assets with the CP spread observed in the aggregate data ought to occur at all banks,

regardless of their level of loan commitments -- an across-the-board growth in liquid assets

would reflect the better funding availability to banks generally.21

         We construct a panel data set for all banking organizations using data from 1991 to

2000.22 Rates of change in assets, loans and securities come from the Reports of Income and

Condition (the “Call Report”). As noted above, ideally we would like to observe the data at a

higher frequency, but detailed bank-level data are not available beyond quarterly intervals. The

sample begins in the first quarter of 1991 because the banking agencies only began to collect data

on unused loan commitments then.




   21
    The interbank credit market may be the means by which a general inflow of funding into the banking system is
funneled to those banks experiencing the largest increases in loan demand.

   22
     Following Kashyap et al (2002), we use the banking organization as the relevant unit of observation, rather than the
bank. This means that we first aggregate the bank-level data from the call report up to the holding company level. For
example, for a bank holding company owning two banks, we would sum the balance sheet items for each bank first and
create a single observation reflecting this banking company’s balance sheet (and off balance sheet) characteristics.

                                                          -47-
         The panel data set is unbalanced due to merger and acquisition activity that occurred

during the sample period. We drop observations in which a banking organization’s total assets

grew by more than 10 percent during a single quarter. In this way, we can be sure that large

changes in a bank’s operations stemming from its M&A activity are not skewing our results. In

addition, because the dependent variables are growth rates, there are substantial outliers in the

panel. We therefore Winsorize the data at the 1st and 99th percentiles of the distribution. That is,

for each observation that lies below the 1st percentile of the distribution, we use the value at the

1st percentile; for each observation that lies above the 99th percentile of the distribution, we use

the value at the 99th percentile.23

         Appendix Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the variables in the panel data set.

The quarterly growth in assets averaged (median) 1.5 percent across banks and time, and the

inter-quartile range varied from -0.5 percent to 4.0 percent. For the quarterly change in loans

(normalized by assets), the distribution varies somewhat less than for asset growth, whereas the

change in liquid assets, sensibly, displayed substantially more variation, ranging from -1.8

percent at the 25th percentile to 2.1 percent at the 75th percentile with a median of about zero.

         Appendix Table 1 also reports the ratio of unused lines of credit divided by unused lines

plus total on-balance-sheet loans. This variable is our measure of the extent to which a bank has

promised to provide liquidity insurance to its borrowers. The unused commitments ratio had a

median value of 0.109, ranging from 0.058 at the 25th percentile of the distributions to 0.167 at

the 75th percentile.

         Appendix Table 2 reports the panel regressions for the three rates-of-change variables.

We include the same interest rate variables used in the aggregate analysis, but now, rather than

    23
      Our statistical conclusions are not affected by Winsorizing these data, although the magnitude of the coefficients and
standard errors is affected.

                                                           -48-
using high-frequency data, we use averages over the whole quarter. We also include interaction

terms between the interest rate variables and each bank’s unused commitment ratio (as of the end

of the previous quarter). Thus, the coefficients on these interaction terms test whether a bank’s

response to interest rate shocks changes with the extent of its pre-existing loan commitments.

We also include that bank’s beginning-of-period capital-asset ratio and its interaction with the

CP spread to test whether banks with lower insolvency risk enjoy larger funding inflows when

the CP spread widens. To control for other cross-bank heterogeneity, we include the log of assets

as of the beginning of the period as control variables and bank-level fixed effects. In addition,

we report the models with (in panel A) and without (in panel B) quarterly time fixed effects.

        As shown in both panels of Appendix Table 2, the effects of increases in the paper-bill

spread on asset growth and loan growth are greater for banks with more pre-existing lines of

credit. That is, the interaction of the paper-bill spread with the unused loan commitment ratio is

statistically significant (at the one percent level). The greater loan-growth suggests that banks

with more commitments experience more take-down demand when CP spreads widen. Just as in

the aggregate analysis, we again see increases in the growth of liquid assets when the paper-bill

spread widens, suggesting strong funding availability for banks during periods of market

tightness. But we do not see any difference in how the liquid-asset growth rate responds to

spreads across banks; regardless of their level of loan commitments, all banks experience

increases in liquid assets following increases in the commercial paper spread. Similarly, the

coefficient on initial bank capital is positive and significant for all three variables, but the

interaction with the CP spread is not. Thus, there seems to be no evidence that banks with

stronger balance sheets – banks that might be perceived to be relatively safe – experience large

funding inflows during periods of wide spread.


                                                  -49-
       Taken as a whole, the results indicate that when markets become tight, funding becomes

more available to banks across that board. Neither banks with greater pre-existing loan

commitments nor banks with better balance sheets (more capital) seem to receive more funding

inflows. We take this as evidence that market participants view the bank system as a safe haven

for funds, probably because of explicit and implicit support provided by government safety nets.




                                              -50-
                                       Appendix Table 1
                    Summary Statistics for Quarterly Bank-Level Panel Data
This table reports summary statistics for growth rates in assets, loans and liquid assets (cash+securities+fed funds
sold-fed funds purchased), along with the ratio of unused loan commitments to unused commitments plus total
loans. Change in loans and liquid assets are normalized by beginning-of-period assets. The sample is based on a
panel of all U.S. banks with assets greater than $100 million for each quarter from 1991 to 2000, from the Reports
of Income and Condition. All banks with asset growth greater the 10 percent during a quarter are dropped during
that quarter so that large mergers will not skew the growth rates. Since the variables display large outliers, the
data have been Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile. Also reported is the paper-bill spread averaged over
each quarter, defined as the 3-month commercial paper rate for highly rated borrowers minus the 3-month
Treasury Bill rate, and the 3-month Treasury Bill rate, also averaged over each quarter in the 1991 to 2000
period.

                                                                     25th                                75th
                                                                   Percentile         Median          Percentile
Quarterly Growth in Assets                                           -0.5%              1.5%            4.0%
)Loans / Assetst-1                                                   -0.3%              1.0%            2.4%
)Liquid Assets / Assetst-1                                           -1.8%             0.07%            2.1%
Unused commitments /                                                  0.058            0.109            0.167
(Unused commitments+Loans)
Paper-Bill Spread                                                     0.35              0.40             0.48
3-Month Treasury Bill Rate                                            4.05              5.00             5.28




                                                       -51-
                                        Appendix Table 2
             Fixed Effects Regressions of Growth in Assets, Loans and Liquid Assets
                    on the Paper-Bill Spread, Interest Rates and Interactions
                                  Panel A: No control for trends
Each column in this table reports a fixed effects regression of three bank-level variables: the growth in assets, the growth in loans and the
growth in liquid assets. The sample is based on a panel of all U.S. banks with assets greater than $100 million for each quarter from 1991 to
2000, from the Reports of Income and Condition. All banks with asset growth greater the 10 percent during a quarter are dropped during that
quarter so that large mergers will not skew the changes in lending and deposits. Since the growth rates display large outliers, these data have
been Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile. Also reported is the paper-bill spread averaged over each quarter, defined as the 3-month
commercial paper rate for highly rated borrowers minus the 3-month Treasury Bill rate, and the 3-month Treasury Bill rate, also averaged
over each quarter in the 1991 to 2000 period. Standard errors appear below coefficients. Coefficients denoted ‘**’ are statistically
significantly different from zero at the 5% level; those denoted ‘*’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% level.

                                                                                Dependent Variables
                                                        Asset                         ) Loans                      ) Liquid Assets
                                                        Growth                        / Assetst-1                     / Assetst-1
Paper-Bill Spread                                       0.009**                          0.001                           0.009**
                                                        (0.003)                         (0.002)                          (0.002)
3-Month Treasury                                       0.002**                         0.002**                          -0.001**
                                                       (0.0002)                        (0.0001)                         (0.0002)
Unused Commitmentst-1                                   0.031**                        0.114**                          -0.126**
                                                        (0.008)                        (0.005)                           (0.007)
Unused Commitmentst-1 *                                 0.064**                        0.061**                           -0.007
Paper-Bill Spread                                       (0.010)                        (0.007)                           (0.010)
Unused Commitmentst-1 *                                 -0.002                        -0.005**                           0.009**
3-Month Treasury                                       (0.0013)                       (0.0009)                           (0.001)
Capital-Asset Ratiot-1                                  0.201**                        0.057**                           0.102**
                                                        (0.013)                        (0.009)                           (0.012)
Capital-Asset Ratiot-1 *                                 0.013                          -0.018                           0.0004
Paper-Bill Spread                                       (0.025)                         (0.017)                          (0.025)
Log of Assetst-1                                       -0.013**                       -0.004**                          -0.006**
                                                       (0.0005)                       (0.0003)                          (0.0005)
Firm Dummies                                               Yes                            Yes                               Yes
Quarterly time dummies                                     No                              No                                No
N                                                       110,201                        110,201                           110,201
Within R2                                                0.018                          0.026                             0.009




                                                                    -52-
                                        Appendix Table 2
             Fixed Effects Regressions of Growth in Assets, Loans and Liquid Assets
                    on the Paper-Bill Spread, Interest Rates and Interactions
                                    Panel B: Year Fixed Effects
Each column in this table reports a fixed effects regression of three bank-level variables: the growth in assets, the growth in loans and the
growth in liquid assets. The sample is based on a panel of all U.S. banks with assets greater than $100 million for each quarter from 1991 to
2000, from the Reports of Income and Condition. All banks with asset growth greater the 10 percent during a quarter are dropped during that
quarter so that large mergers will not skew the changes in lending and deposits. Since the growth rates display large outliers, these data have
been Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile. Also reported is the paper-bill spread averaged over each quarter, defined as the 3-month
commercial paper rate for highly rated borrowers minus the 3-month Treasury Bill rate, and the 3-month Treasury Bill rate, also averaged
over each quarter in the 1991 to 2000 period. Standard errors appear below coefficients. Coefficients denoted ‘**’ are statistically
significantly different from zero at the 5% level; those denoted ‘*’ are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% level.

                                                                                Dependent Variables
                                                        Asset                         ) Loans                      ) Liquid Assets
                                                        Growth                        / Assetst-1                     / Assetst-1
Paper-Bill Spread                                            -                              -                                 -
3-Month Treasury                                             -                              -                                 -
Unused Commitmentst-1                                   0.033**                        0.109**                          -0.114**
                                                        (0.007)                        (0.005)                           (0.007)
Unused Commitmentst-1 *                                 0.067**                        0.058**                           0.0002
Paper-Bill Spread                                       (0.010)                        (0.007)                           (0.010)
Unused Commitmentst-1 *                                -0.002*                        -0.005**                           0.008**
3-Month Treasury                                       (0.0013)                       (0.0009)                           (0.001)
Capital-Asset Ratiot-1                                  0.195**                        0.057**                           0.101**
                                                        (0.013)                        (0.009)                           (0.012)
Capital-Asset Ratiot-1 *                                 0.002                          -0.015                           -0.010
Paper-Bill Spread                                       (0.025)                         (0.017)                          (0.024)
Log of Assetst-1                                       -0.014**                       -0.003**                          -0.006**
                                                        (0.001)                       (0.0004)                          (0.0006)
Firm Dummies                                               Yes                            Yes                               Yes
Quarterly time dummies                                     Yes                            Yes                               Yes
N                                                       110,201                        110,201                           110,201
Within R2                                                0.029                          0.045                             0.036




                                                                    -53-
            Figure 1


            Banks




Investors              Firms
                        Paper-Bill Spread
       19




              0
                                          1




                  0.2
                        0.4
                              0.6
                                    0.8
                                              1.2
                                                    1.4
                                                          1.6
         88                                                     1.8
       19
         89
       19
         90
       19
         91
       19
         92
       19
         93
       19
         94
       19
         95




Year
                                                                      Figure 2




       19
         96
       19
         97
       19
         98
       19
         99
       20
         00
       20
         01
       20
         02
               Figure 3: Assets Impulse Responses
               Graph Titles: IRFname, Impulse Variable, Response Variable
                                     grow_irf1, spread, grow
.02


.01


  0


-.01


-.02
       0                    2                   4                6          8

                                     loans_irf1, spread, loans
 .006


 .004


 .002


       0


-.002
           0                 2                  4                6          8

                                       cig_irf1, spread, cig
 .002



 .001



       0



-.001
           0                 2                  4                6          8

                                     cashg_irf1, spread, cashg
  .01


 .005


       0


-.005


 -.01
           0                 2                  4                6          8
           Figure 3: Liabilities Impulse Responses
               Graph Titles: IRFname, Impulse Variable, Response Variable
                                     depgr_irf1, spread, depgr
.02


.01


  0


-.01


-.02
       0                    2                    4                  6       8

                                    tdepgr_irf1, spread, tdepgr
.02



.01



  0



-.01
       0                    2                    4                  6       8

                                    odepgr_irf1, spread, odepgr
 .005




       0




-.005
           0                 2                    4                 6       8

                                    lgcdsgr_irf1, spread, lgcdsgr
.002




.001




   0

           0                 2                   4                  6       8
           Figure 3: Rates Impulse Responses
           Graph Titles: IRFname, Impulse Variable, Response Variable
                                   cdrate_irf1, spread, cdrate
          .4



          .2



          0



          -.2



          -.4
                0           2                   4                    6   8

                                   fp_irf1, spread, fp
.4




.2




 0




-.2
      0                 2                   4                    6       8

                                 cdfp_irf1, spread, cdfp
.2



.1



 0



-.1



-.2
      0                 2                   4                    6       8
