                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PRIVATE INFORMATION AND ITS
                         EFFECT ON MARKET EQUILIBRIUM:
                  NEW EVIDENCE FROM LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE

                                            Amy Finkelstein
                                           Kathleen McGarry

                                          Working Paper 9957
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9957


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Jeff Brown, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Raj Chetty, Janet Currie, David de Meza,
Seema Jayachandran, Jerry Hausman, Ginger Jin, Larry Katz, Ben Olken, Sarah Reber, Casey Rothschild,
Michael Rothschild, Bernard Salanie, Jesse Shapiro, Jonathan Wright, and seminar participants at Berkeley,
Stanford, San Diego, the University of Chicago, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments and
discussions. We are especially grateful to the employees of the insurance company who generously provided
us with the proprietary data used in this paper and answered many questions about it, and to Jim Robinson
for generously providing us with the actuarial model of long-term care utilization. We thank the NBER and
NIA for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Amy Finkelstein and Kathleen McGarry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Private Information and its Effect on Market Equilibrium:
New Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance
Amy Finkelstein and Kathleen McGarry
NBER Working Paper No. 9957
September 2003
JEL No. D82, G22, I11

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the standard test for asymmetric information in insurance markets: that its

presence will result in a positive correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence. We

show empirically that while there is no evidence of this positive correlation in the long-term care

insurance market, asymmetric information still exists. We use individuals' subjective assessments

of the chance they will enter a nursing home, together with the insurance companies' own

assessment, to show that individuals do have private information about their risk type. Moreover,

this private information is positively correlated with insurance coverage. We reconcile this direct

evidence of asymmetric information with the lack of a positive correlation between insurance

coverage and risk occurrence by demonstrating the existence of other unobserved characteristics that

are positively related to coverage and negatively related to risk occurrence. Specifically, we find that

more cautious individuals are both more likely to have long-term care insurance and less likely to

enter a nursing home. Our results demonstrate that insurance markets may suffer from asymmetric

information, and its negative efficiency consequences, even if those with more insurance are not

higher risk. The results also suggest an alternative approach to testing for asymmetric information

in insurance markets.

Amy Finkelstein                                         Kathleen McGarry
NBER                                                    Bunche Hall 9359
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                               Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138                                     UCLA
afinkels@nber.org                                       Box 951477
                                                        Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
                                                        and NBER
                                                        mcgarry@ucla.edu
Theoretical research has long emphasized the potential importance of asymmetric information in

impairing the functioning of insurance markets. Its empirical relevance, however, remains the subject of

considerable debate.1 Several recent studies of the automobile, health, and life insurance markets have

concluded that asymmetric information does not exist in these insurance markets (e.g. Chiappori and

Salanie, 2000; Cardon and Hendel, 2001; and Cawley and Philipson, 1999). These studies are all based on

the same widely used test of asymmetric information: they test for whether there is a positive correlation

between insurance coverage and risk occurrence. Contrary to the predictions of many moral hazard and

adverse selection models, these papers find no evidence that individuals with more insurance are more

likely to experience the insured risk. These findings have challenged the conventional wisdom that

asymmetric information is an important phenomenon in insurance markets.

    In this paper, we show empirically that asymmetric information may exist in an insurance market

even when the expected positive correlation between insurance coverage and risk fails to materialize.

Individuals may have private information not only about their risk type but also about preference-related

characteristics (such as risk aversion). If these unobserved preference-related characteristics have the

opposite correlation with insurance coverage and with risk occurrence, they may offset the positive

correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence that private information about risk type

would otherwise produce. Thus, rather than indicating symmetric information, the lack of a positive

correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence may indicate that there exist multiple forms

of private information, acting in different directions.

    Distinguishing between these two explanations for the same observed equilibrium is critical to

understanding the information structure of the market. It also has important implications for efficiency. A

symmetric information explanation indicates that there are no information-based efficiency problems. In

contrast, an explanation based on multiple forms of private information raises the possibility that the


1
  Indeed, even when awarding the 2001 Nobel prize for the pioneering theoretical work on asymmetric information,
the Nobel committee noted in its extended citation that empirical evidence of asymmetric information in insurance
markets was “ambiguous” (Bank of Sweden, 2001).


                                                                                                                1
structure of information may create market inefficiencies. Despite the importance of distinguishing

between these two very different explanations for a lack of a positive correlation between insurance

coverage and risk occurrence, there have been no empirical tests designed to do so. We provide one here.

    While the ideas advanced in this paper are applicable to a wide variety of insurance markets, we focus

our empirical work on the private long-term care insurance market in the United States. In addition to

providing an interesting setting for studying asymmetric information, this market is of substantial

importance in its own right. With annual expenditures of $100 billion (over 40 percent of which are paid

for out of pocket) long-term care expenditures currently represent one of the largest uninsured medical

and financial risks faced by the elderly in the United States. As the baby boom generation ages and

medical costs rise, the nature of the long-term care insurance market will have profound implications for

the well-being of both the elderly and their children. The limited size of the long-term care insurance

market is well-known, but not well understood. Adverse selection and moral hazard may play a role, yet

there exists little empirical evidence on their existence in this market.

    We begin by following the existing literature and examine whether there is a positive correlation

between the amount of insurance individuals have and the occurrence of the risk (in this case, the

individual’s ex-post use of a nursing home). We analyze data from two complementary sources:

proprietary micro data from a large private long-term care insurance company, and individual-level panel

data from the Asset and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old (AHEAD) cohort of the Health and

Retirement Survey (HRS). We find no evidence that, after controlling for the risk classification done by

the insurance company, those with more long-term care insurance use more nursing home care. If

anything, we find suggestive evidence that they use less nursing home care.

    To distinguish whether this equilibrium reflects the presence of symmetric or asymmetric

information, we directly examine whether individuals have private information about their risk type. In

the AHEAD data, we can measure each individual’s subjective belief of his probability of entering a

nursing home over the next five years, and compare that prediction to his subsequent five-year nursing

home utilization. We supplement these data with measures of the insurance companies’ information set


                                                                                                            2
and risk classification practices; these measures are based on insurance company application forms which

reveal the set of individual characteristics observed by the insurance companies, and on the industry’s

actuarial model of nursing home utilization as a function of these observed characteristics.

    We find that, after controlling for the insurance company’s risk-classification, the individual’s beliefs

about his subsequent nursing home use remain a positive and statistically significant predictor of

subsequent nursing home use. This test provides direct evidence of asymmetric information in the private

long-term care insurance market: individuals have information about the likelihood of risk occurrence that

the insurance company does not. Moreover, we find that the individual’s private information about his

risk type is positively correlated with insurance coverage.

    These results – together with our failure to find a positive correlation between nursing home

utilization and long-term care insurance coverage – suggest the existence of unobserved heterogeneity not

only in risk type but also in preferences, where some preferences have the opposite correlation with

insurance coverage and with nursing home utilization, and thus mask the role of adverse selection and

moral hazard. Indeed, we demonstrate that, in the absence of this offsetting preference-based selection,

the typical individual with long-term care insurance would be of substantially higher risk than an

individual without such coverage. We also provide direct evidence of the existence and nature of these

other unobserved, preference-related characteristics. Consistent with the theoretical models of de Meza

and Webb (2001) and Jullien et al. (2002), we find that more cautious individuals (a characteristic not

observed by the insurance companies) are both more likely to own long-term care insurance and less

likely to end up using long-term care.

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section one describes the standard empirical test for

whether insurance coverage and risk occurrence are positively correlated and discusses different possible

explanations for a lack of a positive correlation; we emphasize their different implications for the

structure of information and for market efficiency. Section two provides some brief background on the

private long-term care insurance market. The next three sections present the three main empirical

findings. Section three documents the lack of a positive correlation between long-term care insurance


                                                                                                            3
coverage and nursing home care utilization. Section four provides evidence that individuals have private

information about their risk type and shows the impact of this private information on insurance coverage

and on the market equilibrium. Section five investigates the nature of the other offsetting, unobserved

factors. The final section summarizes our findings. We discuss their potential to help reconcile the

existing evidence of differences across insurance markets in whether there is a positive correlation

between insurance coverage and risk occurrence, and their implications for testing for asymmetric

information in other insurance markets.



1. Theoretical background

1.1 The “positive correlation” prediction

A wide variety of asymmetric information models predict a positive correlation between the amount of

insurance and the occurrence of the risky event (Chiappori and Salanie, 2000; Chiappori et al., 2002). As

a result, the standard test for asymmetric information has been a test of the correlation between the

amount of insurance coverage and the ex-post occurrence of the (potentially) insured risk. Throughout the

paper we will refer to this test as the “positive correlation” prediction.2

    The “positive correlation” can arise from either adverse selection or moral hazard, both of which

result in a market that is inefficient relative to the first best. The mechanism by which the positive

correlation arises differs however, for the two phenomena. In the case of adverse selection, the insured is

assumed to have ex-ante superior information to the insurance company about his risk type. Because

individuals who appear to the insurance company to be observationally equivalent face the same menu of

insurance options, and because the marginal utility of insurance at a given price is increasing in risk, those

with private information that they are high risk will select contracts with more insurance than those with

private information that they are low risk (see e.g. Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). In the case of moral
2
 Of course, this prediction applies only to individuals who would be treated symmetrically by the insurance
company (i.e. placed in the same risk category and offered the same set of insurance contract options). Although we
will not always state this qualification explicitly in our discussion, it is implicitly always present. In the empirical
work below, we will take great care to condition on this risk classification.



                                                                                                                       4
hazard, the causality is reversed and the informational asymmetry occurs ex-post: insurance coverage

lowers the cost of an adverse outcome and thus increases the probability or magnitude of the risk

occurrence. The classic explanation is that insurance reduces the individual’s incentive to invest in

(costly) risk-reducing effort (see e.g. Arnott and Stiglitz, 1988). In the health insurance context, another

form of moral hazard may be quantitatively more important: insurance lowers the marginal cost of

consuming the insured good (medical care), and may therefore induce additional consumption.

    Empirically, the positive correlation property appears to exist in some insurance markets but not

others. Cutler (2002) reviews an extensive empirical literature that finds evidence of the positive

correlation property in health insurance, although exceptions exist (e.g. Cardon and Hendel, 2001). There

is also evidence from annuity markets that the insured are higher risk (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2002,

forthcoming), but no such evidence in life insurance markets (Cawley and Philipson, 1999). In the

automobile insurance market, the empirical evidence is mixed. Chiappori and Salanie (2000) and Dionne

et al. (2001) fail to reject the null hypothesis of no correlation; but Pueltz and Snow (1994) and Cohen

(2001) find support for the positive correlation prediction.



1.2 Implications for the structure of information and market efficiency

There are two broad classes of possible explanations for a lack of a positive correlation between insurance

coverage and risk occurrence. One argues that there is symmetric information, while the other argues that

there is asymmetric information about both risk type and preferences, and that the two effects offset each

other. Here, we provide an intuitive discussion of the two scenarios, and their efficiency implications.

Interested readers should consult Chiappori et al. (2002) for a more formal discussion.3

    Consider first the possibility that information is symmetric and there is no moral hazard. Given the

vast amount of information that insurance companies can, and do collect about potential customers, the

individual may not have residual private information; indeed sophisticated actuarial methods might even

3
  Chiappori et al. (2002) show not only that asymmetric information may exist in the absence of a positive
correlation (which is the possibility we focus on here), but also that asymmetric information may not exist even with
a positive correlation.


                                                                                                                   5
give the insurance company superior information about the individual’s risk type.4 It is also possible that

moral hazard may not exist in particular insurance markets. For example, in the case of long-term care

insurance, the unappealing nature of nursing homes may be sufficient to dampen any potential moral

hazard effects. If individuals have no private information and there is no moral hazard, insurance

coverage need not be positively correlated with risk occurrence. Moreover, with symmetric information,

the structure of information will not distort insurance purchases; the equilibrium will therefore be first

best (absent any other market imperfections).

    An alternative explanation for a lack of a positive correlation between insurance coverage and risk

occurrence is that – unlike in the standard models of asymmetric information – risk type may not be the

only source of private information. Individuals may also differ with respect to unobserved preferences –

such as risk aversion – that are correlated with both the demand for insurance coverage and with risk

occurrence. We refer to this as “preference-based” selection to distinguish it from traditional adverse (or

“risk-based”) selection derived solely from the individual’s private information about his risk type. If

unobserved preferences are positively correlated with insurance demand and negatively correlated with

risk occurrence, they can offset, to some degree, the positive correlation between insurance and risk

occurrence that adverse selection and moral hazard would otherwise produce. The correlation between

insurance and risk occurrence may therefore be of indeterminate sign. For example, more risk averse

individuals value insurance more; if they are also lower risk – perhaps because they invest more in risk-

reducing effort – the correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence may be positive, zero or

even negative (Jullien et al., 2002, de Meza and Webb, 2001).5




4
  In this case, the equilibrium may exhibit a negative correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence
(Villeneuve 2000, Villeneuve forthcoming).
5
  It should be noted that when there is private information about risk type, unobserved preference heterogeneity is
not sufficient to generate a zero or negative correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence; it is also
necessary that there be some sort of markup above expected claims, due either to imperfect competition or a
marginal production cost. In other words, as long as there is perfect competition and no loading, the standard
positive correlation test for asymmetric information will still be valid, even in the presence of unobserved preference
heterogeneity (Chiappori et al, 2002).


                                                                                                                     6
    We emphasize that the presence of private information about risk type may preclude an efficient

equilibrium, even if, due to the presence of offsetting preference-based heterogeneity, the positive

correlation property does not obtain. This theoretical result has been shown formally by Jullien et al.

(2002) for the specific case of a monopoly insurance provider, along with private information about risk

preferences and risk type, and endogenous risk probabilities. De Meza and Webb (2001) establish a

similar result for a competitive insurance market with administrative costs. Some of the intuition behind

these results for why the market is inefficient can be demonstrated with a simple example. Consider the

case in which private information about risk type and offsetting preference-based selection produce an

equilibrium with no correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence. There are therefore two

groups of individuals purchasing a given insurance policy: low risk, high risk aversion individuals, and

high risk, low risk aversion individuals. Because these groups pay the same price for the insurance policy,

but have different expected costs, it cannot be the case that both groups are paying an actuarially fair

price, and the quantity of insurance purchased by at least one group will therefore not be first best. In

general, with private information about risk type and risk preferences, the direction of the inefficiency is

unclear; insurance coverage may either be higher or lower than the first best outcome. In addition, there

may or may not be scope for Pareto-improving government intervention.6

    Finally, we note that it is not, in general, possible to draw comparisons of the relative efficiencies of

alternative equilibria based on the observed correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence.

A change in the structure of preferences across individuals of different risk types could produce a change

in this correlation, but with changes in preferences, efficiency comparisons are not straightforward.

Moreover, a change in the correlation likely involves increases in insurance for some risk types and

decreases for other, making the net change in efficiency unclear. This indeterminacy is important to keep


6
  Even in standard asymmetric information models – in which individuals only differ in terms of their (privately
known) risk type – there is variation across models in whether there is scope for Pareto improving government
intervention (Crocker and Snow, 1985). The same is true in models with private information about both risk type
and risk preferences. For an example of a model with private information about both risk type and risk preferences
in which some individuals have too much insurance relative to the social optimum and there is scope for Pareto
improvement through government intervention, see de Meza and Webb (2001).


                                                                                                                     7
in mind. Later in the paper, we show that in the absence of preference-based selection, those with long-

term care insurance would on average be substantially higher risk than those without insurance. However,

we caution that this result does not by itself imply that the resulting equilibrium would be more (or less)

efficient absent preference-based heterogeneity.




2. Background on long-term care and long-term care insurance

At almost $100 billion a year in 2000, long-term care expenditures in the United States comprise 7.5% of

total health expenditures for all ages, and about 1% of GDP. There is substantial variation among the

elderly in their long-term care utilization; for example, Dick et al. (1994) estimate that while two-thirds of

individuals who reach age 65 will never enter a nursing home, one-quarter of women who do enter a

nursing home will spend at least three years there. This suggests potentially large welfare gains from

insurance coverage that reduces this expenditure risk.

    However, most of this substantial expenditure risk is currently uninsured. Over 40 percent of long-

term care expenditures for the elderly are paid for out of pocket, compared to only 17 percent of the

elderly’s expenditures in the health sector as a whole (US Congress, 2000, National Center for Health

Statistics, 2002). This disparity partly reflects the limited public insurance coverage for long-term care.

Medicare, the public health insurance program for the elderly, covers only a very restricted set of long-

term care services. Medicaid, the public health insurance program for the indigent, is available only to

elderly individuals with little or no wealth and very low disposable income.

    The extremely limited nature of private long-term care insurance coverage is also an important factor.

We estimate that in the 2000 HRS, only 10 percent of those aged 65 and over had private long-term care

insurance coverage. Moreover, most private insurance policies insure only a limited fraction of long-term

care expenditures. Policies often have daily and lifetime benefit caps and are typically not indexed for

inflation. Brown and Finkelstein (2003) estimate that typical private policies pay for less than 50 percent

of the expected present discounted value of long-term care costs for a 65 year old. As a result, private



                                                                                                              8
insurance covers only about 5 percent of the elderly’s long-term care expenditures, compared to 35

percent of the elderly’s overall health expenditures (US Congress, 2000, National Center for Health

Statistics, 2002).

    About 80 percent of private long term care insurance is provided by the individual (non-group)

market (HIAA 2000b). The average age of purchase in this market is 67. Coverage rates are roughly

comparable for men and women. However, they increase substantially with asset levels, probably due, at

least in part, to the means-tested nature of Medicaid (HIAA, 2000a).

    Firms use relatively little information specific to the individual in pricing these policies, despite the

absence of regulatory restrictions. Policies are not experience rated. Premiums tend to vary only with age

at purchase, and with several broad health categories (ACLI, 2001; Weiss 2002). Premiums do not vary

by gender.7

    A variety of theoretical explanations have been proposed for the limited size of the private long-term

care insurance market (see Norton, 2000 for a review). Asymmetric information is one potential

explanation, yet there exists very little empirical evidence on its presence in this market. Consistent with

moral hazard, Garber and MaCurdy (1993) present evidence of an increase in nursing home discharges

when the Medicare nursing home benefit is exhausted. The widespread use of deductibles in long-term

care insurance policies (Brown and Finkelstein, 2003) is also suggestive of asymmetric information.




3. Is there a positive correlation between LTC coverage and care use?

Long-term care includes both care in a nursing home and home health care. Nursing homes are

substantially more expensive than home health care (MetLife 2002), and account for over three-quarters

of long-term care expenditures (US Congress, 2000). Moreover, until quite recently, long term care
7
  This unisex pricing practice may initially seem quite puzzling, since women use substantially more long-term care
than men (Society of Actuaries, 1992). However, using the data in Section 3, we find that gender is no longer a
substantively or statistically significant predictor of nursing home use after conditioning on the age and health-
related rate classification employed by the insurance company. Thus it appears that through the use of health-related
categories, insurance companies can capture all of the risk-related information contained in gender. Consistent with
this, we do not find any differences across gender in insurance coverage. Presumably the insurance companies find
this a more politically attractive alternative to pricing directly based on gender.


                                                                                                                   9
policies tended to cover only nursing home care.8 Because of these patterns, and data limitations

discussed below, our empirical analysis focuses primarily on the relationship between insurance coverage

and nursing home utilization.

    Figure 1 – based on aggregate data from the Society of Actuaries (SOA, 2002) – shows the ratio of

nursing home admission rates for insured individuals to admission rates for the general population, by age

and by sex.9 The positive correlation property predicts that the insured-to-population ratio of admission

rates should be larger than one. The pattern displayed in Figure 1 is not consistent with this prediction.

We observe similar admission rates for the insured relative to the population at younger ages, and much

lower nursing home admission rates for the insured relative to the population at older ages. The SOA

(2002) also provides data on the relative nursing home admission rates, by age, among insured individuals

with varying amounts of insurance. Again there is no evidence of a positive correlation between the

amount of insurance and nursing home admission rates; indeed, there is even a pronounced negative

correlation between admission rates and some of the policy features that increase the amount of insurance.

    Although suggestive, the SOA data do not provide a formal test of the positive correlation prediction.

Most importantly, they do not condition on the risk classification of the individuals done by the insurance

companies. In addition, many “uninsured” individuals may in fact be able to collect public Medicaid

insurance should they end up in a nursing home. Our formal analysis of micro data in the remainder of

this section is designed to address these issues.

    We perform the test in two different ways. Our first comparison is to compare care utilization across

insured individuals with different amounts of insurance. To do so we use a proprietary database

containing information on the insurance purchases and subsequent claims experiences of customers in a

large, private long-term care insurance company. Our second approach is to compare the care utilization


8
  When the market began in the early 1980s, most policies covered nursing homes only. Even in 1990, two-thirds of
policies sold covered only nursing homes. By 2000, however, over three-quarters of new policies covered both home
care and nursing home care (AARP 2002, SOA 2002, HIAA 2000a).
9
  We limit the insured data to policies with no deductible. Policies with a deductible will not report a claim (and
hence a nursing home admission) if the nursing home stay lasts less than the length of the deductible; we would
therefore underestimate the insured admission rate for these policies.


                                                                                                                10
of individuals with private insurance to that of individuals without private insurance. For this analysis, we

use individual-level panel survey data from the AHEAD.



3.1 Proprietary policyholder data from a large private insurance company

3.1.1 Data and empirical framework: We have data on the complete set of individual (non-group) private

long-term care insurance policies sold by a large U.S. private long-term care insurance company from

January 1, 1997 through December 31, 2001.10 We observe a complete description of the features of each

policy. Crucially, we also observe the risk classification of the individual done by the insurance company;

it follows typical industry practices. The company varies the premium based on the individual’s age at the

time of policy issue, the date that the policy is issued, and whether the individual is rated preferred,

standard, or substandard based on detailed health information. We observe the individual’s age at

purchase, issue date, and rating category, although we do not observe the underlying health information

on which the rating category is determined. We also observe a complete description of all claims incurred

through December 31, 2001.

     To test the positive correlation prediction, we examine the relationship between the characteristics of

the policy that affect the quantity of insurance provided and nursing home utilization. In contrast to the

comparison using the SOA data we employed earlier, here we can condition on the individual’s risk

classification. However, because we still only observe care utilization if it results in a claim, we will miss

stays that do not exhaust the deductible (which must be satisfied anew for each care episode). Therefore,

we define a “failure” in our hazard model as having at least 100 continuous days of nursing home care

and we restrict the sample to the 94% of policies that have a deductible of 100 days or less (and were

issued at least 100 days before the end of the sample period). Conditional on entering a nursing home,

stays of more than 100 days are quite common (Dick et al., 1994; Kemper and Murtaugh, 1991; and

10
  The company is among the top-five companies in this market (which combined account for almost two-thirds of
premiums (LIMRA, 2001) ). Although the data come from a single company, they appear comparable to the broader
market in terms of the age and gender-mix of purchasers and the product mix of policies sold (see HIAA 2000a for
market-wide statistics). In addition, the company experienced similar growth rates in policy sales over the last five
years to the industry as a whole (LIMRA 2001).


                                                                                                                  11
Murtaugh et al., 1997). The average failure rate in our sample, 0.3 percent, is quite low, but is consistent

with market-wide and population statistics on nursing home utilization (SOA 1992, 2002).11

      Let λ (t , x i , β , λ 0 ) denote the hazard function, the probability that a policyholder with personal and

policy characteristics x i enters their 100th day of continuous nursing home care t days after purchasing

the policy, conditional on not having done so prior to t. We use the standard proportional hazard model

which assumes that λ (t , x i , β , λ 0 ) can be decomposed into a baseline hazard λ 0 (t ) and a proportional

“shift factor” exp( xi′β ) as follows:

(1)                λ (t , x i , β , λ 0 ) = exp( xi′ β )λ 0 (t ) .

We estimate a semi-parametric Cox proportional hazard model to avoid making any parametric

assumptions about the baseline hazard λ 0 (t ) .

      The hazard model framework is particularly well-suited to handling the extensive right-censoring in

the data. Censoring (exiting the sample for reasons other than failure) occurs either because the sample

period ends or because the policy terminates due to death or to failure to pay premiums. Slightly less than

10 percent of our policies terminate; this rate is comparable to industry-wide termination rates (SOA

2002).12

      We include a set of covariates to control for the insurance company’s risk classification of the

individuals. These consist of indicator variables for issue year, rating category (standard, preferred or

substandard), and issue age (which we divide into five roughly equal size bins that are less than 60, 60-64,

65-69, 70-74, and 75+).13

      Finkelstein and Poterba (forthcoming) show that selection can occur on many aspects of the insurance


11
   This low failure rate prohibits an analysis of the relationship between policy characteristics and length of stay
beyond 100 days, or the occurrence of multiple stays of at least 100 days in length.
12
   Treating terminated policies as censored at the date of termination is equivalent to a competing risks framework in
which the two risks (termination and failure) are assumed independent. It is not obvious that this assumption is
appropriate. We therefore tested the robustness of our results to instead maintaining the terminated policies in the “at
risk” sample after policy termination. The results were not substantively affected.
13
   Including separate indicator variables for each age rather than five-year intervals does not affect the coefficients of
interest. We adopt the coarser set of controls as our main specification simply for ease of presentation.


                                                                                                                      12
contract. In testing for the positive correlation property, it is therefore important to look at the correlation

between care utilization and any aspect of the insurance policy along which selection might occur. We

therefore include as our primary covariates of interest measures of all four of the main aspects of the

policy that affect the quantity of insurance in the policy. These are: (1) the deductible, (2) the total

number of days for which benefits may be received in the lifetime of the policy (“benefit period”), (3) the

maximum amount of incurred nursing home care expenditures that the policy will reimburse per day in

care (“maximum daily benefit”), and (4) how the nominal maximum daily benefit increases over time

after purchase of the policy (“benefit escalation”). The positive correlation property predicts that the

hazard rate should be increasing in the benefit amount, the benefit period and the amount of benefit

escalation, all of which increase the amount of insurance in the contract; similarly, the hazard should be

decreasing in the size of the deductible, which reduces the amount of insurance in the contract.

    We measure the deductible with indicator variables for 20-day, 60-day and 100-day deductibles. We

measure the maximum daily benefit amount using three indicators (which roughly evenly divide the

sample) for less than $100, $100, and more than $100 per day. In measuring the benefit period, we create

a series of indicator variables that take account of two factors. First, we distinguish among policies with

benefit periods of 1-4 years, 5+ years (but finite), and unlimited. Second, among policies with finite

benefit periods, we further distinguish policies that reset the allowable benefit period to the original

benefit period if the individual has had 180 continuous days out of care since the last day of receiving

benefits; this reset option effectively extends the benefit period. Finally, we use indicator variables for the

four possible benefit escalation options. In order of increasing benefit levels these are: constant nominal

benefits, benefits escalate at 5 percent of the original benefit per year (“simple” escalation), benefits

escalate at 5 percent per year (“compound” escalation), and benefits are increased by the greater of 5%

compounded annually over 3 years or CPI-growth over the last 3 years at the option of the policy holder

(“indexed”). For completeness, we also control for the remaining policy features as described in the notes

to Table 2.

    Table 1 provides summary statistics on the main individual and policy characteristics examined in the


                                                                                                              13
analysis. We do not control for the premium because we have controlled for all of the characteristics of

the individual and the policy that determine it. We also do not control for sex because it is not used in

determining the pricing of contracts.



3.1.2 Results: Table 2 reports the results from estimating equation (1). We show results for the entire

sample of policies. Because some of these policies have been in effect for only a short time, we also

report results for the subset of policies issued in 1997 or 1998, all of which have had at least three years of

exposure. The results look similar if we instead limit the sample to individuals who are 75 and older at the

time of purchase, and for whom we therefore observe a greater fraction of the policies’ actual lifetime

(results not shown).

    The results in the top portion of the table show the estimated coefficients on several covariates that

reflect the insurance company’s risk-categorization of the individual. As expected, the hazard rate

increases monotonically with the individual’s issue age and with the assessed risk category. For example,

individuals who are rated standard risk have about a 55 percent lower baseline hazard rate of entering a

nursing home for at least 100 days than individuals who are rated high risk.

    The lower portion of the table reports the coefficients on covariates for which the positive correlation

property makes predictions; these predictions are summarized in the right-most column. There is little

evidence in support of these predictions. The coefficients on the benefit escalation and benefit period

variables tend to have the opposite sign from what is predicted by the positive correlation property. The

coefficients on the deductible and daily benefit variables tend to be positive as predicted (those with

shorter deductible periods and higher daily benefits are more likely to use a nursing home) but the

estimated effects are almost always statistically insignificant. Moreover, their magnitudes suggest that any

effect is quantitatively unimportant. For example, the change in hazard rate associated with a 20-day

deductible compared to a 100-day deductible (which is the largest right-signed coefficient) is not only

statistically insignificant but is considerably smaller in magnitude than the change in hazard associated

with any 5-year increase in issue age.


                                                                                                             14
      One potential concern with these findings is that our inclusion of a series of additive controls for the

individual’s risk classification may produce misleading estimates of the relationship between features of

the contract and nursing home utilization if there are important interaction effects among the various

determinants of the individual’s risk classification and nursing home utilization. We therefore estimated a

more flexibly specified version of equation (1) in which we included fixed effects for each risk class,

defined by the interactions of the individual’s issue age, rating category and issue year. We also re-

estimated the hazard model restricting our sample to an increasingly homogenous population with respect

to the insurance company’s risk classification. We found (in results not shown) that the coefficients on the

policy characteristic variables in these alternative specifications were, if anything, less consistent with the

predictions of the positive correlation property than those shown in Table 2.



3.2 Evidence from individual panel data in the AHEAD

3.2.1 Data and empirical framework: The proprietary insurance company data provide detailed

information on the relationship between the amount of insurance and subsequent claims. However, they

contain no comparative information on the experience of those without private insurance. Such

information is available in the Asset and Health Dynamics (AHEAD) cohort of the Health and Retirement

Study (HRS). This sample, first interviewed in 1993, is representative of the non-institutionalized

population born in 1923 or earlier and their spouses. Because the first wave of the survey does not

provide a reliable measure of long-term care insurance coverage, our analyses begin with the second

interview in 1995, at which point the average age of individuals in our sample is 79. We use the panel

nature of the data to track nursing home utilization for the 1995 respondents through the latest currently

available interview in 2000. Appendix A provides more detail on the sample and variable definitions.

      The basic estimating equation is:

(2)         CARE = Xβ 1 + β 2 LTCINS + ε

We regress a measure of the individual’s long-term care utilization from 1995 through 2000 (CARE) on




                                                                                                             15
whether he has long-term care insurance coverage in 1995 (LTCINS); 10% of the sample has such

coverage. We include as controls a series of covariates (X) designed to control for any risk-categorization

of the individual done by the insurance company.

     We use two different measures for the dependent variable CARE. The first is a binary measure of

whether the individual spent any time in a nursing home in the five years between 1995 and 2000; 19

percent of the sample did. The second dependent variable is the total number of nights that the individual

spent in a nursing home in this period. On average, individuals spent 33 nights in a nursing home;

conditional on entering a nursing home, the mean is 187 nights.

     As discussed, the correct empirical test requires controlling for the risk classification of the individual

done by insurance companies. In the proprietary insurance company data, we directly observed this risk

classification. In the AHEAD data we do not. However, we do observe extremely rich and detailed

information on current health and medical history, as well as other demographics. By examining

insurance application forms from five leading long-term care insurance companies we determined which

of these characteristics of the individual the insurance companies observe. All collect a limited set of

demographic information – age, gender, marital status, and age of spouse – as well as similar and

extremely detailed information on current health and on health history. We found only one company that

asked applicants to report any financial information (specifically, whether they had less than $30,000 in

financial assets, presumably to screen for likely Medicaid eligibility).

     Essentially all of the information collected by the insurance companies is observable in AHEAD. We

also know that companies offer age-specific prices with only two or three broad rate classifications within

each age based on health information (ACLI 2001, Weiss 2002, Kemper et al. 1995).14 However, we do

not know the algorithm mapping the observable characteristics into the rate classifications. Given the

importance of controlling for the individual’s risk classification in the analysis, we experiment with four

alternative approaches. First, we do not include any covariates in estimating equation (2) (“no controls”


14
   According to industry actuaries, insurance companies collect more detailed information than they currently use in
risk classification in order to build a detailed claims database for future improvements in actuarial modeling.


                                                                                                                 16
specification). Second, we control for the individual’s age by including a separate indicator variable for

each age (“age dummies” specification). Both of these approaches are likely to underestimate the amount

of categorization done by insurance companies.

     Therefore, our third approach (“all observables” specification) tries to control for everything the

insurance companies observe about the individual. This specification includes not only the age dummies,

but also all of the demographic information that insurance companies observe, (gender, marital status and

age of spouse, which we enter linearly), and indicator variables for each of the detailed current health and

health history characteristics collected by any insurance companies that we observe in the data. To be

conservative, we also include indicator variables for the household’s income quartile and asset quartile,

even though it appears that most companies do not collect this information. This complete set of controls

is summarized in Table 3.

     By including a separate indicator variable for each health characteristic, the “all observables”

specification invokes a much more finely defined categorization of risk than insurance companies actually

use. We therefore believe that this specification is likely to overestimate the amount of risk classification

done by the insurance company.15 However, if there are substantial interaction affects among the

observable controls, we may misestimate the true relationship between care utilization and insurance

coverage by only including these observable controls additively.

     To address this limitation, our fourth and final specification substitutes these linear controls with a

single summary measure of the insurance companies’ prediction about each individual in the 1995

AHEAD’s chance of entering a nursing home in the next five years. We generated these predictions using

the same actuarial model that is employed by much of the long-term care insurance industry; this model

and its pedigree are described in detail in Robinson (1996), Robinson (2002), and Brown and Finkelstein


15
  There are, however, a few characteristics that the insurance companies observe that we cannot measure in the
AHEAD. Most are rare health conditions – such as double amputation or unoperated aneurysm—but their omission
raises the (we think unlikely) possibility that the “all observables” specification underestimates the amount of risk
classification done by the insurance company. To compensate for this omission, we experimented with including as
controls all of the health measures observed in the AHEAD, including those not observed by the insurance company
(e.g. self-reported health status, cataract surgery etc.). We did not find any substantive changes in our results.


                                                                                                                  17
(2003).16 We use a version of the model that predicts care utilization for typical individuals in the

population and makes no adjustment for potential moral hazard effects of the insurance. The predictions

depend non-parametrically on the individual’s age, gender and membership in one of seven different

health states (defined by the number of limitations to instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), the

number of limitations to activities of daily livings (ADLs), and the presence or absence of cognitive

impairment); all of this information is available in the AHEAD.17 This measure provides a parsimonious

way of controlling for non-linear (and non-parametric) interactions between the observed characteristics

of the individual and nursing home utilization.18



3.2.2 Results: The top panel of Table 4 describes the results of estimating equation (2) for these four

alternative definitions of the control variables (X). When the dependent variable is the binary measure of

any nursing home use, we report results from OLS estimation of equation (2); probit estimation produces

similar results. When the dependent variable is the cumulative number of nights spent in a nursing home

since 1995, we report estimates from a Tobit model; a linear model produces similar results both for the

whole sample and when limited to those who report any time in a nursing home.

     The results are not supportive of a positive correlation between long-term care insurance coverage

and long-term care utilization. In all specifications, long-term care insurance coverage is negatively

associated with long-term care utilization. Across all specifications, we can reject a higher probability of

nursing home utilization for the insured relative to the uninsured of more than 2.8 percentage points (15

percent) with 95 percent confidence.

     A potential problem with this analysis is that a substantial fraction of the seemingly uninsured may in
16
   We are extremely grateful to Jim Robinson, the former chair of the Society of Actuaries’ long-term care insurance
valuation methods task force, for generously sharing this model with us, and for answering our many questions.
17
   Although the full model, which is what we use, generates separate predictions by gender, in practice insurance
companies do not offer gender-specific prices. If we instead generate the unisex predictions of the model, we find
that it performs equally well in predicting nursing home utilization, and that conditional on this unisex actuarial
prediction, gender is not a statistically significant predictor of nursing home use in the AHEAD. These findings are
consistent with insurance companies not offering gender-specific prices.
18
   As an alternative way of dealing with non-linearities in the relationship between observable characteristics and
long-term are utilization, we also estimated equation (2) on increasingly homogenous sub-samples of individuals
from the perspective of the insurance company (e.g. by age and health conditions). The results were not affected.


                                                                                                                 18
fact rely on the public insurance provided by Medicaid, which pays for 40% of all nursing home

expenditures (US Congress, 2000). To address this issue, we repeat the regressions shown in the top panel

of Table 4, restricting the sample to those individuals who are least likely to find Medicaid an attractive

substitute for private insurance. Specifically, because Medicaid coverage in effect carries a deductible of

almost all of one’s assets and is therefore a more attractive substitute for lower-wealth individuals, we

restrict the sample to individuals in the top quartile of the household income or wealth distribution in

1995. The bottom panel of Table 4 indicates that the relationship between insurance coverage and care

utilization appears more negative when the sample is restricted to these individuals. Indeed, across all

specifications, we can now reject a higher probability of nursing home utilization for the insured relative

to the uninsured of more than 0.6 percentage points (3 percent) with 95 percent confidence.

     In results not reported, we ascertained that the results in Table 4 were robust to a number of other

alternative specifications. Two in particular are worth noting. First, insurance companies tend to deny

some observably unhealthy individuals private long-term care insurance coverage; for example, Weiss

(2002) estimates that 15% of non-group long-term care insurance applications are denied. We therefore

re-estimated equation (2) restricting the sample to individuals who have none of the health conditions that

tend to provoke denials. The coefficient on long-term care insurance remains consistently negative, even

if the sample is further restricted to those for whom Medicaid is also not a close substitute for private

insurance.19

     Second, because we only observe care utilization for a five-year period, and not over the lifetime of

the policy, it is possible that the positive correlation property would appear if the data were analyzed over

a longer time horizon. We tried several alternative approaches to addressing this issue, none of which

affected the qualitative nature of the results. For example, we used information on how long the

individual has had his policy to restrict the insured individuals in the sample to the two-thirds who had


19
  We verified that the results presented in the remainder of the paper were also not substantively affected by
limiting the sample to the top quartile of the income or wealth distribution, or to individuals unlikely to be denied
insurance, although in some specifications the standard errors increased so that the results in these smaller samples
were no longer statistically significant.


                                                                                                                   19
had their policy since at least 1992 (the earliest year for which nursing home utilization data are available)

and thus observed 8 years of care utilization data rather than only 5. We also tried limiting the sample to

the one-third of individuals who died between 1995 and 2000, for whom utilization subsequent to 2000 is

not possible.

     Finally, it is worth noting that our analysis thus far has focused exclusively on nursing home

utilization. Increasingly, long-term care insurance policies also cover some home health care, although, it

is a small component (about one-quarter) of total long-term care expenditures (US Congress, 2000). In the

AHEAD, we can measure whether the individual consumed any nursing home or any home health care

between 1995 and 2000 (40% of the sample did, compared to 19% for nursing home use alone). When we

re-estimate equation (2) using as a dependent variable whether the individual used any long-term care, we

find a relationship between insurance coverage and any long-term care utilization that is slightly more

negative than the relationship between insurance coverage and any nursing home utilization (results not

shown). This finding persists if we restrict the insured sample to the two-thirds whose policies provide

some home health care benefits. This suggests that the relationship between insurance coverage and home

care is also negative.20




4. The structure of information in the long-term care insurance market

The preceding section indicates no evidence of a positive correlation between insurance coverage and

nursing home utilization. As discussed, this result is consistent with symmetric information in the market,

and similar evidence in other insurance markets has been interpreted as such (see e.g. the papers cited in

20
  However, in the proprietary insurance company data discussed in the previous subsection, we find some weak
evidence of a positive correlation between the amount of insurance in the contract and the hazard rate of entering the
100th consecutive day of home care (results not shown). In contrast to the results for nursing home use, there may
therefore be some weak empirical support for a positive relationship between insurance coverage and home care use.
We suspect that any such evidence reflects the fact that home care – unlike nursing home care – may provide some
direct consumption value (or at least less disutility), and may therefore be more susceptible to moral hazard. We
believe it unlikely that our failure to find a positive correlation between insurance coverage and nursing home use is
due to insurance-induced substitution of home health care use for nursing home use. For we find that the negative
relationship between insurance coverage and nursing home care in both data sets persists when we restrict the
insured sample to those with no home health care coverage.



                                                                                                                  20
the opening paragraph). However, the result is also consistent with individuals’ having private

information about both their risk type and their preferences. We therefore test directly for asymmetric

information by examining whether individuals have private information about their risk type and whether

this information is related to insurance coverage.



4.1 Measuring individual’s beliefs about their risk of nursing home utilization

Information on individuals’ beliefs about their risk of nursing home utilization comes from responses to

the following question asked in the 1995 AHEAD:


     “Of course nobody wants to go to a nursing home, but sometimes it becomes necessary. What do
     you think are the chances that you will move to a nursing home in the next five years?”


Individuals are asked to give a response on a scale from zero to 100, which we rescale to be between 0

and 1. The question was not asked of the approximately 13 percent of the 1995 respondents for whom the

interview was completed by a proxy respondent; this excludes, among others, the most cognitively

impaired; the results in Table 4 are robust to this sample restriction.

     An important consideration is whether individuals’ reporting of their beliefs contains any meaningful

information about their actual beliefs. Two factors are encouraging on this dimension. First, individuals’

predictions appear right on average: the average self-reported probability of nursing home use in a five

year period was 18 percent, while 16 percent of the responders actually did enter a nursing home over the

five year period.21 Second, we find that self-reported nursing home entry probabilities co-vary in sensible

ways with known risk factors; they are higher for women than for men, and increase monotonically with

age and with deteriorating health status. These results are consistent with other work that has found

sensible covariance patterns for self-reported mortality probabilities and characteristics such as the

individual’s age or health status (Hamermesh, 1985, Hurd and McGarry, 2002, Smith et al., 2001).

     However, one well-known issue with self-reported probabilities is the phenomenon of “focal” or

21
  The accuracy of the average prediction holds for both men and women. We find some evidence that those with
insurance and those in better health tend to overestimate their risk.


                                                                                                               21
“categorical” responses wherein respondents give round figures such as 0, 50 or 100 percent. Figure 2

shows a histogram of the responses. Almost 50 percent of respondents report a five-year nursing home

entry probability of zero and 14 percent report a 50 percent probability. More generally, respondents

overwhelmingly favor “round” responses, with over 98 percent reporting a value that is divisible by 5.

Hurd and McGarry (1995) and Gan et al. (2003) report a similar preponderance of such categorical

responses for self-reported mortality probabilities.

    It is somewhat unclear how to treat these categorical responses. Our goal is to measure individual

beliefs. To the extent that the categorical responses represent the “true” subjective probability of the

individual, no adjustment to individuals’ statement of their beliefs seems warranted. However, the

preponderance of categorical responses raises the possibility that individual responses convey information

about their beliefs of the general nature of their risk (e.g. low, medium, or high) but not about the scale of

the risk. For example, about 8 percent of individuals who report a zero probability of 5-year nursing home

entry have private long-term care insurance; this suggests that an answer of zero may convey a belief that

the entry probability is quite low, but not that it is literally zero. In this case, grouping the individual

predictions into several categories, rather than including them as a continuous variable, may be more

appropriate.

    With these considerations in mind, we report results using two alternative measures of the beliefs.

First, we use the actual response of the individual, which we refer to as our “continuous measure” of

individual beliefs. Second, we use a series of indicator variables for whether the individual reported 0

(49%), 1-49 (30%) or 50-100 (21%). We choose these break points to create categories of roughly equal

size. We refer to this as our “categorical measure.”

    Finally, we note that individuals may not be comfortable reporting probabilistic answers, and may not

in fact even think in these terms. If they use probabilistic information in making insurance purchase

decisions, but are unable to translate these latent probabilities into numbers when faced with a survey

question, the resulting measurement error will lead us to underestimate the extent of private information.




                                                                                                               22
4.2 Do individuals have private information about the likelihood of nursing home utilization?

We estimate the relationship between nursing home utilization and beliefs about nursing home utilization

with the following equation:

(3) CARE = Xβ 1 + β 2 B + ε

We estimate a linear probability model of whether the individual went into a nursing home in the five

years between 1995 and 2000 (CARE) on his 1995 self-reported beliefs of this probability (B) and

controls for the insurance companies’ risk classification (X). We do not control for LTCINS in equation

(3) because if private information about risk type is correlated with insurance coverage due to adverse

selection, controlling for LTCINS would control away part of the individual’s information. In practice,

our results are not affected by this choice.

    The results are shown in Table 5. Two main findings emerge. First, using either the continuous or

categorical measure of beliefs, columns (1) and (2) indicate that individual beliefs about the likelihood of

entering a nursing home are a statistically significant, positive predictor of subsequent nursing home

experience. This provides a complement to studies that have found that individuals have some ability to

predict their mortality (e.g. Hurd and McGarry, 1995, 2002; Smith et al. 2001). The results in column 1

indicate that a 10 percentage point increase in self-reported probability is associated with a 1 percentage

point increase in the probability of going into a nursing home. The results in column 2 indicate that

individuals who report a prediction of 50 or higher are 6 percentage points (about 40 percent) more likely

to go into a nursing home than individuals who report a prediction of 0; individuals who report a

prediction of 1 to 49 are no more likely to go into a nursing home than individuals who report 0, but are

significantly less likely to go into a nursing home than individuals who report a prediction of 50 or higher.

    Second, and most importantly, the results in the remaining columns indicate that the individual still

has residual private information about his risk type even conditional on the risk class that the insurance

company assigns to the individual. Regardless of what set of controls for risk classification or measure of

the individual’s beliefs is used, individual beliefs remain a positive, and statistically significant predictor




                                                                                                             23
of subsequent nursing home utilization. Because of concerns about possible measurement error in

individual beliefs, we also tried adding to the regression the individual’s response to the same question

about beliefs asked in the previous interview (1993). We found that when both 1993 and 1995 measures

of beliefs are included, both are consistently statistically significant predictors of nursing home use

(results not shown). This suggests that measurement error in individual beliefs is indeed an issue and that

the results in Table 5 are likely underestimates of individuals’ private information.

     These findings provide direct evidence of the presence of asymmetric information in the private long-

term care insurance market. In particular, the results are supportive of the assumption of adverse selection

models that individuals have private information about their risk type prior to the purchase of insurance.

An alternative interpretation of the results might be that individuals and insurance companies initially

have symmetric information but that individuals, in reporting their beliefs, anticipate the moral hazard

effects of insurance. However, this is not corroborated by the data: the results look similar if we restrict

the sample to the 90% of individuals without private insurance.22

     If individuals have residual private information about their chances of using a nursing home, why

don’t insurance companies attempt to learn more about the individual? There is clearly some information

about the individual that the insurance company could in principle observe but that in practice it does not.

This includes, for example, additional health conditions measured in the AHEAD data but not by the

insurance company as well as measures of the individual’s race, religion, education, spouse’s health, the

number, sex, and proximity of the individual’s children, and whether the individual engaged in each of a

variety of potential preventive health measures (described in more detail in Section 5). When we add

these variables to the “all observables” specification in Table 5, they are jointly significant, but their

addition does not affect the magnitude or statistical significance of the coefficient on the individual’s

prediction. This suggests that feasible collection of additional information about the individual would not

22
  Interestingly, we do not find evidence that the insured are better predictors of their utilization than the uninsured.
This suggests that individuals do not appear to update their beliefs about their risk type based on the price offered by
the insurance company. We also investigated whether predictive power varies systematically across other observable
groups. More educated and older individuals tend to be better predictors; there is weak evidence that women may be
better predictors than men.


                                                                                                                    24
correct the problem of asymmetric information vis a vis the consumer’s information set, but it would give

the company an advantage over competitors that do not collect the information.23



4.3 The relationship between private information about risk and insurance coverage

Table 5 demonstrates that individuals have private information about their risk of entering a nursing

home. We next examine the role of this private information in affecting the purchase of long-term care

insurance. We estimate the equation:

(4) LTCINS = Xδ 1 + δ 2 B + µ

Once again, LTCINS is a binary measure of insurance coverage, and B and X are, respectively, the

subjective probability of entering a nursing home and controls for the risk classification done by the

insurance company. The results are presented in Table 6. Across all specifications, individuals who

believe that they are higher risk are more likely to purchase insurance.

     Table 6 raises the interesting question of whether the private information occurs ex-ante or ex-post. In

other words, do individuals have ex-ante private information that influences subsequent purchase

decisions (as in an adverse selection model), or do individuals revise their beliefs upward after purchasing

insurance to account for the moral hazard effects of the insurance on care utilization? The AHEAD data

do not permit us to distinguish between these alternatives because the average initial age in our sample is

79, and hence subsequent insurance purchases are rare. However, evidence from younger cohorts in the

HRS suggests that individuals have private information about risk type prior to purchasing insurance, and

that such information influences subsequent insurance purchases. Specifically, we found (in results not

reported) that beliefs about subsequent nursing home use in 1996 among uninsured individuals aged 60 to

69 (average age of 63) were positively and statistically significantly associated with acquiring insurance

by 2000 (which 8 percent of the sample did); the magnitude of the coefficient on beliefs as a predictor of


23
  We presume that insurance companies do not collect this information because the costs of doing so are high
relative to the benefits. In addition, the use of behavioral information in pricing insurance contracts (such as
decisions regarding preventive health care investment) could alter the behavioral choices of potential applicants and
thus reduce the informative content of these characteristics.


                                                                                                                  25
subsequent insurance coverage was about two-thirds the magnitude of the contemporaneous correlation

between beliefs and insurance coverage shown in Table 6.



4.4 The effect of private information on the market equilibrium

The results thus far indicate that individuals have private information about their risk type and that this

private information is positively correlated with insurance coverage. Because we also found that the

insured are no more likely to enter a nursing home than the uninsured, there must, mechanically, be other

unobserved characteristics of the individual that have opposite correlations with insurance coverage and

with care utilization. The next section directly investigates what these other unobserved characteristics

might be. Here, we provide one way of quantifying the extent of private information about risk type.

    We re-estimate the relationship between nursing home utilization and insurance coverage (equation

2), using the individual’s subjective assessment of nursing home risk as an instrumental variable for

insurance coverage. The IV estimates provide a partial equilibrium (and hence lower bound) estimate of

what the impact of this private information about risk type would be on the market equilibrium in the

absence of offsetting preference-based selection (i.e. if private information about risk were the sole

systematic determinant of insurance coverage). We do not, however, place any causal interpretation on

the coefficient on insurance coverage.

    Table 7 reports the results. The first two rows show the results when individuals’ continuous or

categorical beliefs in 1995 about their five-year nursing home use probability are used as instruments.

Due to concerns about measurement error in individual beliefs, the next two rows report results when

individuals’ beliefs as reported in the 1995 interview and in the 1993 interview are used as instruments.

For comparison, the bottom row of Table 7 reports the OLS estimates of equation (2) limited to the

sample for whom we have belief information in 1995.

    The OLS estimates indicate that on average the insured are not higher risk than the uninsured. By

contrast, the IV estimates suggest that, holding prices constant, the insured would be at least 20

percentage points more likely to enter a nursing home than individuals without insurance if beliefs about


                                                                                                              26
risk type were the only systematic factor influencing insurance coverage.

     Of course, such a change in the risk composition of the insured would also affect the pricing of

insurance. One way to gauge how insurance prices would change in the absence of preference-based

selection is to compare OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between total nights spent in a nursing

home and insurance coverage. In results not reported here, we find that the OLS estimates suggest that the

insured spent an (insignificant) 5 to 14 days less in a nursing home over a five year period than the

uninsured, while the IV estimates suggest that the insured spend a (significant) 40 to 212 days more in a

nursing home than the uninsured (median estimate is 69). The national average daily cost of a nursing

home in 2002 was $143 (MetLife, 2002). Therefore, if we assume the OLS estimate is 0 and take the

median IV estimate, this suggests that in the absence of preference-based selection, the expected (non-

discounted) nursing home expenditures of an insurance policy would rise by almost $10,000 over a five

year period. Presumably the general equilibrium effects of these price changes on selection in the long-

term care insurance market (and hence further effects on prices) would result in a market that, in the

absence of offsetting preference-based selection, would be display an even larger positive correlation

between insurance coverage and risk occurrence than the partial equilibrium IV estimates imply.

     Finally, we found that Hausman tests of the difference between the IV and OLS estimates indicate

that, in all but one of the 16 IV estimates, we can reject with at least 10 percent confidence the null

hypothesis that LTCINS is not correlated with the error term in equation (2). In other words, the

offsetting preference-based selection has a statistically significant effect on the relationship between

insurance coverage and nursing home utilization in equilibrium. We now turn to a direct examination of

what these offsetting preference-based factors might be.24




24
  Another possibility is that differences between the OLS and IV results in Table 7 stem primarily from classical
measurement error in our long-term care insurance variable. However, we believe this to be unlikely. We re-
estimated equation (2) using long-term care insurance coverage in 1998 as an instrumental variable for coverage in
1995. This is more typical of the type of instrument selected to deal with classical measurement error. When doing
so we found IV results that were only slightly different from the OLS results (never varying by more than 1.6
percentage points) and about half the time are more negative than the OLS estimates.


                                                                                                                27
5. Direct evidence of preference-based selection

We exploit the richness of the AHEAD data to identify characteristics of the individual that are

unobserved by the insurance company and that have the opposite correlation with risk occurrence and

preferences for insurance. Econometrically, imagine we can measure two aspects of the individual that are

unobserved by the insurance company, and related (with noise) to the individual’s (unobserved) risk type:

his beliefs about his type (B) and some aspect of his preferences (P) that the insurance company does not

observe. We have seen that B is positively related to insurance coverage and to care utilization and are

looking for a P that has the opposite correlation with insurance coverage and care utilization. We

therefore estimate the equations:

(5)       CARE = Xb1 + b 2 LTCINS + b3 B + b4 P + ε

(6)       LTCINS = Xd1 + d 3 B + d 4 P + η

and look for variables to measure P that produce the opposite sign on b4 and d 4 .

      It is difficult, if not impossible to measure all (or even most) of the components of P. By definition,

they must be unobserved by the insurance company; many of them are therefore likely to be unobserved

by the econometrician as well. We therefore focus primarily on a candidate that has attracted considerable

theoretical attention: selection based on risk aversion. De Meza and Webb (2001) and Jullien et al. (2002)

propose that the risk averse (or more “cautious”) may not only place a higher value on insurance, but may

invest more in preventive effort and thus end up lower risk than less risk averse individuals.

      The AHEAD data provide a nice measure of the individual’s investment in risk-reducing behavior.

We observe, in 1995, whether the individual undertook various gender-appropriate potential preventive

health care measures over the last two years. These are: whether the individual had a flu shot, had a blood

test for cholesterol, checked her breasts for lumps monthly, had a mammogram or breast x-ray, had a Pap

smear, and had a prostate screen. The insurance company applications we reviewed did not solicit any of

this information.

      There is substantial variation in the fraction of gender-appropriate potential preventive activity


                                                                                                                28
actually undertaken: the median individual does two-thirds of these activities, but 7% report doing

nothing and 30% report engaging in all relevant preventive behaviors. This measure does not appear to

primarily reflect whether the individual has seen a doctor over the last two years (over 90% of our elderly

sample has) or the type of insurance the individual has; Medicare (which covers 99% of our sample)

reimburses for all of these preventive health measures.

     Table 8 reports the results of estimating equations (5) and (6). To conserve space, we only report

results using the continuous measure of individual’s beliefs; the results look similar if categorical

measures of beliefs are used instead. The results from the first column within each panel indicate that

individuals who undertake a greater fraction of potential preventive health activity (i.e. more cautious

individuals) are less likely to subsequently go into a nursing home. The fact that our measure of

preventive activity is a statistically significant predictor of nursing home utilization even though we

condition on individuals’ beliefs about this same nursing home utilization indicates that individuals do not

efficiently incorporate all relevant, available information about their characteristics in forming their

beliefs about their risk type. This result is consistent with Smith et al.’s (2001) finding that individuals do

not efficiently form beliefs about their mortality prospects.25

     The results from the second column within each panel indicate that those who undertake more

preventive health activity are also more likely to own insurance. Finally, we used the results from

estimating the insurance coverage equation (6) to decompose insurance coverage into a component

predicted by the preventive health activity ( δˆ4 P , which we denote as LTCINS_HATPREVENT), a

component predicted by individuals’ private information about risk type ( δˆ3 B , which we denote as




25
   Although beliefs about nursing home risk are positively correlated with nursing home use and preventive activity
is negatively correlated with nursing home use, beliefs and preventive activity are themselves positively correlated.
Consistent with this, we find that more cautious individuals tend to overestimate their risk probability relative to
actual experience. This suggests the existence of an unobserved “pessimism” factor that causes individuals to shade
upward their beliefs about nursing home risk and also to behave more cautiously; such pessimism may not, however,
have a direct effect on actual nursing home utilization.


                                                                                                                 29
LTCINS_HATRISKTYPE) and the residual ( η̂ , which we denote by LTCINS_RESID).26 The third column

of each panel of Table 8 shows the results of estimating the care utilization equation (5) with these three

different components of insurance coverage on the right hand side. LTCINS_HATPREVENT is always

negative. In other words, the variation in insurance coverage that is positively correlated with preventive

health activity is negatively correlated with long-term care utilization.

     Thus, consistent with the theoretical models of de Meza and Webb (2001) and Jullien et al (2002),

more cautious individuals are both more likely to own insurance and less likely to experience the insured

risk. It is not clear, however, whether our results reflect the type of causal relationship between risk

aversion and risk occurrence posited by these theoretical papers. It is possible that there is a causal

relationship; for example, flu shots reduce the risk of pneumonia which is a nontrivial contributor to the

need for a nursing home for the elderly. Alternatively, these preventative measures may be correlated

with other investments that themselves cause lower rates of institutionalization. For example, we find that

individuals who invest more in our measured preventive health activities are substantially less likely to

have a hip fracture, another important contributor to nursing home residence. This is unlikely to reflect a

causal effect of any of our measured preventive health activities – flu shots and mammograms are not

thought to reduce the probability of a hip fracture – but may reflect a causal effect of other unmeasured

preventive health activities (such as greater exercise and calcium consumption in earlier years) and a

positive correlation across preventative activities.

     Another possibility is that our preventive health measures proxy for unmeasured aspects of socio-

economic status. Indeed, we find a strong positive correlation between our measure of preventive health

and individuals’ wealth, which most insurance companies do not observe. Moreover, we find that higher

asset individuals are both substantially more likely to have long-term care insurance (which may reflect

the crowd-out of Medicaid on insurance demand among the less wealthy) and substantially less likely to

use nursing homes. Although the results in Table 8 are robust to adding controls for the individual’s asset

26
  For this specification, we include separate indicator variables for each preventive health activity (and gender) in
order to estimate more flexibly the relationship between preventive health activity and insurance coverage. The
results are similar if we instead use the fraction of gender-appropriate preventive health activity undertaken.


                                                                                                                    30
quartile to the three specifications that do not already have them, we cannot rule out the possibility that

our preventive health measure is proxying for unmeasured aspects of socio-economic status.

     Interestingly, other than preventive health activity and wealth, other characteristics of the individual

that we can measure and that the insurance companies do not observe appear to have the same correlation

with insurance coverage and risk occurrence. They are therefore not potential contributors to offsetting,

preference-based selection. For example, individuals with more children are both less likely to have

insurance and less likely to use nursing home care. The same is true for non-whites relative to whites,

Hispanics relative to non-Hispanics, and less educated individuals relative to more educated individuals.27

Relatedly, if we re-estimate the relationship between care utilization and insurance coverage in equation

(2) adding as additional controls all of the factors that we observe and that the insurance company does

not, we still do not recover a positive relationship between insurance coverage and care utilization. This

indicates that, not surprisingly, we are not able to measure fully all of the unobserved characteristics of

the individual that have the opposite correlation with insurance coverage and with risk type.




6. Conclusion

A growing body of empirical work has begun to question the empirical relevance of theoretical models of

asymmetric information to insurance markets. Several recent papers, using different data sources and

examining different insurance markets, have found no evidence of a positive correlation between the

amount of insurance and the occurrence of the risk, and have concluded that asymmetric information may

therefore not exist in these markets. In this paper, we show empirically that asymmetric information may

exist even if the insured are not above-average in their risk type.

     We explore these issues in the context of the private long-term care insurance market in the United

States. As was the case in these earlier studies, we find no evidence of a positive correlation between

27
  Since gender is not used in pricing, it is also a potential source of preference-based selection. However, as noted
above, gender is not statistically or substantively correlated with insurance coverage. Moreover, once the risk-
classification done by the insurance company is controlled for, gender is not statistically or substantively correlated
with nursing home use.


                                                                                                                     31
individuals’ insurance coverage and the occurrence of the risk (in this case, nursing home use). However,

using information about self-assessments of nursing home risk, we find direct evidence of asymmetric

information. After conditioning on the information set of the insurance company, the individual’s beliefs

about his risk type are positively and statistically significantly correlated both with subsequent care

utilization and with insurance coverage.

    The lack of a positive correlation between insurance coverage and care utilization – despite the

presence of private information about risk type – is explained by the existence of another type of private

information: individuals have private information not only about their risk type but also about preference-

related characteristics that have the opposite correlation with insurance coverage and risk occurrence. For

example, we find evidence that more “cautious” individuals – as measured by their investment in

preventive health measures – are both more likely to have long-term care insurance and less likely to use

nursing home care.

    Such preference-based selection can offset the positive correlation between insurance coverage and

risk occurrence that asymmetric information about risk type would tend to produce. Indeed, we

demonstrate that in the absence of preference-based selection those with insurance would be substantially

higher risk than those without insurance. The fact that they are not indicates that, on net, private

information about risk type in the long-term care insurance market does not raise prices above their

population-average actuarially fair price. It does not, however, imply that the market equilibrium is

efficient. Further investigation of the exact nature of the equilibrium and whether it is constrained Pareto

efficient would be needed in order to draw any public policy conclusions. Relatedly, an unanswered

question – and an important avenue for further work – is whether asymmetric information is an important

contributor to the extremely limited size of the private long-term care insurance market.

    For insurance markets more generally, the results in this paper suggest two interesting directions for

further work. First, the evidence of offsetting, preference-based selection in the long-term care insurance

market suggests a potential unifying explanation for the apparent differences across insurance markets in

whether the insured are above-average in their risk type. For example, there is evidence of a positive


                                                                                                          32
correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence in annuities (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2002,

forthcoming) but not in life insurance (Cawley and Philipson, 1999), which insures the (opposite)

longevity risk to that insured by annuities. It may be that preference-based selection operates in the

opposite direction in these two markets. Characteristics of the individual that the insurance company does

not observe – such as their level of caution or their wealth – may be positively correlated with demand for

both annuities and life insurance, but negatively correlated with the life insurance risk of dying and

positively correlated with the annuity risk of living.

    Our findings also suggest an alternative, general approach to testing for asymmetric information in

insurance markets. Conditional on the information set used by the insurance company, the existence of an

individual characteristic that is correlated with both insurance coverage and risk occurrence indicates the

presence of asymmetric information; this is true regardless of the sign of the correlation. Of course, the

test is only one-sided: a failure to find a characteristic of the individual correlated with both insurance

coverage and risk occurrence might simply reflect a lack of sufficient information available to the

econometrician, rather than the absence of asymmetric information. Still, the test may provide a useful

complement to other approaches to testing for asymmetric information (see Chiappori et al. 2002).

    Implementation of this test requires only that the econometrician observe more information about the

individual than the insurance company uses in pricing. This may often be the case. For example, the

government often places legal restrictions on the insurer’s ability to price based on certain characteristics

– gender is perhaps the best known example – which may nonetheless be observed in insurance company

data or in general surveys. In addition, information that is costly to verify may not be collected by

insurance companies – because individuals would have an incentive to lie if it were used in pricing – but

might be collected by a general survey, where such incentives do not operate. For example, although

annuity companies do not collect information on individuals’ wealth (despite the known correlation

between socio-economic status and mortality), such information is available in many public use surveys.

These types of disparities between the information collected and used by the insurance company and

available to the econometrician suggests that the test may find widespread application.


                                                                                                              33
REFERENCES

AARP. 2000. “Medicaid Financial Eligibility for Older People: State variations in access to home and
community-based waiver and nursing home services.” April.

AARP. 2002. “Long-Term Care Insurance: An Assessment of States’ Capacity to Review and Regulate
Rates.” February, MS # 2002-02.

ACLI. 2001. Life Insurers Fact Book, 2001. Washington, DC

Arnott, R and Joseph Stiglitz. 1988. “The basic analytics of moral hazard.” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 90: 383-413.

Bank of Sweden, 2001. “Press Release: The 2001 Sveriges Riksbank (Bank of Sweden) Prize in
Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, Advanced Information.” Available at
http://www.nobel.se/economics/laureates/2001/ecoadv.pdf

Brown, Jeffrey and Amy Finkelstein. 2003. “Why is the market for private long-term care insurance so
small?” Unpublished mimeo.

Cawley, John and Tomas Philipson. 1999. “An empirical examination of information barriers to trade in
insurance.” American Economic Review Vol 89, no 4 pp.827-846.

Cardon, James and Igal Hendel. 2001. “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence from the
National Medical Expenditure Survey.” RAND Journal of Economics 32, 408-427.

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre and Bernard Salanie. 2000. “Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 108, 56-78.

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, Bruno Jullien, Bernard Salanie, and Francois Salanie. 2002. “Asymmetric
Information in Insurance: General Testable Implications.” Unpublished mimeo.

Cohen, Alma. 2001. “Asymmetric Information and Learning in the Automobile Insurance
Market.“ Mimeo, Harvard University, Department of Economics.

Cohen, Marc. Forthcoming. “Private Long-Term Care Insurance.” Journal of Aging and Health.

Crocker, Keith and Arthur Snow. 1985. “The efficiency of competitive equilibria in insurance markets
with asymmetric information.” Journal of Public Economics Volume 26 (2): 207 – 219.

Cutler, David. 2002. “Health Care and the Public Sector.” In A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein,
eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North Holland), forthcoming.

De Meza, David and Webb, David. 2001. “Advantageous selection in insurance markets.” Rand Journal
of Economics. Summer.

Dick, Andrew, Alan Garber and Thomas MaCurdy. 1994. Forecasting Nursing Home Utilization of
Elderly Americans. In David Wise (ed) Studies in the Economics of Aging.

Dionne, Georges, Christian Gourieroux and Charles Vanasse. 2001. “Testing for evidence of adverse


                                                                                                       34
selection in the automobile insurance market: a comment.” Journal of Political Economy 109(2): 444-
451.

Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2002. “Selection Effects in the Market for Individual
Annuities: New Evidence from the United Kingdom.” Economic Journal 112, 28-50.

Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. Forthcoming. “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets:
Policyholder Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market.” Journal of Political Economy.

Gan, Li, Michael Hurd and Daniel McFadden. 2003. “Individual subjective survival curves.” NBER
Working Paper 9480.

Garber, Alan and Thomas MaCurdy. 1993. “Nursing home discharges and exhaustion of Medicare
benefits.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 88(423): 727-736.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 1985. “Expectations, Life Expectancy, and Economic Behavior.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics Vol 100, Issue 2, pp.389-408.

Hurd, Michael D. and Kathleen McGarry, 1995. "Evaluations of the Subjective Probability of Survival in
the Health and Retirement Survey," Journal of Human Resources, 30 : s268-s292.

Hurd, Michael D. and Kathleen McGarry, 2002. "The Predictive Validity of Subjective Probabilities of
Survival" Economic Journal, 112 (482) : 966-985.

Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA). 2000a. “Who buys LTC insurance in 2000?”
Washington DC.

Health Insurance Association of American (HIAA). 2000b. “LTC insurance in 1997 – 1998.” Washington
DC.

Jullien, Bruno, Bernard Salanie, and Francois Salanie. 2002. “Screening risk-averse agents under moral
hazard.” Unpublished mimeo.

Kemper, Peter and Christopher Murtaugh. 1991. Lifetime use of nursing home care.” New England
Journal of Medicine 324: 595-600.

LIMRA. 2001. “Individual Medicare Supplement and Long-Term Care Insurance.”

Mehta, Kala M., Kristine Yaffe, Kenneth Langa, Laura Sands, Mary Whooley, Kenneth Covinsky (2002).
"Additive Effects of Cognitive Function and Depressive Symptoms on Mortality in Older Community
Living Adults." mimeo, UCSF.

Mellor, Jennifer. 2001. “Long-term care and nursing home coverage: are adult children substitutes for
insurance policies?” Journal of Health Economics 20 pp.527-547.

MetLife Mature Market Institute. 2002. “MetLife Market Survey of Nursing Home and Home Care Costs
2002.”

Murtaugh, Christopher, Peter Kemper, Brenda Spillman, and Barbara Carlso. 1997. “Amount,
distribution, and timing of lifetime nursing home use.” Medical Care (35): 3 pp. 204-218.



                                                                                                         35
National Center for Health Statistics, 2002. Health, United States, 2002 With Chartbook on Trends in the
Health of Americans. Hyattsville, Maryland: 2002.

Norton, Edward. 2000. “Long-term Care.” In AJ Culyer and JP Newhouse (eds) Handbook of Health
Economics, vol 1, ch 17. Elsevier Science.

Pueltz, Robert and Arthur Snow. 1994. “Evidence on Adverse Selection: Equilibrium Signaling
and Cross-Subsidization in the Insurance Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 102: 236-257.

Robinson, James. 1996. “A Long-Term Care Status Transition Model,” presented at the 1996 Bowles
Symposium on the Old-Age Crisis: Actuarial Opportunities. Georgia State University, September.

Robinson, James. 2002. “A long-term care status transition model.” Mimeo, University of Wisconsin,
Madison.

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect
Information.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 90: 629-649.

Sloan, Frank and Edward Norton. 1997. “Adverse selection, bequests, crowding out, and private demand
for insurance: evidence from the long-term care insurance market.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 15:
201-219.

Smith, V Kerry, Donald Taylor and Frank Sloan. 2001. “Longevity expectations and death: can people
predict their own demise?” American Economic Review September pp.1126-1134.

Society of Actuaries. 1992. “Report of the long-term-care experience committee: 1985 national nursing
home survey utilization data.” Transactions of the Society of Actuaries, 1988-89-90 Reports. Pp.101-164.

Society of Actuaries. 2002. “Long-term care experience committee InterCompany Study 1984-1999.”
Available at http://www.soa.org/sections/intercompany_study.pdf.

United States Congress, Committee on Ways and Means (2000). Green Book 2000: Background Material
on Programs Under the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means, Washington DC: GPO.

Villeneuve, Bertrand. 2000. “The consequences for a monopolistic insurance firm of evaluating risk better
than customers: the adverse selection hypothesis reversed.” Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory
25: 65-79.

Villeneuve, Bertrand. Forthcoming. “Competition between Insurers with Superior Information” European
Economic Review.

Weiss Ratings Inc. 2002. “Weiss Ratings’ Consumer Guide to LTC Insurance.” Palm Beach
Gardens, Fl.




                                                                                                      36
                                                                  Figure 1: Ratio of Insured to Population Nursing Home Admission Rate

                             1.6
                             1.4
                             1.2
                              1
Ratio




                             0.8
                             0.6
                             0.4
                             0.2
                              0
                                                   60-64                         65-69                             70-74                          75-79                         80-84
                                   Source: Society of Actuaries (2002), Appendix D-7                           Attained Age
                                   Note: Insured estimates based on policies with no deductible                                                                  Females           Males




                                                 Figure 2: Distribution of Subjective Probability of Entering NH within Five Years

                             0.6



                             0.5
   Fraction of Respondants




                             0.4



                             0.3



                             0.2



                             0.1



                               0
                                   0


                                          0.05


                                                    0.1


                                                           0.15


                                                                    0.2


                                                                          0.25


                                                                                 0.3


                                                                                         0.35


                                                                                                0.4


                                                                                                        0.45


                                                                                                                0.5


                                                                                                                      0.55


                                                                                                                               0.6


                                                                                                                                     0.65


                                                                                                                                            0.7


                                                                                                                                                    0.75


                                                                                                                                                           0.8


                                                                                                                                                                   0.85


                                                                                                                                                                          0.9


                                                                                                                                                                                 0.95


                                                                                                      Subjective Probability                                                            1
                                    Source: 1995 AHEAD Survey




                                                                                                                                                                                 37
                                               Table 1
                      Summary Statistics for Proprietary Insurance Company Data

                                                                          Policies Issued        Policies Issued
                                                                          1997-2001              1997 or 1998
Failure rate                                                              0.3                    0.6
Risk Classification of Individual:
  Median issue date                                                       September 1, 1999      February 8, 1998
  Average issue age                                                       64.4                   65.3
  Percent rated low risk                                                  29                     16
  Percent rated standard risk                                             66                     79
  Percent rated high risk                                                 5                      5
Policy Characteristics:
Deductible
  Percent with 20-day deductible                                          5                      5
  Percent with 60-day deductible                                          8                      8
  Percent with 100-day deductible                                         87                     87
Maximum Daily Benefit
  Average nursing home daily benefit (in $)                               119                    113
  Average home health care daily benefit (in $)                           112                    103
  Percent With Home Care Benefit < than Nursing Home Benefit              19                     26
Benefit Period
  Percent of policies with Unlimited Benefit Period                       18                     18
  Average Benefit Period for Policies w/ limited benefit period           4.3                    4.2
  Percent with Limited Benefit Period that allow extension                10                     13
Benefit Escalation
  Percent with no benefit escalation                                      2                      ----
  Percent with 5% “simple” benefit escalation                             30                     29
  Percent with 5% compound benefit escalation                             28                     18
  Percent with “indexed” escalation                                       40                     53
Number of observations                                                    144,798                49,887
“Failure rate” denotes the percentage of the sample who experience at least 100 continuous day of nursing home
care during the sample period. Dashed line indicates less than 1 percent. 60% of policy sales are to women; we do
not report this in the above table because it is not a characteristic used by the insurance company to categorize
individuals.




                                                                                                                38
                                              Table 2
                 Hazard of Receiving Nursing Home Care for 100th Consecutive Day
                                       Policies Issued       Policies Issued     Prediction w/ “positive
Covariates in Regression
                                         1997 - 2001          1997 or 1998            correlation”
                                   Coeff        Std err  Coeff          Std err
Issue Age Category:
    Age < 60 (omitted)                    --            --             --             --
    Age 60-64                            1.199***       (0.423)        1.039**        (0.505)
    Age 65-69                            1.729***       (0.423)        1.798***       (0.475)
    Age 70-74                            2.944***       (0.400)        2.928***       (0.469)
    Age 75+                              4.010***       (0.403)        3.913***       (0.473)
Rating Category:
    High risk (omitted)                  --             --             --             --
    Rated low risk                       -1.100***      (0.259)        -0.964***      (0.322)
    Rated standard risk                  -0.535***      (0.175)        -0.562***      (0.200)
Deductible:
    100-day deductible (omitted)         --             --             --             --
    60-day deductible                    0.024          (0.208)        -0.030         (0.252)     Positive
    20-day deductible                    0.233          (0.238)        0.312          (0.268)     Positive; > 60-day
Daily Benefit:
    Daily benefit ≤ $100 (omitted)       --             --             --             --
    Daily Benefit = $100                 0.095          (0.127)        -0.007         (0.141)     Positive
    Daily Benefit > $100                 0.240*         (0.134)        0.143          (0.151)     Positive; > $100
Benefit Period:
    1-4 years, no extension (omitted)    --             --             --             --
    1-4 years, possible extension        -0.306         (0.207)        -0.509**       (0.254)     Positive
    5+ years, no extension               -0.391**       (0.162)        -0.543         (0.193)     Positive
    5+ years, possible extension         -0.160         (0.343)        -0.257         (0.389)     Positive; > 5+ no ext
    Unlimited                            0.168          (0.153)        0.075          (0.175      Positive; > 5+ w/ ext
Escalation of Benefits:
    “Index option” (omitted)             --             --             --             --
    5% compound escalation               -0.102         (0.236)        -0.254         0.288       Negative
    5% “simple” escalation               0.111          (0.131)        0.016          (0.154)     Neg; < 5% compound
 No escalation                           0.335          (0.333)        --                         Neg; < all others
Failure Rate                                        0.3%                         0.6%
N                                                 144,798                       49,888
Note: Estimation from a Cox proportional hazard model. Also included are: indicators of issue year, whether the
policy is tax qualified, frequency of policy premium payments, whether the policy has a “shared care” rider benefit
(which makes the spouse eligible for the policy benefits if the individual dies within a specified time period after
policy issue), and whether the home health care benefits are lower than (rather than equal to) the nursing home
benefits. We do not include the home health care daily benefit separately because the correlation between daily
benefit for home health care and daily benefit for nursing home is 0.92.
                                                                                                                  39
                             Table 3: Means of Variables Used in the Analysis
Variable                                         Whole Sample            Insured                Uninsured
Any NH Utilization (1995 – 2000)                 0.187                   0.146                  0.191
Total # of nights in NH (1995 – 2000)            32.7                    20.67                  33.9
Long-term care insurance coverage (1995)         0.103                   1.00                   0.00
Demographics (1995)
  Age                                            78.6                    77.4                   78.8
  Female                                         0.63                    0.61                   0.64
  Married                                        0.54                    0.60                   0.54
  Spouse’s age (if married)                      73.8                    73.3                   73.9
  Household Assets (median)                      138,000                 218,000                130,100
  Household Income (median)                      18,000                  25,000                 17,000
Current Health (1995):
  ADL limitation: bathing                        0.11                    0.08                   0.12
  ADL limitation: eating                         0.05                    0.04                   0.05
  ADL limitation: dressing                       0.13                    0.09                   0.14
  ADL limitation: toileting                      0.08                    0.07                   0.08
  ADL limitation: walking                        0.10                    0.06                   0.10
  Incontinence                                   0.22                    0.25                   0.21
  Cognitively impaired                           0.03                    0.02                   0.03
  Use wheelchair                                 0.03                    0.03                   0.03
  Use walker                                     0.07                    0.03                   0.08
  Use crutches                                   0.003                   0.002                  0.004
  Use cane                                       0.13                    0.09                   0.13
  Use oxygen                                     0.01                    0.008                  0.01
  Regularly use prescription drugs               0.79                    0.82                   0.78
  IADL limitation: grocery shopping              0.15                    0.11                   0.15
  IADL limitation: managing medication           0.05                    0.03                   0.05
  Low BMI                                        0.10                    0.09                   0.10
  High BMI                                       0.13                    0.09                   0.14
  Currently smoke                                0.08                    0.09                   0.08
Health History (1995 and before):
  Home Health Care Use                           0.17                    0.13                   0.17
  Nursing Home Use                               0.02                    0.03                   0.02
  Depression                                     0.19                    0.14                   0.20
  Drinking Problem                               0.03                    0.04                   0.03
  Diabetes                                       0.14                    0.12                   0.14
  Diabetes treated with insulin                  0.05                    0.04                   0.05
  Kidney Failure Assoc w. Diabetes               0.02                    0.01                   0.02
  Stroke                                         0.12                    0.09                   0.12
  Heart condition                                0.34                    0.32                   0.34
  Medication for heart problem                   0.22                    0.20                   0.22
  Heart Attack                                   0.09                    0.08                   0.09
  Congestive Heart Failure                       0.04                    0.04                   0.04
  High Blood Pressure                            0.54                    0.59                   0.53
  Hip fracture                                   0.05                    0.05                   0.05
  Lung Disease                                   0.12                    0.13                   0.12
  Cancer                                         0.16                    0.17                   0.16
  Psychiatric problems                           0.15                    0.16                   0.14
  Arthritis                                      0.54                    0.49                   0.54
  Injury from falling                            0.15                    0.15                   0.15
Note: All means are weighted. See Appendix A for our construction of cognitive impairment, depression, drinking
problem, and household assets. All of the listed control variables are used in the “all observables” specification.

                                                                                                                  40
                                                Table 4
                   Long-term Care Insurance Coverage and Utilization in the AHEAD Data

Dependent Variable      No Controls        Controls for         Controls for “all     Controls for insurance
                                           Age Dummies          observables”          company prediction
                               (1)               (2)                   (3)                          (4)

                                                    Entire Sample

Any nursing home        -0.045***          -0.016               -0.001                -0.012
utilization             (0.016)            (0.015)              (0.015)               (0.015)
                        [N=6,280]          [N=6,280]            [N=6,083]             [N=6,275]

Number of nights        -71.589***         -28.853              -15.673               -30.067
spent in nursing        (25.774)           (25.099)             (25.241)              (24.762)
home                    [N=6,189]          [N=6,189]            [N=5,998]             [N=6,181]


             Restricted to those for whom Medicaid is not a close substitute for private insurance

Any nursing home        -0.045**           -0.032*              -0.028                -0.026
utilization             (0.018)            (0.018)              (0.017)               (0.017)
                        [N=2,161]          [N=2,161]            [N=2,123]             [N=2,161]

Number of nights        -91.087***         -64.487*             -64.626*              -70.576**
spent in nursing        (35.391)           (34.347)             (33.063)              (34.183)
home                    [N=2,140]          [N=2,140]            [N=2,103]             [N=2,140]
Notes: Each cell reports the coefficient on LTCINS from estimating equation (2) on a specific dependent variable and
definition of the set of control variables. The column headings describe the set of control variables used. See text and
Appendix for detailed description of these covariates. When the dependent variable is “any nursing home utilization”,
reported coefficients are from a linear probability model. When the dependent variable is “number of nights spent in
nursing home”, the reported coefficients are from a Tobit model. Heteroskedacticity-adjusted robust standard errors are in
parentheses. ***, **, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent level respectively.
Restricted sample (“those for whom Medicaid is not a close substitute”) consists of those in the top quartile of the
distribution of income or wealth. In the full sample, the mean of any nursing home utilization is 0.19 and the mean number
of nights spent in a nursing home is 33. In the restricted sample (“those for whom Medicaid is not a close substitute”) the
means of these two dependent variables are, respectively, 0.13 and 17.




                                                                                                                        41
                                                                          Table 5
                                                       Individuals’ predictions of nursing home entry

                                                                                     Control Variables

                                    No Controls                 Age Dummies                 “All observables”              Insurance Company Prediction
                                (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)           (9)

Individual’s Prediction
Continuous measure          0.097***                       0.073***                     0.041*                         0.044**
                            (0.024)                        (0.023)                      (0.022)                        (0.022)
Categorical measure

    Predicts 0 (omitted)                   --                            --                            --                             --

    Predicts 1 to 49                       -0.019                        -0.004                        0.003                          -0.004
                                           (0.012)                       (0.011)                       (0.011)                        (0.011)

    Predicts 50 to 100                     0.062***                      0.047***                      0.032**                        0.033**
                                           (0.015)                       (0.015)                       (0.014)                        (0.015)

Actuarial Prediction                                                                                                   0.501***       0.498***       0.507***
                                                                                                                       (0.029)        (0.029)        (0.028)

R2                          0.004          0.007           0.104         0.104          0.169          0.169           0.100          0.100          0.099
N                           5,072          5,072           5,072         5,072          4,960          4,960           5,072          5,072          5,072
Note: Reported coefficients are from linear estimation of equation (3). Dependent variable is whether individual enters nursing home over subsequent five years;
mean is 0.16. “Continuous measure” of individual’s prediction uses the individual’s reported prediction, rescaled to range from 0 to 1. When categorical measure of
beliefs is used instead, the omitted category is “individual predicts 0”. The column headings describe the additional covariates included in the regression.
Heteroskedacticity-adjusted robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent level
respectively.

                                                                                                                                                                 42
                                                                    Table 6
                               The Relationship between Insurance Coverage and Individuals Beliefs about Risk Type

                                                                                     Control Variables
                                                                                                                                       Insurance Company
                                    No Controls                      Age Dummies                       “All observables”
                                                                                                                                            Prediction
Coefficient                      (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)             (8)

Individual’s Prediction
Continuous measure          0.090***                         0.095***                          0.095***                           0.103**
                            (0.020)                          (0.020)                           (0.020)                            (0.020)
Categorical measure

    Predicts 0 (omitted)                     --                                --                                --                                --

    Predicts 1 to 49                         0.063***                          0.059***                          0.048***
                                                                                                                                                   0.059***
                                             (0.011)                           (0.011)                           (0.011)
                                                                                                                                                   (0.011)
    Predicts 50 to 100                       0.067***                          0.070***                          0.069**                           0.074***
                                             (0.013)                           (0.013)                           (0.013)                           (0.013)

Actuarial Prediction                                                                                                              -0.122***        -0.114***
                                                                                                                                  (0.017)          (0.017)

R2                          0.005            0.011           0.013             0.018           0.050             0.052            0.013            0.017
N                           5,072            5,072           5,072             5,072           4,960             4,960            5,072            5,072
Note: Reported coefficients are from linear estimation of equation (4). Dependent variable is whether the individual has LTC insurance; mean is 0.11. See notes to
table 5 for more details.




                                                                                                                                                                 43
                                               Table 7
          Decomposing the Relationship between Utilization of Nursing Home Care and Insurance

                                                  Control Variables
                                            No Controls     Age Dummies               “All                 Insurance
                                                                                      Observables”         Company
                                                                                                           Prediction
IV. Instruments: Continuous                 1.079***             0.767***             0.435*               0.428*
Measure of Beliefs, 1995                    (0.356)              (0.288)              (0.251)              (0.233)

IV. Instruments: Categorical                0.262                0.324*               0.335*               0.231
Measure of Beliefs, 1995                    (0.176)              (0.172)              (0.190)              (0.164)

IV. Instruments: Continuous                 1.148***             0.743***             0.514***             0.586***
Measure of Beliefs, 1995 and 1993           (0.297)              (0.225)              (0.208)              (0.202)

IV. Instruments: Categorical                0.276*               0.273**              0.359**              0.256*
Measure of Beliefs, 1995 and 1993           (0.149)              (0.142)              (0.166)              (0.140)

OLS                                         -0.046***            -0.023               -0.007               -0.017
                                            (0.015)              (0.015)              (0.015)              (0.014)
Notes: Table reports the results of estimating equation (2) with the dependent variable is “any nursing home entry.” Each
cell reports the coefficient on LTCINS; heteroskedacticity-adjusted robust standard error are in parentheses. The first four
rows report the results of IV estimation with the instruments as described in the first column. For comparison, the last row
reports the OLS estimates of equation (2) when the sample is restricted to individuals for whom 1995 beliefs are available.
The column headings describe the additional covariates included in the regression. ***, **, * denotes statistical
significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                                                                                          44
                                                                           Table 8: Preference-based Selection

                                                                                                              Control Variables

                                             No Controls                                  Age Dummies                                “All Observables”                      Insurance Company Prediction
                                NH                             NH              NH                             NH             NH                           NH             NH                            NH
                                             LTCINS                                           LTCINS                                       LTCINS                                       LTCINS
                               ENTRY                          ENTRY           ENTRY                          ENTRY          ENTRY                        ENTRY          ENTRY                         ENTRY
                                  (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)           (10)            (11)         (12)
 Preventive Activity         -0.111***       0.064***                       -0.036**        0.051***                      -0.019         0.013                        -0.055***       0.051***
                             (0.019)         (0.016)                        (0.018)         (0.016)                       (0.019)        (0.017)                      (0.018)         (0.016)

 Individual Prediction       0.102***        0.087***                       0.072***        0.091***                      0.040*         0.095***                     0.048**         0.099***
                             (0.024)         (0.020)                        (0.023)         (0.120)                       (0.022)        (0.020)                      (0.023)         (0.020)

 LTCINS_HATPREVENT                                          -1.433***                                      -0.708***                                     -0.434                                      -0.771***
                                                            (0.226)                                        (0.244)                                       (0.349)                                     (0.251)

 LTCINS_HATRISKTYPE                                         1.122***                                       0.781***                                      0.405*                                      0.460**
                                                            (0.270)                                        (0.246)                                       (0.232)                                     (0.228)

 LTCINS_RESID                                               -0.040***                                      -0.022                                        -0.007                                      -0.013
                                                            (0.015)                                        (0.015)                                       (0.015)                                     (0.015)

 N                           5,010           5,010          5,010           5,010           5,010          5,010          4,900          4,900           4,900        5,010           5,010          5,010

Note: All estimates are from a linear probability model. The column headings describe the additional covariates included in the regression and, below that, the dependent variable. Columns
(1), (4), (7), and (10) report the results from estimating equation (5); the dependent variable is nursing home entry. Columns (2), (5), (8), and (11) report the results from estimating equation
(6); the dependent variable is insurance coverage. “Preventive activity” measures the fraction of gender-appropriate preventive health activity undertaken by the individual. All regressions
also include a control for sex because the fraction of potential preventive activity undertaken may vary with sex simply because the number of potential preventive activities is 3 for men
and 5 for women. “Individual prediction” measures the individual’s continuous prediction. LTCINS_HATPREVENT, LTCINS_HATRISKTYPE and LTCINS_RESID are generated based on the
results from estimating the insurance coverage equation (6) and reflect the variation in insurance coverage that is explained, respectively, by “Preventive activity”, the individual’s beliefs
about his risk type, and the variation unexplained by either preventive activity, individual beliefs, or the risk classification controls. Heteroskedacticity-adjusted robust standard errors are
in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                              45
Appendix A: The AHEAD Sample and Variable Definitions.

Sample definition: Our sample is drawn from the original Asset and Health Dynamics (AHEAD) cohort
of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). This consists of a representative sample of individuals born in
1923 or earlier, and their spouses.28 The AHEAD respondents were interviewed in 1993, 1995, 1998 and
2000. For reasons discussed below, we restrict our analysis to data from 1995 to 2000. We also exclude
the 3 percent of original respondents who were in a nursing home in 1995. Non-death (i.e. “real”) attrition
is just over 4 percent from 1995 and 2000. All of our estimates from the AHEAD data are weighted using
the 1995 household weights.

Key independent variable: Long-term care insurance: We measure individuals’ insurance coverage in
1995, the first wave for which reliable information is available. Our indicator variable LTCINS is coded 1
if the individual answers yes to the following question:

        R15: Aside from the government programs, do you now have any insurance which specifically
        pays any part of long-term care, such as, personal or medical care in the home or in a nursing
        home?

Although a few papers have used answers to questions about long-term care insurance in the 1993 wave
(see e.g. Norton and Sloan 1997 or Mellor 2001) we are uncomfortable with this measure. In that year the
survey asked specifically about a variety of types of health insurance and then asked if the respondent had
any (other) type of insurance:

        R6. Do you have any (other) type of health insurance coverage?

        R7. What kind of coverage do you have? It is basic health insurance, a supplement to Medicare
        (MEDIGAP) or to other health insurance, long-term care insurance, or what?

The question thus does not specifically target long-term care insurance coverage. It yields an estimated
coverage rate of just over 2 percent, substantially below what other analyses have indicated for this time
period. By contrast, the reported coverage rate using the 1995 measure (10 percent) matches other
existing estimates (see e.g. Cohen, forthcoming and citations therein). Our concern about the accuracy of
the 1993 long-term care insurance measure was corroborated in email correspondence with David Weir,
Assistant Director of HRS (April 2002).

Construction of some of the health measures collected by insurance companies
Cognition: We follow Mehta et al. (2002) who work specifically with AHEAD and define an individual
as cognitively impaired if he has a score of 8 or less (out of 35) on the Telephone Interview for Cognitive
Status (TICS). For proxy interviews, cognitive impairment is based on assessments offered by the proxy.
Depression: We again follow Meta et al. (2002) and define depression as a score of 3 or greater (out of 8)
on the CES-D8. This measure is not available for proxy respondents. For the 9% of the sample who were
interviewed by proxy, we set the depression measure to zero and include an indicator for proxy interview.
Drinking problem: We define a drinking problem as 3 or more drinks per day.
Assets. Household assets are defined as total bequeathable assets (including housing wealth but not Social
Security or Defined Benefit pension wealth) less debts.



28
  A younger cohort, born in the years 1931-1941, was interviewed for the companion HRS survey. We use the
AHEAD cohort because the HRS cohort was not asked to report their subjective probability of entering a nursing
home (the key variable for the analysis in Section 4) until later waves.


                                                                                                                 46
