                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE ECONOMICS OF IDENTITY AND THE ENDOGENEITY OF RACE

                                         Howard Bodenhorn
                                        Christopher S. Ruebeck

                                          Working Paper 9962
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9962


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




We thank Susan Averett, Siddharth Chandra, Price Fishback, Ronald Oaxaca, Robert Margo, Gregory Price,
Peter Temin, Melissa Thomasson, Robert Whaples, as well as seminar participants at George Mason
University’s Public Choice Center, the 2003 ASSA meetings, and the NBER/DAE for many useful
comments. Bodenhorn thanks the National Science Foundation (SES-0109165) and the Earhart Foundation
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Howard Bodenhorn and Christopher S. Ruebeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Identity and the Endogeneity of Race
Howard Bodenhorn and Christopher S. Ruebeck
NBER Working Paper No. 9962
September 2003
JEL No. N3, J7

                                          ABSTRACT

Economic and social theorists have modeled race and ethnicity as a form of personal identity

produced in recognition of the costliness of adopting and maintaining a specific identity. These

models of racial and ethnic identity recognize that race and ethnicity are potentially endogenous

because racial and ethnic identities are fluid. We look at the free African-American population in

the mid-nineteenth century to investigate the costs and benefits of adopting alternative racial

identities. We model the choice as an extensive-form game, where whites choose to accept or reject

a separate mulatto identity and mixed race individuals then choose whether or not to adopt that

mulatto identity. Adopting a mulatto identity generates pecuniary gains, but imposes psychic costs.

Our empirical results imply that race is contextual and that there was a large pecuniary benefit to

adopting a mixed-race identity.


Howard Bodenhorn
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042
and NBER
bodenhoh@lafayette.edu

Christopher S. Ruebeck
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042
ruebeckc@lafayette.edu
                The Economics of Identity and the Endogeneity of Race


                                                                              Identity! My God!
                                                        Who has any identity anymore anyway?
                                                                    It isn’t so perfectly simple.
                                                          -Ralph Ellison, Invisible Man (1952)


   1. Introduction

       Economic and social theorists have modeled race and ethnicity as a form of personal

identity adopted in response to the costliness of maintaining a specific identity (Hechter,

Friedman, and Appelbaum 1982; Stewart 1997; Mason 2001; Akerlof and Kranton 2000; Darity,

Mason, and Stewart 2002). These models of racial and ethnic identity recognize that race and

ethnicity is contextual because racial and ethnic identities are fluid (McElreath, Boyd, and

Richerson, undated). Harris and Sim (2001) report recent evidence of this fluidity among

contemporary mixed black-white youth. Although 75 percent of today’s mixed black-white

children self-identify as black, 17 percent self-identify as white, and the remaining 8 percent

prefer not to select a single racial designation. About 10 percent of mixed-race youth adopt one

racial designation at school and a different one at home. It is evident that among modern mixed-

race youth racial identification is contextual.

       Racial and ethnic self-identification have economic consequences because the choice of

self-identity is likely to be entwined with the acceptance of and acculturation into dominant

social norms. If race or ethnicity is endogenous in certain circumstances, a self-identity may or

may not be selected to distance oneself from a subordinate group or to improve one’s standing

with or acceptance into the dominant group. In a study of people of Mexican descent, Mason

(2001) tests a model in which acculturation is a dominant strategy, and finds that light-

                                                  -3-
complected people of Mexican descent may acculturate more easily. Murguia and Telles (1996)

report different educational opportunities for Mexicans of light and dark complexion and argue

that these may result from conscious choices. Phenotypic differences, they argue, influence

individual strategies.   Light-skinned people of Mexican descent learn early in life that by

assimilating or acculturating they can defuse negative stereotypes and attain more than their

dark-complected counterparts. Later in life, light-skinned Mexicans are able to increase their

incomes by adopting a non-Hispanic white identity (Mason 2001). Yet there may also be

situations in which members of the subordinate group decide to maintain identities separate from

the dominant group.

       Our study considers the choices and life chances of black and mixed black-white

individuals residing in the urban U.S. South prior to the Civil War. The experience of mixed

black-white individuals in this period is particularly germane to the study of the social and

economic consequences of racial identification because the so-called one-drop rule was not yet

firmly established. Most Upper South states legally adopted a one-fourth rule separating black

from white.1 But the line was not as sharply drawn because the dominant white culture accepted

mixed-race people as a separate class. As Williamson (1984, p. 13) notes for Virginia, “there

were some people who were significantly black, visibly black, and known to be black, but by the

law of the land and the rulings of the courts had the privileges of whites.” Lower South states

generally adopted no formal definition of “whiteness,” and were even more accepting of a

separate mixed-race or mulatto class.    “Known and visible mulattoes could by behavior and

reputation be ‘white’” (Williamson 1984, p. 19). Acculturation was an option for at least some

mixed-race people living in the antebellum South.



                                                -4-
        We first model a mixed-race individual’s choice of self-identity. Acculturation brought a

degree of acceptance from the dominant white community, which opened the door to a wider set

of economic opportunities, but acculturation carried an implicit cost, namely that by adopting the

norms of the dominant white culture (dress, language, mannerisms, religious affiliation, group

membership, etc.), the individual alienated himself or herself from the black community. To the

extent that the recognition of an individual’s heritage generates utility, the rejection of black

culture was costly.

    We then test the model empirically. We find that African Americans were more likely to

identify as mulatto when there were already a substantial number of other mulattos who had

formed social networks and established a community. Yet, the probability of declaring a mulatto

identity declined with the size and extent of the African-American community. We interpret this

to mean that if blacks ostracized mulattos for separating themselves socially and economically,

then the larger the black community (holding the number of mulatto households constant) the

more costly it was to be ostracized. Similarly, whites became less accepting of a mulatto’s

distinctiveness as the city became increasingly African American and thus showed mulattos

fewer preferences.

    Once we demonstrate that the choice of a mulatto identity was associated with racial

composition of the individual’s neighborhood and city, we then investigate the economic

consequences of adopting a mulatto identity. 2 We estimate differences in wealth between blacks

and mulattoes and find that mixed-race householders, both male and female, accumulated more


    1
       That is, anyone with at least one black grandparent was considered black.
    2
       It is likely that these two measures are jointly determined. If the wage differential that can be received by
individuals choosing to “pass” increases, this will cause more to make this choice. If more individuals choose to
pass, this will change the wage differential. We return to this concern in our discussion of community effects and in
our closing remarks.
                                                          -5-
wealth than black householders. Regression decompositions suggest that a substantial portion of

the wealth gap was due to racial identification and to community factors. Consistent with our

model, we find that mixed-race people realized smaller advantages relative to blacks as the size

of the African-American community increased both absolutely and relatively. Thus, mixed-race

people benefited when they could form a distinct intermediate racial class, standing between the

dominant white and subordinate black communities.



   2. The Economic and Social Consequences of Complexion

       Social scientists have long concerned themselves with the consequences of the social

construct of complexion in a community with mixed-race people (Reuter 1918). Recent work

recognizes, however, that racial identity is endogenous or contextual (Stewart 1997; Akerloff and

Kranton 2000; Mason 2001; Darity, Mason and Stewart 2002). An individual faces some leeway

in the racial or ethnic identity he or she adopts subject to social and legal conventions. For

instance, an individual of African-American heritage may identify as mixed-race but not as

white, in most cases.

       What is the incentive for mixed-race individuals to create a separate collective identity

and then claim membership in it? Social scientists have developed a number of answers. Harris

(1993) and McAdams (1995) develop status-based explanations. McAdams (1995, p. 1031)

contends that individuals seek two things: the esteem of others and social status.        Group

membership is an important source of esteem and status and individuals will make personal

sacrifices to raise the status of their own group and diminish that of others. Thus mulattos in

early America raised their own position by physically, socially, and culturally separating



                                                -6-
themselves from blacks. In Charleston, mixed-race African-Americans operated a social and

literary club, the Brown Fellowship Society, which excluded dark-complected blacks. Similarly,

Harris (1993, p. 1736) contends that the true benefit of “whiteness” is the right of exclusion;

membership is closely guarded. Whiteness inhered certain privileges, some of which mulattos

enjoyed that blacks did not. In some parts of the antebellum South, for example, mulattos

retained the right to vote, to own certain kinds of property (including slaves), obtain an

education, and pursue high-status occupations, most of which were unavailable to dark-

complected blacks.    Consistent with Harris’s theory, mulattos cultivated relationships with

whites, achieved some measure of “whiteness,” and actively excluded blacks from the enjoyment

of similar privileges. Indeed, Johnson (1996, p.117) concludes that within Savannah’s African-

American community, “color was a greater obstacle to social interaction among people of

African origin than either culture or language.”

       Hechter (1988, p. 270) contends that the formation of separate racial and ethnic identities

can be valuable when agents will trade only within a racially or ethnically homogeneous network

because laws, norms, customs and traditions outside the network are unknown, poorly

developed, or unsuited to trading patterns within the network. Greif (1994) has shown that

ethnic networks that adopt a common set of institutional rules reduce the cost of coordination

and enforcement. Thus, in the antebellum South, whites may have been more receptive to the

inclusion of mulattos into their social and economic circles because they assumed that having a

white parent promoted a respect for the institutional conventions observed in the white

community. Horton (1993, p. 122) argues that most early American whites “believed that the

infusion of ‘white blood’ increased their ability and civility.” A study of modern populations



                                                   -7-
reports that mixed-race people who grow up in predominantly white environments report low

identification with other blacks (Hall 1995).

       For African-Americans, the economic advantages of mixed-race heritage and light skin

date back to slavery. Reuter (1918) and Frazier (1957), among others, argue that a light-skinned

advantage appeared early in the slavery era when masters selected some fair complected blacks

to work as house servants and field foremen, and provided others with craft training. Fair

complexion increased a slave’s life chances, by significantly reducing his or her toil and

drudgery, by improving his or her access to food and shelter, by exposure to the culture, manner

and language of the dominant class, and by increasing his or her chances of manumission. By

the mid-nineteenth century, the mulatto advantage was institutionalized throughout the South.

       Although Jim Crow eliminated any legally recognized complexion differences (Davis

1991; Penha-Lopes 1996), social and economic differences persisted within the African

American community. Sociological studies beginning in the 1960s found that modern mixed-

race people earned higher incomes, accumulated more wealth, received better educations,

worked at better jobs, and even improved their marriage chances. Freeman et al. (1966) found

that more educated women had lighter complected husbands, more educated men had lighter

complected wives, and that lighter complected individuals of either sex tended to be more

educated. In the mid-1960s, skin color connoted class in the African-American community,

because dark-skinned men worked at predominantly blue-collar jobs. The intra-group preference

for light-skinned, even white, marriage partners dates back to the mid-nineteenth century.

Bogger (1997, p. 136) bluntly states that by giving them a white father, black women in

antebellum Virginia provided their children a substantial social advantage. In the modern



                                                -8-
context, the desire to marry light is labeled the ‘bleaching syndrome’ and it remains a powerful

impulse (Hall 1995). To Freeman et al. (1966, p. 374) this intra-group preference toward light

complexions implies that “the skin color of the middle-income Negro represents an important

objective status in a contextual sense; that is, it operates as do other family status indicators to

limit and outline the course of their lives both within the Negro community and the larger

American society.”

    The statistical discrimination literature pioneered by Phelps (1972) and Arrow (1973)

provides a context for light-skinned advantages. If the manner in which ability is measured

provides a noisy signal that differs in some way between whites and blacks, then the gradation of

mixed-race individuals’ skin color of may be manifested in gradations of economic opportunity.

As Schelling (1978) observed, people may rely on “information that is color-discriminating.” If

enough people believe that dark-skinned individuals are somehow different from light-skinned

individuals, whether economically, socially or intellectually, the population at large will tend to

consciously or unconsciously adopt those same markers as emblematic of status or ability.

        African-Americans internalize the preference for light skin because it is consistent with

the preferences of the dominant culture. Unlike the experience of members of the dominant

group, however, internalization of the fair complexion ideal among African-Americans generates

intra-group conflict because complexion is verifiable by sight whereas assimilation is verifiable

only by action.3 Color, not action or qualifications, may then be the primary criterion used by the

dominant culture to assess the potential for assimilation of African-Americans, and it may

influence the distribution of rewards. Such attitudes and actions by the dominant group are


    3
      Moreover, the extent to which there is repeated interaction—with members of both the dominant and
subordinate cultures—will affect the ease with which a person assimilates. The frequency of interaction may
depend on community size.
                                                     -9-
divisive within the subordinate group because attitudes in the dominant culture generate

advantages for one segment of the African-American community based solely on skin tone.

       Indeed, the divisive nature of complexion within the African-American community is

much commented on, by psychologists, philosophers, sociologists, even by novelists, poets and

playwrights. Langston Hughes, noted writer of the Harlem Renaissance, regularly wrote about

jealousies surrounding skin tone. Graham (1999) discusses the continued preference for light

complexion among wealthy African Americans. In 2002 Dwight Birch, a dark-skinned black,

filed an EEOC complaint under Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. He claims that a light-

skinned African-American manager of a Jonesboro, Georgia restaurant discriminated against him

based on his skin color.

       Thus, black on black discrimination, while rooted in history, is not a mere historical

curiosity. In discussing the phenomenon, Penha-Lopes (1996, p. 817) relates an old African-

American adage: “Black is evil, yallah is low-down, look here, honey, ain’t you glad you

brown.” Zack (1993, p. 39) is more explicit if less folksy. She argues that any person who would

be considered black by other blacks assumes a white or partly white racial designation from

members of the white community is “not to be trusted.” So while there may be an economic

advantage in adopting a part-white identity, there is a potentially large social cost in doing so.

The dominant white culture may reward assimilation (to a point), but blacks often punish it. We

accept that there was a comparable tradeoff in the late antebellum period, and investigate its

implications. In the next section we model an individual’s decision to adopt a black or mulatto

identity using game-theoretic techniques. Later sections estimate the economic extent of the

mulatto advantage in late antebellum America.



                                                -10-
   3. A Game in Extensive Form

       The issue of identity is tightly linked with discrimination because the recognition of an

individual’s identity is required for discrimination to occur.          This is more basic than

discrimination, and allows the decisions of a group to limit the availability of opportunities to

another group in addition to limiting the opportunities available to members of one’s own group.

As Arrow (1972) remarks, “Why certain kinds of groups perceive themselves as having common

interests and not others is a question on which economics does not seem likely to throw much

light. But given group identification, it is not so unreasonable that members of the group will

work together to promote group interests, even though it would pay any individual to depart from

them.” [Emphasis in the original.]

       The effects of identity become more complex once we recognize that there is some

degree to which individuals can construct their identity. In particular, if there are pecuniary gains

to taking on a particular identity, but psychic costs to doing so, then there may be some group

members who choose to forgo the gains and maintain their original identity. In essence, then, the

question of identity reduces to one of group attachment or membership.

       Two basic forces are referenced in models of identity.           First, members of a more

powerful group may receive a sense of identity by defining themselves in reference to the less-

powerful group or groups. This could either be for psychic or pecuniary benefit. Second,

members of the less-powerful group internalize their identity, causing them to incur a psychic

cost that may hinder their choice of improving their economic status. The models available in

the literature focus on these forces in differing degrees. Because adopting their mechanics in full



                                                  -11-
would add little to our discussion, we summarize their results and then present a simple model of

interaction that captures the key features we wish to study.

        Evolutionary models can study a population’s long-run identity equilibria when

individuals are allowed to choose their membership. McElreath, Boyd, and Richerson (undated)

assume that social norms exist but individuals interact with groups other than their own as well

as those who share their norms. Although the norms enhance a member’s interaction within the

group, they simultaneously make interacting with outsiders less desirable. Thus the outward

markers that indicate an individual’s type persist and are favored by natural selection when

successful individuals’ behaviors are imitated. The theoretical results not only reinforce the idea

that an emphasis on skin color may be adopted as a marker of membership but indicate as well

that other traits may evolve to enhance the identification of those with similar norms. In

particular, additional markers, such as speech or dress, may be adopted which exclude those who

have chosen to pass by virtue of their lighter skin color.

        Darity, Mason, and Stewart (2002) also employ an evolutionary model to explore

individuals’ choices in adopting racist or tolerant attitudes towards those that are not members of

their group. Their assumption that one group operates from a position of power drives the

prediction that it will use identifying traits to exclude the disadvantaged group from power. Their

model also illustrates a mechanism for the adoption of traits rather then the exploitation of

existing traits and social status.

        Akerlof and Kranton (2000) address the economic consequences of identity. Their model

generates steady states in the population’s mix of identities by considering equilibria in groups of

individuals choosing identity and action. Similarly, Austen-Smith and Fryer (2002) model these



                                                  -12-
forces in the context of education. They state that the “central underlying idea of ‘acting white’

is that individuals face a tension between signaling their type to the outside labor market and

signaling their type to a peer group: signals that induce high wages can be signals that induce

peer rejection.” What potentially induces peer rejection in their model is effort in school, which

is interpreted by blacks as ‘acting white.’ Effort is known to enhance opportunities, but these

enhanced future opportunities must be weighed against the loss of group attachment that occurs

when good students are ostracized by their peers. Austen-Smith and Freyer assume a continuum

of abilities among the school-age population and find that there will be capable students who

exert little effort as well as those who select higher levels of effort consistent with ability. This

weighing of opportunity and ostracism is one of the principle issues to be explained when

considering the economics of identity. As in Austen-Smith and Freyer, it is central to our model.

        Austen-Smith and Fryer do not assume that firms use discriminatory hiring practices.

Rather, it is the much commented on loss of membership in or attachment to a community that

motivates an individual to forgo the pecuniary benefits of investing in skills and the search for

employment using those skills.4 Such an assumption may be justified when modeling modern

job markets, because some employers may prefer to hire an individual that is a member of a

minority group, ceteris paribus, to satisfy affirmative action requirements. A similar motivation

is less likely to have been operative in the 1860’s, when the identity of whites also was at stake


    4
      James Baldwin wrote that those who cross the line ‘do so at the grave expense of double alienation’ (quoted in
Talty 2003, p. 144). Baldwin was reflecting on the risks of selecting a part-white identity. There was no guarantee
that whites would embrace and reward a person’s intention to assimilate to the white norm, but there was a good
chance that blacks would reject and punish assimilators when they interacted with members of the black community.
Mixed-race individuals who professed their ‘blackness’, on the other hand, faced fewer opportunities in white
society, but were more accepted in black society. It is interesting to note, in this regard, that W.E.B. Du Bois and
Booker T. Washington made social and political statements with their choices of identity. Du Bois downplayed his
white heritage and addressed a largely black audience. Booker T. Washington used his part-white heritage to gain
access to a white audience. Du Bois and Washington are still viewed very differently by African-American scholars.
We thank Gregory Price for reminding us of this.
                                                         -13-
to the extent that recognizing a mulatto’s whiteness diluted the value of whiteness in the white

community.

        The differing social costs in our data would have similar effects in these more detailed

evolutionary and game theoretic models: increasing the loss of identity suffered by either group

would decrease mulattos’ ability to increase their wealth. We thus lose little in using the

parsimonious structure of formalizing one group’s advantage as its ability to move first in an

extensive form game.

        In Figure 1, the position of power occupied by the majority is reflected in its position in

the game. By moving first, those in the majority can anticipate the effect their choice will have

on the lower class. The choice that the white individual faces is to either deny or recognize a

mixed-race individual’s whiteness, presumably by employing them in a manner identical to or

different from the manner in which a black individual would be employed. There is a direct

advantage as well as an indirect disadvantage to the employer in doing so. First, the lower social

status of the mixed-race individual allows the employer to pay them for duties that otherwise

would require hiring a white employee at a higher wage. Yet by choosing to recognize the

mixed-race individual’s non-black heritage, the employer is also decreasing the extent to which

he can feel superior to the members of a lower class in society.5




    5
      We have anthropomorphised the population as an individual, but this is common in both the formal and
informal modeling of the literature to greater or lesser degree (usually greater, if only implicitly).
                                                    -14-
                                           White


                                  Reject               Accept

                                           Mixed-race

                 Mulatto       Black                     Mulatto    Black


        πH, wL – IB               πL, wL        πH – IW, wH – IB       πL – IW, wL
  Figure 1. An extensive form game in which White moves first, choosing to ‘Accept’ or
  ‘Reject’. Mixed-race moves second, choosing ‘Mulatto’ or ‘Black’. Payoffs to White
  are given first. The payoffs are related as follows: πH > πL > 0, wH > wL > 0, IW > 0, and
  IB > 0.




       Using this model, we can address the following questions: (1) Why would a mixed-race

individual choose to play Black even when the white population might accept them and thus

provide opportunities to increase income and accumulate more wealth? (2) Why would the

white majority choose not to hire a mixed-race individual in place of a white individual when

doing so would provide an economic benefit to them?

       The answer to the first question is that the black individuals may face too high a psychic

cost due to their loss of attachment to a larger community of African-Americans. The increase in

wage (wH – wL) would not compensate for the loss in identity (IB) resulting from diminished

acceptance within the black community, even when whites choose Accept. This cost may be

diminished, however, when more mixed-race individuals choose to play Mulatto.

       The second question is potentially more interesting. In a sense, the mixed-race individual

would like to play Mulatto rather than Black, but this outcome is not subgame perfect if the

                                                -15-
white population has chosen not to favor individuals publicly adopting a mixed-race identity

(Reject). Whites will choose Reject when the loss to white identity (IW) exceeds the potential

increase in owners’ profits (πH – πL). This may be a result of the black population being largely

mixed-race and not affording the (white) business owners sufficient identity advantage relative to

a black underclass. Given rejection, the wage (wL) that mulattos are able to earn is no better than

the wage earned by blacks, and the mulatto additionally incurs a loss of identity (IB).

       To summarize, the sub-game perfect equilibrium will be ‘Accept, Black’ if πH – πL > IW

and IB > wH – wL, ‘Accept, Mulatto’ if πH – πL > IW and wH – wL > IB, or ‘Reject, Black’ when IW

> πH – πL;. Thus we see that two conditions are necessary for mixed-race individuals to increase

their wealth relative to blacks. A large community of other mixed-race individuals decreases a

mulatto’s own potential loss of identity or community attachment, and their smaller proportion of

the entire non-white community decreases the identity loss imposed on the whites that hire them.

If too large a proportion of the African-American population is mixed-race, then whites

anticipate that too many mixed-race individuals would choose to pass if they are accepted, and

thus the whites don't provide sufficient incentive for mixed-race individuals to identify as

mulatto.



   4. Data

   This study uses a large, self-weighted, regionally representative sample of all African

Americans residing in the urban South in 1860. Information is drawn from the original

manuscripts of the 1860 census for the cities of Baltimore and Frederick, Maryland; Baton

Rouge and New Orleans, Louisiana; Charleston, South Carolina; Louisville, Kentucky; Mobile,



                                                 -16-
Alabama; Nashville, Tennessee; and Petersburg and Richmond, Virginia. The data include

information on several demographic and economic variables for 9,107 African-American

families, including 3,521 families with a mixed-race head of household.

       The 1860 population census manuscripts are a valuable source for exploring the

economics of identity because census marshals reported detailed racial classifications, including

white, black, mulatto, Indian, and Asian. The census does not tell us whether African-Americans

self-identified as black or mulatto or whether marshals classified individuals based on certain

outward appearances. Indeed, the directions given to marshals are singularly unhelpful in

understanding how the determination was made. Printed directions given to the marshals state

that, for free persons, a black “without admixture” is to be classified as black, and all mixed-

blood people as mulattos (IPUMS 2003). Although we cannot determine exactly how racial

classifications were arrived at – whether race was self-reported or attributed by the marshal – it is

likely, given the direction provided, that marshals categorized persons according to locally

accepted demarcations.

       If we look to other sources for clues as to how citizens and marshals came to an

understanding of racial classification, we see that racial classification involved an intricate

hierarchy based on complexion. In his study of nineteenth century freedom papers in Maryland,

Komlos (1992) finds no fewer than eight common skin-tone classifications, including dark, light,

brown, copper, yellow, mulatto, bright, and chestnut. Bodenhorn (2002) finds an equal number

in Virginia. Census marshals were forced to condense this intricate classification system into a

dichotomous black/mulatto classification scheme. If we place African-American skin tones on a

continuum from nearly white at one end to very black at the other (two common classifications



                                                  -17-
in the antebellum South), we can imagine a system in which census marshals were forced to

inquire into many people’s racial heritage. There is thus strong support for treating race as an

endogenous choice, but we can further quantify the proportion of the population with the ability

to choose. African-Americans otherwise classified as ‘nearly white’ may have been entered as

‘mulatto’ in the census regardless of that individual’s personal choice of identity. Similarly,

‘very black’ individuals were likely entered as ‘black’ by the marshal regardless of their

preferred social group affiliation. In Maryland’s recorded freedom papers, 38.2 percent of

African-Americans were identified as dark or black. Those classified as light (12.7%), yellow

(7.1%), and bright (1.6%) accounted for another 21.4 percent of Maryland’s African Americans,

whom the marshals were likely to enter as mulattos regardless of their preferred more specific

racial identity (Komlos 1992). This leaves 40.4 percent of the African American community to

be classified on some basis—the marshal’s decision, self-identification, or some locally accepted

understanding.

   Telles (2002, undated) and Telles and Lim (1998) provide detailed studies of racial

classification in Brazil in the 1990s. These studies may provide valuable insight into antebellum

racial classification practices because Brazil, like the antebellum United States but unlike the

post-Civil War U.S., did not embrace a dichotomous racial classification scheme (Davis 1991).

Indeed, a national survey of Brazilians in 1976 revealed the use of more than 100 racial

designations, but six designations accounted for more than 97 percent of the responses (Telles,

undated). This is comparable to the dozens of color designations found in the freedom papers

given to free blacks, with the predominance of a half-dozen common terms, such as black,

brown, mulatto, bright mulatto, dark mulatto, and yellow. The issue of concern in the Brazilian



                                                -18-
studies, as it is here, is the concordance between self-description and interviewer classification.

Telles (undated) reports that 79 percent of Brazilians were assigned the same racial classification

by interviewers that they themselves adopted. Interestingly, the interviewers and subjects both

classified 55 percent of the population white, but the remainder was perceived by interviewers as

slightly more brown (versus black) than by the subjects. We must recognize that transferring the

information gleaned from their rich data on perception to our data on wealth may be difficult due

to potentially significant differences in time and place between the two societies studied.

   Ultimately, it may be advantageous in our study that census marshals categorized the race of

enumerated individuals because racial determinations were thus made by white, educated

interviewers and because the marshals were “especially likely to be in positions in which

decisions about racial classification affect[ed] the incomes of the persons being classified”

(Telles and Lim 1998, p. 467). This matches the structure of our model: both parties that face

benefits and costs are represented in the determination of identity. Moreover, if our assumption

that marshals determined a respondent’s racial category is correct, it should bias the results

against finding racial differences.    Taking the data from modern Brazil as a guide, self-

classification versus interviewer-identification of race has little effect on black-brown differences

in income (Telles and Lim 1998, pp. 469-70).

   Although our data on wealth accumulation are not as rich as that used in modern studies of

racial differences (see Blau and Graham 1990; Altonji, Doraszelski and Segal 2000), they are

rich enough to investigate differences in economic outcomes between blacks and mulattos.

While we cannot control for current and permanent income, we can proxy for both with controls

for occupation and literacy, two important determinants of current and permanent income. The



                                                  -19-
most significant shortcoming of the census manuscripts is that some marshals were more diligent

in collecting wealth information than others. It was not uncommon for marshals to return a

blank (nonresponse) when reporting real and personal estate in the manuscripts. Historians have

long discussed the meaning of these nonresponses, and the debate is far from resolved. Some

contend that marshals left the cell blank rather than recording zeros. Others contend that

marshals censored modest or hard-to-value property holdings, so that nonresponses likely

represent small but nonzero wealth. Conley and Galenson (1998) and Bodenhorn (2002) review

the debate and conclude that it is reasonable to attribute to each nonresponse a small, but nonzero

value. Such attributions assume that each marshal had an idiosyncratic censoring value, below

which he simply failed to estimate and report a value for personal property. In the summary

statistics reported in Table 1, we report values for personal estate by attributing to each

nonresponse a value equal to one-half the lowest value returned by each marshal. Using a

different sample, Bodenhorn (2002) finds that results drawn from the 1860 census are robust to

different imputations. In their study of modern racial wealth gaps, Altonji, Doraszelski, and

Segal (2000, p. 46) adopt a comparable procedure and report that their results are robust to the

assignment of different reasonable values. On the other hand, we assume that nonresponses for

real estate do, indeed, represent zero holdings. Because even modest real estate ownership

would represent a substantial proportion of an African American family’s wealth, it seems

unlikely that marshals would have failed to report such holdings.



   5.Choice of Identity and Community Effects




                                                 -20-
     In developing our model of racial self-identity, we posited that community attachment yields

utility. People of all races and ethnicities are comfortable associating with others like themselves.

It follows that mixed-race African Americans in antebellum America’s cities established

exclusive, often exclusionary, groups and societies. But in adopting, cultivating, and displaying a

mixed-race identity, mulattos risked severing their ties with the black community even while

they were seldom openly welcomed into the white community. Mixed-race individuals, then,

were more likely to adopt a mulatto identity when there were other mulattos nearby. Yinger

(1986) discusses a number of variables likely to influence the salience of racial group

membership, including the size of the racial group both absolutely and relative to the dominant

race, residential concentration, language differences, intraracial cultural commonalities,

education, and discrimination, among others. In particular, individuals are more likely to adopt a

racial identity and affiliate with a racial group the larger and the more residentially concentrated

it is.

         To estimate the likelihood of an African American adopting a mulatto identity, we

estimate a standard probit specification, where the probability of selecting a mulatto identity is a

function of individual, neighborhood, and city characteristics. The variables believed to be

among the more important determinants of a fair-complected African American’s decision to

claim a mulatto identity include the absolute size of the mulatto community (measured in

households headed by mulattos) at the census ward level; the absolute size of the entire African

American community (mulatto plus black households) at the city level; and the relative size of

the African-American community to the total community (African Americans plus whites) in the

city.



                                                  -21-
        Our choice of these three variables was driven by both theoretical and pragmatic

considerations. The pragmatic reason is that among the set of available variables believed to

capture community effects, these were the only three that were not highly and jointly collinear.

The three also have theoretical appeal. As previously mentioned, an individual’s desire to adopt a

particular racial designation is likely to depend on the number of other individuals in the

neighborhood (defined here as the census ward) adopting a like designation. If in selecting a

mulatto identity I alienate blacks, the psychic costs to me of doing so will be smaller the greater

the number of other mulattos in my neighborhood, because I can still maintain identity with

some group. Similarly, the benefits of selecting a mulatto identity may rise rapidly in the number

of others selecting a similar designation due to economies of scale in providing community

amenities and establishing community organizations, such as churches, gardening clubs, and

literary societies.

        The latter two variables reflect responses of the white community to the absolute and

relative size of the African-American community. We include the absolute size of each city’s

African American population because whites were protective of their ‘whiteness’, and their

willingness to confer the privileges of part-whiteness to light-complected African Americans

may have depended on the absolute size of the African American community. The larger the

black community, holding the number of mulattos constant, the lower the whites’ psychic cost of

conferring privileges to mulattos because ‘whiteness’ would retain its exclusivity. Yet as the

black community increases, holding the number of mulattos constant, a mulatto’s racial

distinctiveness may have been overwhelmed by the mass of ‘blackness.’ In these instances, the

payoff to whites of advantaging mulattos over black may have been diminished.



                                                 -22-
   We also include the percentage of African Americans to the total population to capture white

response to not only an increasing absolute black population, but an African American

population that was increasing relatively. An increasing black population, holding the number of

mulattos constant, may have had negative consequences for those adopting a mulatto identity.

Blacks were often hostile toward a mulatto elite and whites may have been less willing to

recognize any African American’s whiteness if they felt threatened by a large and growing

African American population. This is also consistent with Telles’ (undated) finding that racial

ambiguity (differences between self-reported and interviewer reported race) in Brazil is greater

in areas with lower proportions of whites.

       Before reporting the regressions, we must note a number of nontrivial empirical issues.

We use the logarithm of the number of mulatto households in the ward and the number of

African-American households in the city because initial trials suggested nonlinearities in the

relationships. Log specifications were the most parsimonious specification. Because the

independent variables are independent across, but not within wards, the standard errors are

decreased using STATA’s (2001) cluster command, which corrects the covariance matrix to

recognize correlation within groups, but does not change the estimated coefficients.

       We must also choose the relevant extent over which network effects6 act. Sarnikar

(2002) contends that inferences must be drawn cautiously. We observe, for example, that an

individual’s choice is correlated with the choices of others, but we cannot determine whether that

choice is due to social interaction effects or to some other unobservable characteristic(s)

common to all individuals in the group. The issue is one of identifying the relevant reference

group. Are all the inhabitants of the census ward the relevant reference group, or were social



                                                -23-
interactions confined to more compact neighborhoods? The more compact the unit of

observation, the more likely the results will be driven by common unobservable characteristics.

Because wards were relatively large (several hundred to a few thousand households, depending

on the city), it seems unlikely that there was a common unobservable characteristic driving the

choice of racial identification.

   Similarly, we cannot rule out endogenous self-selection into neighborhoods (Sarnikar 2002).

Evans, Oates and Schwab (1992) demonstrate that, in certain circumstances, peer group effects

disappear when the endogenous choice of peer group is controlled for. But because the relevant

peer group is aggregated to the relatively large ward level in this study, we believe that the

endogenous choice of neighborhood is not as serious an issue as it would be if we were

considering choices at a less aggregated level.

         Panel A of Table 2 reports the baseline regression, which regresses the three community

variables on the dichotomous complexion variable (mulatto = 1). The independent variables take

on the expected signs and are statistically significant. As expected, an increase in the number of

residents in an individual’s ward adopting a mulatto identity increases the probability than an

individual adopted a mulatto identity. In both male- and female-headed households, the size of

the mulatto community had the largest marginal effect on an individual’s racial identification.

Holding constant the size and proportion of the African American community, a one percent

increase in the log number of mulatto households increased the probability of adopting a mulatto

identity by 17 percent. But, holding constant the number of mulatto households in a ward, a one

percent increase in the number of African-American households in a city decreased the

probability that an individual would be identified as mulatto by 11.6 percent. As the African

   6
       A network effect or network externality exists whenever one person’s choices affect others’ utility received
                                                         -24-
American population made up a larger percentage of a city’s total population, individuals

became less likely to identify as mulatto. The marginal effect is small, but meaningful and

statistically significant. A one percentage point increase in the proportion of a city’s population

that was African American decreased the likelihood of identifying as mulatto by about 2 percent.

        Yinger’s (1986) hypothesis indicates that the probability of adopting a mulatto identity

should increase in the number of neighbors of like kind because a larger group with a common

heritage will be better positioned to establish a viable community independent of blacks and

whites. Our result is consistent with his hypothesis. The logarithmic specification and its

superiority to (unreported) linear specifications also imply that the benefits increase rapidly at

small numbers of households, but slowly at larger numbers of households. This is consistent our

reading of the historical literature (Bogger 1997, Frazier 1957, Horton 1993, Johnson 1996,

Williamson 1984), which holds that when there were relatively few mulatto households in a

neighborhood, whites held these few mulattos in higher regard than blacks and offered them

various privileges, including access to education, church membership, craft training and other

social and economic advantages. The psychic cost to whites of recognizing a mulatto’s whiteness

was low when there were few mulattos in the neighborhood. As the number of mulatto

households increased, however, an expansive definition of ‘whiteness’ diminished the value of

being white or partly white. Whites became less willing to privilege partial whiteness and

labored to narrow the definition of whiteness so as to exclude even many mulattos. The value of

group attachment as a form of identity is obvious in this instance, particularly when the group

was large enough to form a viable community, independent of white privilege.




from the same choice.
                                                 -25-
       We add the household’s reported aggregate wealth (real plus personal estate) as an

additional regressor in Panel B of Table 2. Again, much of the historical and contemporary

literature addressing the privileges associated with lighter complexions (Frazier 1957, Graham

1999) holds that “money whitens.” In other words, wealthier individuals are more likely to

identify as mulatto, for a given complexion, than less wealthy respondents. Including wealth in

the estimated equation has no effect on size or significance of the community variables. Greater

wealth, indeed, increased the probability that a given householder would be identified as mixed-

race. The effect is positive and statistically significant in both the male and female equations, but

the estimated marginal effect for males is more than twice that for female householders. A one

percent increase in a male householder’s log wealth increased the likelihood of his identifying as

mulatto by about 12 percent; a female’s by about 5 percent.

       In Panel C of Table 2, we also report male and female specifications including several

other individual and household characteristics (wealth is excluded because it is strongly

correlated with several of the other variables). Again, the inclusion of individual and household

characteristics does not substantially alter the size or significance of the community variables.

Among male-headed households, after controlling for community effects, an increase in the

Socioeconomic Index (a higher-paying or more respected employment) increased the likelihood

of identifying as a mulatto, as did whether the immigrant had immigrated, or lived in a larger

household. If the household head was illiterate, he was significantly less likely to identify as

mulatto. For a female-headed household, the Socioeconomic Index of the head had a smaller and

less statistically significant marginal effect on the probability that she would be identified as

mulatto. Unlike for males, immigrant status and household size had no significant influence on a



                                                  -26-
woman’s racial identity. Illiteracy, however, substantially reduced the probability that a woman

was identified as mulatto, and the effect is somewhat stronger among women than men.

   Like Telles (undated, p. 25) we interpret the results to imply that racial classification “is not

merely ambiguous or situational, both of which suggest randomness, but rather is structured by

particular characteristics of the population and urban contexts.” The principal variables included

in the regressions reflect our theoretical assertion that mixed-race individuals were more likely to

adopt a mulatto identity when they had the support of a relatively large group of similar

individuals. The number of other mulatto heads of household in the ward reflect the size of the

group with which an individual would be most likely to have personal relationships. That the

number of mulattos in the ward positively and strongly influences an individual’s choice of

mulatto identity is consistent with our belief that there are economies of scale in establishing a

community and all the trappings that go with a legitimate community – schools, churches, clubs,

and other organizations. The city population variables, on the other hand, capture how whites

and blacks responded to the desire of mixed-race people to adopt a separate racial identity. If,

holding the number of mulattos constant, the African-American community grew absolutely

large blacks could punish or ostracize mixed-race individuals who attempted to set themselves

apart. Similarly, if the African-American community grew large relative to the aggregate

population, whites were less inclined to show preferences to anyone with any black heritage. We

now turn to whether an individual’s choice of identity had any real economic consequences. An

analysis of differences in wealth accumulation between blacks and mulattos indicates that

identity mattered.




                                                 -27-
   6. The Economic Consequences of Mulatto Self-Identity

   In this section we use data on individual and community characteristics from the 1860

manuscript census to determine the magnitude of the mulatto advantage among African

Americans residing in urban places. Bodenhorn (2002) demonstrates a modest advantage for

mulattos living in rural areas of the antebellum South, but offers no insight into whether such an

advantage arose in urban areas. Before turning to the empirical work, we briefly explain or

method.



   6.1 Empirical Methods

       We follow the literature in estimating the economic extent of the mulatto advantage

through regression decomposition techniques pioneered by Blinder (1973) and Oaxaca (1973).

This technique recognizes that the mulatto effect on the functional form of the regression may be

more complex than a simple shift in the constant term. Let j index households and divide the

sample by race into blacks and mulattoes. Further, let Wjb denote the dollar value of wealth held

by a black household and Xjb a vector of economic and demographic characteristics for that

black household. Wjm and Xjm represent the corresponding variables for mulatto households.

       Our basic empirical specification posits that wealth is either linear or log-linear in the

economic and demographic variables and is given by:

       Wjb = α0b + Xjbβb + ejb

       Wjm = α0m + Xjmβm + ejm

   where α0b is the regression intercept for blacks, βb is the vector of slope parameters for

blacks, and ejb is the error term. α0m, βm, and ejm are the corresponding parameters and error term



                                                 -28-
for mulattoes.    Separate regressions are estimated for male-headed and female-headed

households, so the parameters are allowed to differ across race and sex.

   The regressions are then used to decompose differences in wealth between blacks and

mulattoes into two parts. The predicted values of the mean wealth for blacks and mulattoes are:

       êb = α0b + Xb βb

       êm = α0m + X m βm

   where the Xb and X m represent the mean values of the black and mulatto household

variables.

   Using these two equations it is easy to show that:

       êm - êb = {( X m - Xb )βm} + {(α0m - α0b) + Xb (βm - βb)}

   The first bracketed term is that part of the total estimated racial wealth gap (êm - êb)

explained by racial differences in the means of the household variables ( X m - Xb ) based on

coefficient estimates from the mulatto sample. The first term, thus, estimates the contribution of

economic and demographic differences to the wealth gap, assuming that the relationship between

the economic and demographic variables and wealth are fairly represented for both races by the

mulatto regression coefficients. This is commonly called the “explained” component of the

wealth gap because it is that part of the wealth gap explained by differences in characteristics

between the two groups. The second bracketed term is typically labeled the “unexplained” part

of the regression decomposition. This wealth gap arises due to differences in the functional

relationship between mean characteristics and wealth, captured by differences in the regression




                                                -29-
parameters, between the two groups. The unexplained component is often interpreted as the

economic consequences of discrimination or racial preferences.



    6.2 Wealth Regressions

        Before turning to the wealth decompositions, we briefly discuss the results of the

underlying regression specifications. The dependent variable is either the level or the natural

logarithm of wealth in current 1860 dollars.                The control variables include the head of

household’s age and its square, a variant of Duncan’s socioeconomic occupational index, two

dummy variables capturing whether the individual had migrated across state lines since birth or

had immigrated to the United States, a dummy variable equal to one if the household head was

illiterate, the total number of residents in the household, and the number of males over 20 years

of age residing in the household.7 We also include the same community variables used in the

probit estimates to determine the extent to which the advantages or disadvantages of living in a

large mulatto or African-American community affected wealth accumulation.

        The two regression specifications (ordinary least squares estimates of wealth levels and

the natural logarithm of wealth) reported in Panels A and B of Table 3 generate reasonable

coefficient estimates.8 Wealth typically rises at a declining rate with age. Individuals engaged in

higher status occupations, such as professionals, proprietors, and crafts-persons, accumulated

more wealth than those engaged as operatives, laborers, and low-skill service occupations.


    7
       The Duncan SEI index is described in Reiss, et al (1961, Appendix B). Socioeconomic status was defined as a
combination of average income and average educational levels for each of about 500 occupations appearing in the
1950 census. Many of the classifications for professionals, proprietors, craftsmen, operatives and laborers in 1950
were comparable to classifications and definitions appearing in the 1860 census, so Duncan’s index seems an
appropriate metric.
     8
        The same specifications were estimated using median and robust regression techniques as a check on the
effect of outliers. The results were comparable in that the coefficients were similar in size and significance.
                                                         -30-
Indeed, according to the estimates for black males in Panel A of Table 3, a one-point increase in

an individual’s SEI score was associated with a $9.23 increase in household wealth; for mulatto

males, a point increase was associated with a $35.00 increase in total household wealth.

Evaluated at the sample mean wealth for mulattos, a one-point increase in the SEI score

generated a 4.1 percent increase in wealth. Literate male household heads had accumulated

significantly more than illiterate ones. The connection between literacy and wealth was weaker

and less significant for women, but the costs of illiteracy were large, reducing household wealth

by between $75 for black women and $420 for mulatto men, or about one-half of the sample

average wealth in both instances. Larger households accumulated more wealth than smaller

ones. The addition of one member in a male-headed household increased household wealth by

between $20 and $26. The addition of a male 20 years or older, holding household size constant,

had a negligible effect on household wealth.

   In all eight specifications, the community variables discussed previously have an

economically meaningful and statistically significant effect on wealth accumulation. An increase

in the number of mulatto households in the ward is associated with a decrease in wealth,

interestingly, for both blacks and mulattos, though the effects are not statistically significant in

most specifications. Combined with the results from the earlier probit specifications, we interpret

this result to mean that a light-skinned African American was more likely to identify as mulatto

the larger the size of the local mulatto community, but the driving force behind this decision was

apparently not an enhanced ability to increase one’s wealth. There were likely nonpecuniary

benefits.




                                                 -31-
   All eight specifications show that there were large costs associated with living in a large

African American community. A one log point increase in the number of African American

households (holding the number of mulatto households in the community constant) led to a

decrease in household wealth by $20 for black female-headed households to a remarkable

$557.47 for black, male-headed households. Given the average levels of household wealth, the

negative impact of living among a large number of other African Americans was huge, as was

the effect of living in an increasingly black city.

   6.3 Decompositions

   Although the specifics of the regression coefficients are insightful, the more important focus

is on the wealth decompositions resulting from the estimates, which are reported in Table 4. The

unadjusted racial wealth gap for male-headed households is substantial. Mixed-race, male-

headed households held more than three and one-half times the wealth of a household with a

black male head. The unconditional gap is $612 and the predicted gap is $604 ($844-$240).

Using parameter estimates from the mulatto equation (α0m , βm) to determine the importance of

the racial difference in characteristics, we find that differences in economic and demographic

characteristics explain 64 percent of the black-mulatto wealth gap. Using parameter estimates

from the black equation for male-headed households, we can explain about 53 percent of the

racial wealth difference. The OLS estimates indicate that even if blacks had overcome their

relative economic, demographic, and residential disadvantages a substantial portion – between

30 and 50 percent – of the wealth gap would have persisted. According to this estimate, about

one-third to nearly one-half of the observed differences in wealth were attributable to race per se.




                                                      -32-
   Decompositions based on OLS regressions using the natural logarithm of wealth as the

dependent variable yield comparable results. If we use the coefficient estimates from the mulatto

equation, differences in economic and demographic characteristics explain 56 percent of the

racial wealth gap. Thus, as much as 44 percent of the racial wealth gap was attributable to racial

heritage or complexion.      Decompositions from the black equation estimates indicate the

differences in means explain about 68 percent of the racial wealth gap.

   The decompositions for female-headed households are generally comparable to those for

men.   Using ordinary least squares estimates on the level of wealth for both blacks and

mulattoes, we can explain about 66 percent of the complexion-based wealth gap. Coefficient

estimates from the logarithmic specifications explain a little more than 50 percent of the racial

wealth gap for female-headed households.

   Blau and Graham (1990) posit three potential sources of racial wealth gaps: racial differences

in intergenerational and inter vivos transfers; racial differences in rates of return on assets; and

racial differences in current and permanent income. The data at hand shed no light on the

second, but they indirectly address the first and third. Differences in the racial occupational

structure and literacy capture an important component of inter vivos transfers, namely,

intergenerational human capital transfers in the form of general (literacy) and specific

(occupational) training and investment. Training and literacy also represent important factors in

determining an individual’s current and permanent income. For African-American men, general

and specific training, some undoubtedly provided by parents, together accounted for as much as

37% of the overall wealth gap. For women, they accounted for as much as 19%. Thus,




                                                 -33-
equalization of racial differences in education and training would have closed a significant

portion of the observed mixed-race wealth advantage.

    Our ultimate interest, however, is the consequence of adopting a mulatto or black identity

given the racial heritage of other members of the community. Taking the three, previously

discussed, community variables as a group, Lines 6 of Table 4 Panels A and B show that,

depending on the specification, the costs of ‘blackness’ were large. The three variables, which

we believe proxy for white attitudes toward blacks and mixed-race people, account for between

18 and 88 percent of the wealth gap for male-headed households. The latter figure, based on the

functional relationships estimated for black men, suggests that the mulattos received highly

preferential treatment and benefited economically from it. Decompositions based on data from

female-headed households show a comparable effect.



    7. Concluding Comments

    The antebellum South’s experience of mixed-race people may inform modern concerns. The

2000 federal census, for instance, recognized the evolving nature of racial self-identification

when it allowed respondents to select as many different racial categories as they felt appropriate.

This decision sparked heated debate within the African-American community. Some objected to

a range of choices because they felt that it would undermine a sense of solidarity with or

attachment to a community of African-Americans sharing a common purpose. If the antebellum

experience serves as a guide, these people may have cause for concern.9



    9
         Interestingly, there is a movement among some reformers in Brazil to eliminate intermediate racial
classifications because they are believed to be divisive within the nonwhite community (Telles 2002, undated) and
younger Brazilians are somewhat more likely to self-identify as “black” rather than “brown”, relative to the
classifications of interviewers.
                                                        -34-
         Light-skinned mulattoes in Charleston, Savannah, Mobile, and New Orleans encouraged

whites to distinguish them from blacks and made efforts to develop their own identity outside the

black community.        These light-skinned mulattoes formed exclusive organizations mirroring

those of white society, including churches, schools, literary and gardening clubs, and mutual

benefit societies. Many of these organizations excluded dark-skinned blacks. Some light-skinned

African-Americans embraced the norms of the dominant culture so fully—and were, in turn,

accepted into it—that they operated large plantations worked by black slaves. Our results reveal

the conditions under which they chose to ‘act white’ and were accepted as non-black. In rejecting

their blackness in part or in whole, mulattos received more education, worked at higher-status

occupations, and accumulated more wealth than blacks. They were better able to accomplish

these things when they could separate themselves, when their fair complexion not only set them

apart, but elicited a favorable response from the dominant white community.

    After the Civil War the adoption of the one-drop rule under Jim Crow mitigated, and

eventually eliminated, the legal standing of mulattos. As a result, discussions of the relative

advantages and disadvantages of mixed-race identities disappeared from public discourse. In

recent years, however, the discussion has reemerged, probably as a consequence of the attention

focused on the talents and racial heritages of such popular athletes and performers as Tiger

Woods (black, white, Asian and Native American), Derrick Jeter (black and white), Maria Carey

(black Venezuelan and white Irish), Lenny Kravitz (black and Jewish), and Halle Berry (black

and white), among others.10 It is interesting, if not ironic, that in accepting her Academy Award

Ms. Berry invoked the memory of Dorothy Dandridge as the first African American woman to


    10
        The subject is of growing interest because of the increasing number of mixed-race children, generally. The
cover story on a recent issue of Parade (6 July 2003), distributed with many Sunday newspapers, provided some
insights into the lives of several mixed-race youth and teenagers.
                                                        -35-
win an Oscar. Dandridge, a light-skinned mulatto, very much wanted to live in and be accepted

by the black and white communities, but found limited acceptance in either (Talty 2003). Indeed,

Dandridge may have summarized the mixed-race individual’s quandary best when she wrote:

“You have a part of white America in your soul, and a part of black America in your spirit, and

they are pulling against one another” (quoted in Talty 2003, p. 146).

       Given the so-called ‘browning of America’ and the recognition by the U.S. Census

Bureau of people claiming multiple racial heritages, it may be time for economists to study in

greater detail the consequences of mixed-race identities. It may also be time to abandon the

notion that race can be captured with a dichotomous variable in empirical specifications. Race

may be endogenous in certain circumstances. The issue, as well as the individual who straddles

the race line, is more complex than can be captured with a binary variable. Future research

should address issues of race and mixed-race by extending the existing, highly stylized models of

race and by more fully investigating the causes, consequences, and interrelationships involved in

an individual’s choice of identity. We intend to pursue this line of investigation.




   References

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 115:3 (August 2000), pp. 715-753.

Altonji, Joseph G., Ulrich Doraszelski, and Lewis Segal. “Black/White Differences in Wealth.”

       Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives 24:1 (2000), pp. 38-50.




                                                 -36-
Arrow, Kenneth J., “Models of Job Discrimination.” In Racial Discrimination in Economic Life.

       Edited by Anthony H. Pascal. Lexington, Massachusetts: D.C. Heath & Co., 1972.

Austen-Smith, David, and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. “‘Acting White’.” Mimeo, Pennsylvania State

       University, 2002.

Blau, Francine D. and John W. Graham.          “Black-White Differences in Wealth and Asset

       Composition.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105:2 (May 1990), pp. 321-339.

Blinder, Alan S. “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structured Estimates.” Journal of

       Human Resources 8 (Fall 1973), pp. 436-55.

Bodenhorn, Howard. “The Complexion Gap: The Economic Consequences of Color among Free

       African Americans in the Rural Antebellum South.” NBER Working Paper 8957 (May

       2002).

Bogger, Tommy. Free Blacks in Norfolk, Virginia, 1790-1860: The Darker Side of Freedom.

       Charlottesville and London: University of Virginia Press, 1997.

Conley, Timothy G. and David W. Galenson. “Nativity and Wealth in Mid-Nineteenth-Century

       Cities.” Journal of Economic History 58: (1998), pp. 468-493.

Darity, William A. Jr., Patrick L. Mason, and James B. Stewart. “The Economics of Identity:

       The Origin and Persistence of Racial Norms.”          Working paper, UNC-Chapel Hill

       (January 2002).

Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab. “Measuring Peer Group Effects: A

       Study of Teenage Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 100:5 (October 1992), pp.

       966-991.

Frazier, E. Franklin. Black Bourgeoisie. Glencoe, Illinois: Free Press, 1957.



                                                -37-
Freeman, Howard E., David Armor, J. Michael Ross, and Thomas F. Pettigrew. “Color

       Gradation and Attitudes among Middle-Income Negroes.” American Sociological Review

       31:3 (June 1966), pp. 365-374.

Graham, Lawrence Otis. Our Kind of People: Inside America’s Black Upper Class. New York:

       Harper-Collins, 1999.

Greif, Avner. “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical

       Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies.” Journal of Political Economy

       102:5 (October 1994), pp. 912-50.

Hechter, Michael. “Rational Choice Theory and the Study of Race and Ethnic Relations.” In

       Theories of Race and Ethnic Relations, pp. 264-279. Edited by John Rex and David

       Mason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Hechter, Michael, Debra Friedman, and Malka Appelbaum. “A Theory of Ethnic Collective

       Action.” International Migration Review 16:2 (Summer 1982), pp. 412-434.

Hill, Mark E. “Color Differences in the Socioeconomic Status of African American Men:

       Results of a Longitudinal Study.” Social Forces 78:4 (June 2000), pp. 1437-1460.

Horton, James Oliver (ed.). Free People of Color: Inside the African American Community.

       Washington, D.C. and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993.

Johnson, Whittington B. Black Savannah, 1788-1864. Fayetteville: University of Arkansas

       Press, 1996.

Komlos, John. “Toward an Anthropometric History of African-Americans: The Case of Free

       Blacks in Antebellum Maryland.” In Strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American




                                              -38-
       Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel, pp. 297-329. Edited by Claudia

       Goldin and Hugh Rockoff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.

Mason, Patrick L. “Annual Income, Hourly Wages, and Identity Formation among Mexican

       Americans and other Latinos.” Working paper, Florida State University (December

       2001).

Murguia, Edward and Edward E. Telles.               “Phenotype and Schooling among Mexican

       Americans.” Sociology of Education 69:4 (October 1996), pp. 276-289.

McElreath, Richard, Robert Boyd, and Peter J. Richerson. “Shared Norms Can Lead to the

       Evolution of Ethnic Markers.” Working paper, UCLA (undated).

Oaxaca, Ronald. “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.” International

       Economic Review 14:3 (October 1973), pp. 693-709.

Penha-Lopes, Vania. “What Next?” Journal of Black Studies 26:6 (July 1996), pp. 809-826.

Reiss, Albert J., Jr., with Otis Dudley Duncan, Paul K. Hatt, and Cecil C. North. Occupations

   and Social Status. New York: The Free Press, 1961.

Reuter, Edward B. The Mulatto in the United States, Including a Study of the Role of Mixed-

       Blood Races throughout the World. Richard G. Badger, 1918.

Sarnikar, Supriya. Empirical Essays on Network Effects in Markets. Unpublished Ph.D.

       dissertation, University of Arizona, 2002.

Schelling, Thomas, Micromotives and Macrobehavior. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1978.

Seltzer, Richard and Robert C. Smith. “Color Differences in the Afro-American Community and

       the Differences They Make.” Journal of Black Studies 21:3 (March 1991), pp. 279-286.




                                                -39-
Talty, Mulatto America: At the Crossroads of Black and White Culture: A Social History. New

       York: HarperCollins, 2003.

Telles, Edward E. “Self vs. Social Classification of Race: Inconsistency, Category Ambiguity

       and Affirmation in Brazil.” Working paper, UCLA, January 2002.

Telles, Edward E. “Racial Ambiguity among the Brazilian Population.” Working paper, UCLA,

       undated.

Telles, Edward E. and Nelson Lim. “Does it Matter Who Answers the Race Question?: Racial

       Classification and Income Inequality in Brazil.” Demography 35:4 (November 1998), pp.

       465-474.

Williamson, Joel. New People: Miscegenation and Mulattoes in the United States. New York:

       New York University Press, 1984.

Yinger, J. Milton. “Intersecting Strands in the Theoresation of Race and Ethnic Relations.” In

       Theories of Race and Ethnic Relations, pp. 20-41. Edited by John Rex and David Mason.

       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Zack, Naomi. Race and Mixed-Race. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1993.




                                              -40-
    Table1: Descriptive Statistics for Economic and Demographic Variables by Household Type (standard errors)
                          Male-Headed Households           Female-Headed Households
Variable                  Blacks            Mulattoes      Blacks            Mulattoes

Total Wealth             231.57           844.15           168.79           613.17
                         (1029.85         (3153.33)        (825.75)         (2159.78)
Age                      40.46            39.52            42.34            40.55
                         (11.61)          (10.96)          (13.04)          (12.95)
Socioeconomic            12.389           16.373            8.175            8.43
   Index (SEI)           (9.47)           (12.81)          (7.93)           (9.94)
Illiterate               0.393            0.214            0.372            0.234
Number in House          4.608            5.128            3.800            4.191
                         (2.40)           (2.58)           (2.28)           (2.46)
Males (20+) in House     1.291            1.380            0.499            0.550
                         (0.68)           (0.76)           (0.81)           (0.96)

OCCUPATIONAL CLASSIFICATIONS
Professionals    0.010                    0.015            0.003            0.001
Proprietors/Mgrs 0.014                    0.043            0.006            0.011
Clerk/Sales      0.010                    0.018            0.014            0.006
Crafts           0.094                    0.292            0.039            0.126
Operatives       0.302                    0.146            0.063            0.013
Service          0.157                    0.178            0.490            0.335
Laborers         0.350                    0.203            0.060            0.023

NATIVITY
Interstate Migrant       0.053            0.095            0.069            0.112
International            0.007            0.027            0.012            0.039
 Immigrant

NEIGHBORHOOD AND CITY CHARACTERISTICS
Mulattos in Ward     62.77   102.99                        70.75            109.21
African-Americans
 In City             3,522   2,229                         2,575            1,671
African Americans as
  % of Total City    14.12   10.89                         15.01            11.28

CITY OF RESIDENCE
Baltimore, Md            0.724            0.320            0.462            0.175
Baton Rouge, La          0.001            0.017            0.003            0.017
Charleston, SC           0.020            0.096            0.067            0.179
Frederick, Md            0.024            0.034            0.018            0.023
Louisville, Ky           0.036            0.038            0.043            0.031
Mobile, Al               0.003            0.044            0.007            0.038
Nashville, Tn            0.010            0.012            0.015            0.027
New Orleans, La          0.064            0.355            0.118            0.357
Petersburg, Va           0.090            0.035            0.189            0.065
Richmond, Va             0.026            0.050            0.077            0.089

# Observations           3,647            2,089            1,939            1,432



                                                       -41-
    Table 2: Determinants of Identity, Probit Models
        (Marginal effects reported instead of coefficient estimates to facilitate interpretation)

                                                  Males                            Females
         Panel A: Baseline Community Effects Regressions
Log Mulatto Households in Ward                     0.175***                         0.172***
                                                  (7.60)                           (6.87)
Log African-American Households in City           -0.116***                        -0.116***
                                                  (-4.89)                          (-5.66)
African-Americans as % of All Households in City -0.022***                         -0.018***
                                                  (-7.18)                          (-6.59)
Log likelihood                                    -3127.35                         -1979.94
Pseudo R-square                                    0.17                             0.14

         Panel B: Baseline Community Effects plus Household Wealth
Log Mulatto Households in Ward                      0.170***                        0.164***
                                                   (7.90)                          (6.88)
Log African-American Households in City            -0.103***                       -0.104***
                                                   (-4.78)                         (-5.41)
African-Americans as % of All Households in City -0.018***                         -0.013***
                                                   (-7.00)                         (-5.32)
Log Household Wealth                                0.122***                        0.054***
                                                   (5.86)                          (6.10)
Log likelihood                                     -3068.73                        -1936.89
Pseudo R-square                                     0.18                            0.16

           Panel C: Baseline Community Effects plus Individual Attributes other than Wealth
Log Mulatto Households in Ward                         0.163***                   0.157***
                                                      (7.28)                     (6.02)
Log African-American Households in City               -0.107***                  -0.109***
                                                      (-4.76)                    (-5.04)
African-Americans as % of All Households in City -0.019***                       -0.018***
                                                      (-7.35)                    (-6.41)
Socioeconomic Index                                    0.005***                   0.003*
                                                      (5.46)                     (1.83)
Interstate Mover                                       0.048                      0.009
                                                      (1.49)                     (0.21)
International Immigrant                                0.138*                     0.103
                                                      (1.91)                     (0.95)
Illiterate                                            -0.098***                  -0.132***
                                                      (-4.31)                    (-4.27)
Household Size                                         0.015***                   0.007
                                                      (4.95)                     (1.48)
Males in Household                                    -0.006                     -0.011
                                                      (-0.59)                    (-0.78)
Log likelihood                                        -3050.21                   -1952.40
Pseudo R-square                                        0.19                       0.15

     Notes: z-statistics reported in parentheses. * denotes significance at 1%; ** at 5%; *** at 10%. Standard errors
are robust standard errors to account for clustering of the data by ward.
     Sources: See Table 1 and text.


                                                           -42-
      Table 3: Determinants of Household Wealth, Black and Mulatto Heads of Households

             Panel A: Ordinary Least Squares – Wealth Levels
                                      Black Men        Mulatto Men   Black Women     Mulatto Women

Age                                   22.310***        25.280        -10.302         35.702*
                                     (7.26)           (39.90)        (12.16)         (21.85)
Age Squared                          -0.149*           0.174          0.179          -0.324
                                     (0.08)           (0.49)         (0.16)          (0.25)
SEI                                   9.232***        35.003***       0.288          -10.226
                                     (2.813)          (7.35)         (4.03)          (6.47)
Interstate Migrant                   162.739          -352.045*      -57.706         10.897
                                     (121.56)         (189.90)       (71.74)         (179.90)
Immigrant                            1529.489**       318.916        1168.59**       747.669**
                                     (667.11)         (498.78)       (488.88)        (374.52)
Illiterate                           -100.01**        -420.105***    -75.237         -346.901***
                                     (39.82)          (115.78)       (52.08)         (82.47)
Number in House                      19.158**         26.297         15.841*         20.279
                                     (9.03)           (42.98)        (8.12)          (19.81)
Males in House                       -16.918          150.255        2.657           47.956
                                     (40.90)          (151.43)       (35.82)         (56.91)
Log Mulatto Households                9.043           -202.892*      -14.767         -117.096
  In Ward                            (18.14)          (108.31)       (25.64)         (88.47)

Log African-American                 -557.265***      -232.665***    -20.434         -289.180***
  Households in City                 (21.21)          (21.33)        (41.35)         (19.817)

Percent African-American             -58.466***       -23.937***     -3.378          -30.391***
  Households in City                 (3.44)           (6.90)         (4.68)          (5.41)

Constant                             4809.728***      1517.922       408.25          2716.174***
                                     (386.89)         (1036.73)      (432.76)        (513.32)

Observations                         3,647            2,089          1,939           1,432
Adjusted R-Square                    0.10             0.07           0.11            0.05




                                                         -43-
      Table 3: continued

             Panel B: Ordinary Least Squares – Wealth Logs
                                       Black Men       Mulatto Men         Black Women        Mulatto Women

Age                                   0.075***          0.052**            0.056***           0.042**
                                     (0.02)             (0.021)            (0.018)            (0.021)
Age Squared                          -0.001***          -0.0002            -0.0005**          -0.0003
                                     (0.0002)           (0.0003)           (0.0002)           (0.0002)
SEI                                   0.026***          0.026***           0.009              0.009
                                     (0.003)            (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.008)
Interstate Migrant                   0.117              -0.082             -0.0007            0.168
                                     (0.13)             (0.109)            (0.127)            (0.179)
Immigrant                            1.285***           0.183              0.433              0.904***
                                     (0.435)            (0.229)            (0.378)            (0.287)
Illiterate                           -0.279             -0.271**           0.136              -0.160
                                     (0.199)            (0.108)            (0.132)            (0.116)
Number in House                      0.065***           0.094***           0.077***           0.062***
                                     (0.021)            (0.016)            (0.020)            (0.020)
Males in House                       0.008              -0.026             0.143***           0.041
                                     (0.055)            (0.063)            (0.038)            (0.050)
Log Mulatto Households                -0.019            -0.144             -0.037             -0.166
  In Ward                            (0.081)            (0.104)            (0.065)            (0.101)

Log African-American                 -0.657***          -0.392***          -0.378***          -0.453***
  Households in City                 (0.066)            (0.042)            (0.067)            (0.054)

Percent African-American             -0.085***          -0.028*            -0.057***          -0.041**
  Households in City                 (0.013)            (0.016)            (0.021)            (0.021)

Constant                             8.020***           5.977***           5.254***           7.085***
                                     (0.723)            (0.660)            (1.076)            (0.572)

Observations                         3,647              2,089              1,939              1,432
Adjusted R-Square                    0.19               0.23               0.27               0.21

     Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are robust standard errors, adjusted to account for
clustering of the data by census ward. All regressions include unreported city dummy variables that are jointly
significant in all specifications. * implies statistical significance at 10 percent; ** at 5 percent; and *** at 1 percent.
     Sources: U.S. Census Bureau. Eighth Census (1860). Manuscript censuses.




                                                             -44-
    Table 4: Regression Decompositions, Racial Wealth Gap

                                  Male-Headed Households                       Female-Headed Households
                                  Mulatto        Black                         Mulatto        Black
                                  Functions      Functions                     Functions      Functions

     OLS - Wealth Levels
1. Evaluated at mulatto means     $844.55           $562.60                    $622.92          $357.34
2. Evaluated at black means        455.15            239.59                     348.42           160.33
3. Unadjusted differential        612.58             612.58                     444.38           444.38
4. Explained Gap (1)-(2)          389.94             323.01                     274.50           197.01
5. Explained Gap as
   % of undadjusted gap            63.6%             52.7%                     61.8%             44.3%
6. Percent of Unadjusted Gap
    explained by Community
     variables                    18.3%             88.0%                      40.8%             3.2%

     OLS - Log Wealth
1. Evaluated at mulatto means     4.82              4.57                       4.96             4.95
2. Evaluated at black means       4.28              3.91                       4.47             4.43
3. Unadjusted differential        0.97              0.97                       1.00             1.00
4. Explained Gap (1) - (2)        0.54              0.66                       0.49             0.52
5. Explained Gap as
   % of unadjusted gap            55.7%             68.0%                      49.0%            52.0%
6. Percent of Unadjusted Gap
   explained by Community
   variables                      26.3%             69.3%                      26.0%            36.0%


    Note: See text for discussion of regression decomposition.
    Sources: calculations based on regressions reported in Table 2; data from 1860 population census manuscripts.




                                                        -45-
