                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE IMPACT OF LENGTH OF THE SCHOOL YEAR
                      ON STUDENT PERFORMANCE AND EARNINGS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE GERMAN SHORT SCHOOL YEARS

                                           Jorn-Steffen Pischke

                                           Working Paper 9964
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9964


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2003




I thank Josh Angrist, David Autor, Jens Ludwig, Jack Porter, Justin Wolfers, and participants at various
seminars for helpful comments. I thank Stefan Bender for calculating the social security statistics used in the
paper for me. Some of the data used in this paper have been obtained from the German Zentralarchiv für
Empirische Sozialforschung at the University of Köln (ZA). Neither the producers of the data nor the ZA bear
any responsibility for the analysis and interpretation of the data in this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Jorn-Steffen Pischke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Length of the School Year on Student Performance and Earnings: Evidence from
the German Short School Year
Jorn-Steffen Pischke
NBER Working Paper No. 9964
September 2003
JEL No. J24, J31

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper investigates how changing the length of the school year, leaving the basic curriculum

unchanged, affects learning and subsequent earnings. I use variation introduced by the West-

German short school years in 1966-67, which exposed some students to a total of about two

thirds of a year less of schooling while enrolled. I show that the short school years led indeed to

shorter schooling for affected students. Using comparisons across cohorts, states, and secondary

school tracks, I find that the short school years increased grade repetition in primary school, but

had no adverse effect on the number of students attending the highest secondary school track or

earnings later in life.

Jorn-Steffen Pischke
Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
England
and NBER
s.pischke@lse.ac.uk
1         Introduction
Primary and secondary school students in the United States attend school on
average for 180 days, compared to an OECD average of 195 days and 208 days
in East Asian countries.1 Because of its concerns about the performance of
American students, extending the length of the school year was a major policy
recommendation of a 1983 presidential commission in its report “A Nation
at Risk.” The role of time as an educational input became an even bigger
focus of a second commission a decade later, in a report entitled “Prisoners
of Time.” Despite the important role of time in school in the policy debate
there is little evidence to what degree the length of the school year matters
for academic achievement and later earnings of students. In this paper, I
study the impact of a reform in the West-German school system in 1966-
67 which dramatically changed the amount of instructional time for some
students in school at the time without directly a¤ecting the curriculum, the
highest grade completed, or the secondary school degree received by these
students. I use this as a natural experiment to study the e¤ects of time
spent in school on grade repetition, the choice of the secondary school track
attended, and on later earnings.
    Until the 1960s, all German states except Bavaria started the school year
in spring. Politicians felt at the time that it was more sensible to start the
school year after summer vacation, and they wanted to achieve uniformity
in this policy across states. The transition to a fall start of the school year
was achieved in most states through two short school years with 24 instead
of the regular 37 weeks of instruction each. Students in school during this
time therefore lost a total of 26 weeks of instruction, about two thirds of a
school year. The city states of West-Berlin and Hamburg opted for a single
long school year instead. The state of Niedersachsen, although introducing
the short school years, added extra time to graduating classes, so that many
students in this state did not loose any time in school, even though they
participated in the short school years. This means that there is substantial
    1
        See NCES (2000) and Lee and Barro (2001).


                                            1
heterogeneity across birth cohorts and states in who was exposed to less
schooling because of the short school years.
    I use variation across cohorts, states, and the secondary school track
attended by a student to identify the e¤ect of participating in the short
school years on a variety of outcomes. While the short school years nominally
eliminated about two thirds of a year, the total time a¤ected students spent
in school may actually have been reduced by less. Some students may have
stayed in school longer, for example because of grade repetition or other
compensatory mechanisms. This is an important aspect, which has to be
kept in mind when assessing policies which try to manipulate term length.
I analyze grade repetition among primary school students directly and show
that the short school years did indeed have the e¤ect that more students
were held back. Unlike grade repetition, which is a relevant outcome only for
weaker students, the short school years did not seem to have had a negative
e¤ect on the proportion of students entering the highest secondary school
track. Finally, I also fail to …nd negative e¤ects on earnings later in life.
    These results may seem surprising in light of the evidence showing that
returns to schooling are quite substantial.2 The association between earnings
and schooling may not be causal, of course, because individuals select the
amount of schooling they obtain partly on the basis of unobserved charac-
teristics, which also a¤ect earnings. To overcome this problem, many recent
studies have used instrumental variables to estimate the returns to schooling,
exploiting compulsory schooling laws or di¤erences in the costs of schooling
for particular individuals. While these studies should be free of ability bias,
they have typically found even larger returns than the OLS estimates. In
the United States these estimates are clustered around 10 percent; see Card
(1999) for a survey of this literature.
    These estimates of returns to schooling may not be the correct compari-
son when trying to interpret the impact of reducing term length on student
  2
    Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) report OLS returns to schooling of 7 to 8 percent for
Germany during the 1980s. US returns were slightly lower than that at the beginning of
the decade and higher at the end.



                                          2
achievement and earnings. Most importantly, the variation underlying the
results on returns to schooling comes from the highest grade completed or
degree obtained. The short school years, on the other hand, a¤ected the
length of schooling obtained without a¤ecting secondary degrees obtained
directly. One plausible explanation for the di¤ering results would therefore
be that returns to schooling estimated previously re‡ect mostly the signalling
value of schooling, which is tied to degrees, rather than actual human capital
accumulation, which is related to the time spent in school. The short school
years had the same impact on the time in school for all a¤ected students,
therefore not altering the relative costs of di¤erent degrees or their signalling
value. If this interpretation is correct, the length of the school year might
easily be reduced in many advanced countries where the minimum level of
schooling obtained by all students is high.3
    However, the results may also be consistent with schooling re‡ecting
mostly human capital accumulation. It has to be kept in mind that the
nominal curriculum did not change for students exposed to the short school
years. Teachers might have been able to actually teach all the relevant ma-
terial in a reduced amount of time. Universities and post-secondary voca-
tional schools might have compensated for material that had been missed in
school. Individuals exposed to the short school years graduated earlier and
hence spent more time in the labor market. The increased incidence of grade
repetition might indicate that slower students were not able to cope with
the increased pace during the short school years. Grade repetition might
have been a mechanism that insured that some marginal students learned
the same amount.
    Nevertheless, this interpretation would also suggest that reducing time
students spent in school would be socially bene…cial, since overall resources
are being saved without adverse e¤ects on the labor market performance of
students. My results would fail to carry over to broader policies if the short
   3
    Note that changing the length of the school year for a given level of compulsory
schooling has di¤erent implications in the signalling model than changing the compolsory
schooling age. See Lang and Kropp (1986) for evidence from compulsory schooling laws
on the signalling hypothesis.


                                           3
school years brought about particular e¤ort from educators and students,
which was speci…c to this episode and could not be sustained in a more
normal setting. Unfortunately, it is di¢ cult to obtain …rm evidence on
whether this was the case.
    There are a number of previous results on the e¤ects of term length on
student achievement and earnings. Various studies on school quality in the
United States include term length at the school level as one of the regressors
(for example, Grogger, 1997, Eide and Showalter, 1998). These studies typ-
ically …nd insigni…cant e¤ects of term length on achievement and earnings.
One problem with the school level studies is that term length may proxy for
other school attributes, which are unobserved in these equations. But the
most important shortcoming is probably that there simply is not very much
variation in the length of the school year across schools.
    Rizzuto and Wachtel (1980), Card and Krueger (1992), and Betts and
Johnson (1998) examined the e¤ect of state level policies, often for earlier
periods where there was more variation in term length. The e¤ect of un-
observed heterogeneity may also be less of an issue with state level data.
All three studies found positive and signi…cant e¤ects of term length on
later earnings when state e¤ects are not controlled for. Card and Krueger
also present results controlling for state e¤ects. The positive e¤ect of term
length vanishes within states and conditional on other school quality vari-
ables. While some of the …ndings by Card and Krueger have been challenged
by Heckman, Layne-Farrar, and Todd (1996), the zero term length result is
relatively robust in their re-estimations.
    Lee and Barro (2001) correlate student performance across countries with
a variety of measures for school resources, among them the amount of time
spent in school during the year. They …nd no e¤ects of the length of the
school year on internationally comparable test scores.4 A more recent study
by Wöß   mann (2003), which also analyzes cross country test score data, cor-
roborates this …nding. He …nds a signi…cant e¤ect of instructional time, but
  4
   The results di¤er somewhat by subject of the test: longer time in school increased
mathematics and science scores, but lowered reading scores.


                                         4
the size of the e¤ect is negligible. A 10 percent reduction in the time of
instruction (a larger change than that implied by the German short school
years) leads to drop in test scores of 0.015 standard deviations. Lee and
Barro (2001) also look at grade repetition, and they …nd a signi…cant e¤ect
of more instructional time. These results therefore largely agree with my
…ndings on the German short school years. None of these previous stud-
ies exploits policy induced variation in the length of the school year of the
magnitude which I study here, which makes the German experience one of
particular interest. There are three German studies of the impact of the short
school years on student achievement by Meister (1972), Schlevoigt, Hebbel
and Richtberg (1968) and Thiel (1973), which I will discuss in some detail
below.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 starts by
laying out some background about the German school system and the short
school years, and discusses what type of variation is used for identi…cation of
the short school year e¤ects. It also discusses the measurement framework,
and assesses the external validity of the exercise. Section 3 describes the
data sources used to obtain the empirical results in Section 4 on the time
spent in school, learning outcomes, earnings, and civic outcomes. Conclusions
are drawn in Section 5.


2     Institutions and Empirical Framework
2.1    Background on the German School System and
       Identi…cation
In the 1930s, the German school year started uniformly after Easter. When
new territories were integrated into the country due to Nazi expansion after
1937, heterogeneity arose because some of these areas started their school
year in summer. The Ministry for Science and Education therefore decreed in
1941 to move the beginning of the school year to summer for all of Germany.
    Education has been in the political domain of the federal states in post-


                                      5
war West-Germany. After the war, all states except Bavaria eventually re-
turned to the pre-war custom of starting school in spring. This heterogeneity
caused frictions, for example, when families moved across state borders and
children had to switch schools. Therefore, the prime ministers of the states
signed an Agreement on the Uni…cation of the School System in 1964, the so
called Hamburg Accord (Hamburger Abkommen). Among other provisions,
the agreement stipulated to move the start of the school year uniformly to
summer again, so that the new school year would commence after the sum-
mer vacation.5 The accord was to be implemented by the beginning of the
1967 school year.
    A heated debate ensued on how to accomplish the transition from a start
of the school year after Easter to the new date in summer. An early consensus
emerged among the states, which was based on a prolonged school year,
lasting from April 1966 to summer of 1967. This solution was supposed to
avoid that children in school during this time would graduate with having
attended for a shorter period than what is required by law. However, the
Hamburg Accord had also stipulated that schooling is compulsory up to
at least grade 9. Some, predominantly southern, states had only required 8
grades in the basic secondary school track, while 9 years were already common
in the northern states. Various of these states, for example Rheinland-Pfalz,
decided to use the 1966-67 transition period to introduce the 9th grade as
well. To do this, they planned to split the April 1966 to summer 1967
period into two short school years. This way, the cohort of students entering
7th grade in April 1966 and not attending higher secondary schools, could
graduate after nominally attending nine grades by summer 1967, even though
they only spent 8 years and four months in school.
    The early consensus of a long school year unraveled as more and more
states decided to opt for the short school years. Eight states carried out the
transition by having a short school year starting April 1, 1966 and ending
November 30, 1966, and a second short school year starting December 1, 1966
  5
   Summer vacations are staggered across German states, so that the beginning of the
new school year can be anywhere from beginning of August until middle of September.


                                         6
and ending July 31, 1967.6 The two city states of West-Berlin and Hamburg
stuck to the solution with a single long school year. Starting in 1967, the
school year would begin in August and end in July in these states. Grad-
uating classes which participated in the long school year, however, would
graduate at the end of March after a shortened …nal year. Hence, every-
body in Hamburg and Berlin attended school for the regular amount of time
despite the transition. Bavaria, which already started in summer, had a reg-
ular length school year during the transition period. Finally, Niedersachsen
adopted the short school years during 1966-67 but added additional school
periods in subsequent years for some types of schools (see below for details).
    The mechanics of the transition lead to variation in the length of schooling
along a variety of dimensions, which can be used for identi…cation. Since
the two short school years involved 24 instead of the regular 37 weeks of
instruction, students in school during 1966-67 lost a total of 26 weeks in class,
and therefore graduated after having attended school for about two thirds
of a year less than other students who either completed their schooling by
1966 or began school in 1967 or later. Hence, cohorts which graduated before
1966 or which entered after 1967 went to school longer than cohorts in school
during 1966-67. Throughout the analysis, I will not use this variation alone,
because I want to control for cohort main e¤ects.
    The second dimension is due to the fact that students in Germany attend
one of three secondary school tracks, each of which is of a di¤erent length.
The lowest track is basic school (Volksschule or later Hauptschule), which
ended with the end of compulsory schooling after 8 or 9 grades.7 The second
track, middle school (Realschule), ends after grade 10, and the highest track,
Gymnasium, leads to graduation after 13 grades. This means that some
students, who were born in the late 1940s and were close to graduation by
the mid-60s, will have been a¤ected by the short school years and not others,
depending on which track of secondary school they attended. For example,
   6
     These are the nominal starting and ending dates of the school years. The second short
school year e¤ectively ended with the beginning of summer vacation at varying dates across
states.
   7
     States only started introducing 10th grades in basic school in later periods.


                                            7
consider someone born in 1949 and entering school in 1956. This person
will have graduated by spring 1966 if she went to basic or middle school
but will have been in school during both short school years if she went to
Gymnasium. The interaction of cohort and track helps identify the e¤ects of
the short school year, and is used in my analysis.
    The third dimension is the contrasts across states. This makes use of the
fact that Bavaria, Hamburg, and Berlin did not have short school years. The
state of Niedersachsen provides an additional source of variation. Nieder-
sachsen decided not to have students enter 1st grade for the school year
starting December 1966, but only in August 1967. This decision freed up
resources (class rooms and teachers) which were used to lengthen the …nal
school year for students attending basic and middle school in the subsequent
years. Every basic school cohort entering 9th grade between 1966 and 1974,
had an additional 8 month period added to their last school year. For ex-
ample, the cohort, which entered 9th grade in April 1966 (the …rst short
school year), did not graduate until March 1967. The next cohort, entering
9th grade in December 1966, graduated in March 1968 and so on. Thus,
all basic school students attended school for 9 years, even those who were in
school during the short school years.
    Things were slightly more complicated for middle school students. The
students entering 10th grade in April 1966 graduated in November 1966
after 9 years and 8 months. The next three cohorts, entering 10th grade
between December 1966 and August 1968, graduated after 9 years and 4
months of school. These cohorts were a¤ected by the short school years
just like their peers in other states. The next six cohorts, entering 10th
grade between August 1969 to August 1974, graduated from March 1971 to
March 1976 after a total of 10 years in school. Hence, the total schooling of
these cohorts was una¤ected by the short school years. Students attending
Gymnasium were fully a¤ected by the short school years. The length of
their schooling was not extended for any cohorts. Obviously, the variation
introduced by the Niedersachsen rules can only be exploited together with
the variation across tracks and cohorts. I will use both the full interactions


                                      8
of cohort, track, and state, as well as cohort and state di¤erences only (for
states outside Niedersachsen) to identify the e¤ect of the short school years,
while controlling for main e¤ects of each of these.
    The short school year might have a¤ected students in a variety of ways.
Instructional time was obviously reduced for these students, not necessarily
only during the short school years but even in later years as curricula were
adapted for the a¤ected cohorts. For example, the education minister of the
state of Schleswig-Holstein decreed that the curricula for four years were to
be taught during the two short school years and the subsequent two regular
school years. Thus, the available time for each one year curriculum was only
reduced by one sixth. In addition, some requirements were reduced for the
students exposed to the short school years.8 In Baden-Württemberg, on the
other hand, the curricula for the short school years were shortened, but there
was no change in the requirements for the subsequent school years. However,
Thiel (1973), after reading of the directives of the school bureaucracy, claims
to …nd “no speci…c reductions”in the material of the core subjects like Ger-
man, English and math. Additional hours of instruction were added to a
minor degree.
    Despite these adjustments, some students may not have been able to
cope with the necessary acceleration in pace, resulting in students repeating
a grade. The short school years will have lengthened the time these students
actually ended up spending in school. Furthermore, students who were in
primary school during the short school years may have ended up choosing a
di¤erent secondary school track. I will analyze grade repetition and atten-
dance of the highest track (Gymnasium) as outcomes directly below. These
behaviors, grade repetition and track choice, will also a¤ect the interpreta-
tion of the results on earnings. The short school year experiment does not
manipulate the total amount of time spent in school directly but rather the
length of the instructional period in a certain set of grades.
  8
    For example, the state of Schleswig-Holstein usually required the reading of three
authors for the Great Latin Exam (Grosses Latinum), but reduced the number to two
during the 1966 short school year.



                                          9
    Test scores on a standardized test would be the preferred choice to as-
sess the e¤ects on student achievement and learning. Unfortunately, there
are no uniform standardized tests available in Germany. However, I will
present the results of three studies undertaken at the time, which tested
students in school during the short school years. I also analyze grade repeti-
tion in primary school and secondary track choice. In order to understand
these outcomes, it is important to note that grades and therefore academic
achievement in primary school are a major determinant of both. Unlike in
the United States, whether a student repeats a grade is determined by the
teacher and school largely without input from the parents. In principle,
there is a set rule, and if certain grades of a student drop below a cuto¤,
the student is required to repeat a grade. In practice, there is some teacher
discretion involved. A single teacher is typically responsible for most sub-
jects of a class in primary school, and there is a subjective component to
grades (like class participation), so that the teacher can in‡uence promotion.
Teacher discretion is larger in 1st grade and grades play less of a role than
in later years. Nevertheless, grade repetition should largely re‡ect academic
achievement, especially in grades 2 to 4.
    The same is true for the choice of the secondary school track after grade 4.
In the 1960s, all states except Berlin started Gymnasium, the highest track,
with grade 5, while middle school started in many states only with grade
7.9 I therefore concentrate on the decision to enroll in Gymnasium. At the
end of grade 4, the primary school will make a recommendation based on
grades, possibly speci…c exams, and teacher assessment, whether a student
should attend Gymnasium. Independent of this recommendation, parents
can choose to have their child apply to Gymnasium. In case of a negative
primary school recommendation, the student may have to take an admissions
exam, which determines whether the Gymnasium will admit the student.
Whether a student enrolls in Gymnasium therefore depends both on parental
choice and on the academic performance of the student. Since low achieving
   9
    Some states treat grades 5 and 6 as an orientation phase, and allow entry into Gym-
nasium in grade 5 as well as in grade 7.


                                          10
students are unlikely to enter Gymnasium, track choice is a useful measure
of student achievement.
    After the initial choice of a secondary track is made, switching tracks,
while possible in principle, is rare. For example, in 1966, before the …rst short
school year, 13579 students switched into Gymnasium from basic or middle
school, compared to 174828 students entering the …rst grade of Gymnasium
from primary school. Thus, switchers are only about 7 percent of total
accessions into Gymnasium in that year. Most of this lateral movement
takes place by grade 7.

2.2    Measurement Framework
In order to evaluate the e¤ect of the short school years on various outcomes,
I construct a variable Di , indicating whether an individual participated in
the short school years. These indicators are constructed based on an indi-
vidual’s year of birth, state, and secondary school track or graduation year
as described in detail below. I then estimate equations of the form

               yi =   + Di +     s   +   g   +   c   +   a   +   t   +   f   + "i   (1)

where yi is an outcome, like the log of earnings or wages, s is a set of state
e¤ects, g is a set of secondary school track e¤ects, c is a set of year of birth
or cohort e¤ects, a is a set of age e¤ects, t is a set of time e¤ects, and f
is a gender e¤ect.
    The regressor of interest, Di , is an interaction of state, year of birth, and
secondary school track e¤ects. Because state, cohort, and secondary school
track are likely to in‡uence wages independently of the length of school, it is
important to include these control variables in the regression. The implicit
assumption is that Di , conditional on state, year of birth, and secondary
school track is as good as randomly assigned. The state where an individual
went to school and track are variables which are (at least partly) under the
control of individuals. A possible concern is that parents moved across states
or decided to send their child to a di¤erent secondary school track in response
to a state’s decision to introduce the short school years. This is unlikely to be

                                         11
the case. The ultimate decisions of the states whether to introduce the short
school years were only made at the beginning of 1966. This left little time for
parents to move in order to have their children attend school in a di¤erent
state. The only students possibly a¤ected were therefore those living near
the border of one of the states without the short school years (Hamburg and
Bavaria, since West-Berlin has no borders with other West-German states)
who could possibly send their children to a school in the neighboring state.
This should be a very small proportion of students.
    In a given state (outside Niedersachsen), the secondary school track only
matters for the assignment of Di for students who were going to be in grades
10 or higher at the time of the short school years. These students made
their track choice many years earlier. By grade 9 it is relatively di¢ cult
to switch tracks. Nevertheless, students a¤ected by the short school years
in primary school may have ended up attending a di¤erent secondary school
track than they would have otherwise. In this case, track would be an
outcome variable of the treatment, and should therefore not be included as
a control in regression (1).10 I show below that the short school years did
not actually have much of an impact on the choice of secondary track. If Di
does not have a causal e¤ect on track, it is safe to include track as a control.
In order to probe this issue, I estimate equation (1) only for students who
were in grades 1 to 9 during the short school years. Track is not used in
the construction of Di for these students in states outside Niedersachsen, so
that it can be omitted from the regression in this case when Niedersachsen
is excluded.
    One issue in controlling for track e¤ects is how to account for the fact
that the basic track was extended from 8 to 9 years in many states during
the 1960s as well. Instead of using dummies for three tracks, I divide basic
track students into separate groups depending on whether they graduated
after eight or nine years.11 The other controls in equation (1), for age, year,
  10
    See Angrist and Krueger (1999).
  11
    In Niedersachsen, the …rst birth cohort attending 9 years of basic school is the 1946
cohort, in Nordrhein-Westfalen, Hessen, Rheinland-Pfalz, and Baden-Württemberg the
1952 cohort, in Bavaria the 1954 cohort, and in Saarland the 1948 cohort. In all other


                                           12
and gender, are only included to help increase the precision of the estimates.
    Notice that the regressions only control for age, and not labor market
experience. The students a¤ected by the short school years will have more
potential labor market experience. The estimates I present below are a
combination of the education and experience e¤ects induced by the short
school years. I have made no attempt to separate the two e¤ects. In order
to do so, it would be necessary to have an independent estimate of the e¤ect
of experience. Because of the collinearity of time, age, and cohort, I do not
believe that it is possible to identify the linear portion of the experience e¤ect
convincingly. However, the individuals in the samples I use are on average
between 32 and 35 years old. Hence, most of the individuals will be in the
relatively ‡at part of their experience pro…le already, so that the e¤ect due
to experience is likely going to be small.
    The validity of the identi…cation hinges on the assumption that interac-
tions of state, year of birth, and track e¤ects do not matter for the outcome
variables except for the e¤ects of the short school years. This assumption is
more likely to be satis…ed when fewer cohorts are used. I therefore present
regressions using the cohorts born from 1943 to 1964. This includes the
cohorts potentially exposed to the short school years, those born 1947 to
1960, as well as four adjacent cohorts. Nevertheless, identi…cation could
be undermined if there were other changes, which a¤ected some cohorts in
some states. While education policy certainly was rather ‡uid during the
1960s, the design here is likely to be more robust than typical di¤erence-
in-di¤erence investigations of policy changes. The reason is that the short
school years came into e¤ect, and then ended, so that there are control co-
horts both before and after the intervention. Other policy changes during
the period tended to be permanent, and hence largely orthogonal to the short
school year regressor.
states, all birth cohorts in the sample attended 9 school years.




                                            13
2.3    External Validity
The various possible dimensions of contrasts across states, cohorts, and
tracks, as well as the possibility to construct control groups from before
and after the treatment leads to a quasi-experimental design which should
result in rather good internal validity of the estimates. I have argued that the
possible challenges, like mobility of parents and track choice, are unlikely to
be a big problem. I will argue below that shortcomings of the data, which re-
sult in some measurement error, are also unlikely to invalidate the estimates.
A bigger question is whether the estimates are very informative beyond the
particular experience of Germany in 1966-67, and hence the external validity
of the estimates.
    As with many interesting policy experiments, there is the danger that the
policy engendered a response speci…c to the episode. Schools and teachers
may have mobilized additional resources in order to cope with the added
pressure of the short school years on the students. Teachers may have in-
creased their e¤ort. Parents may have …lled gaps left by the schools. Such
responses could be due to the temporary nature of the policy, and may not be
forthcoming in response to a more permanent change of instructional time. If
this is the case, the German short school years may not be very informative
on the broader question of the impact of the length of the school year.
    At this point, it is rather di¢ cult to assemble hard evidence on exactly
what happened in schools more than 35 years ago. However, I will present
a few pieces of evidence on these issues. The two German studies by Meis-
ter (1972) and Thiel (1973) both carried out surveys of a small number of
teachers during the short school years, asking them about the adjustments
that took place and some of the consequences.
    Some state education authorities added some class room hours for a¤ected
students in certain subjects, and teachers and principals may have shifted
additional hours between subjects themselves. Thiel (1973) asked teachers
in 2nd, 4th, and 8th grade directly whether they gave additional hours of
instruction in writing and math. Out of 21 teachers, only 19 percent report


                                      14
a regular additional hour for math and 33 percent for writing. 14 percent
actually report a regular hour less in writing. Slightly more than half report
an additional hour in each subject occasionally.12
    Since primary school classes are typically taught by a single teacher, there
is also the possibility that reading, writing and math were stressed more to
the detriment of other subjects, without additional hours. According to the
survey by Meister (1972), 11 out of 13 primary school teachers report shifting
emphasis to reading, writing and math, particularly reading and writing. In
addition, 3 of the teachers mentioned cuts in music instruction. Thiel (1973)
reports that 72 percent of teachers gave additional homework in math, and
62 percent in writing. 60 percent mention that they perceived parents as
working more intensively with their children. On the other hand, only one
out of 13 respondents in Meister’s (1972) survey mentioned more parental
involvement (although this answer comes from a free form question).
    In addition to added instruction, teachers may have increased their ef-
fort. The most direct piece of evidence on this is data on teacher absences
assembled by Thiel (1972). He surveyed 120 schools in Baden-Württemberg,
and received responses from between 77 and 86 of them for the years 1964/65
to 1969/70. The results are displayed in Figure 1, and are measured as the
average number of school days missed by teachers during a school year. The
numbers for the short school years have been scaled up by the relative reduc-
tion in school days during those years to make the numbers comparable across
time. The short school years are marked by squares on the …gure. Teachers
are on average absent for about 8 days a year. During the …rst short school
year, this dropped to just below 6 days (and the change is signi…cant). Dur-
ing the second short school year the number of absences increased to about
8.8 days, i.e. slightly above the level before the beginning of the short school
years. Absences increased still a bit further in the …rst year after the short
school years before falling back to their normal level.
    This indicates that teachers may have put in additional e¤ort particularly
  12
    The numbers reported in Table 3 on p. 23 of Thiel (1973) do not match exactly his
reporting of the results in the text. I report the results given in the table.


                                         15
during the …rst short school year, and may have come to school even with
minor illnesses that would have normally kept them at home. This additional
e¤ort was not sustainable during the second short school year. The slightly
higher level of absences even after the short school years may indicate that
teachers may have succumbed to additional illnesses because of the additional
stress caused by the episode. However, there are other potential explanations
at least for the short school year pattern of absences. The …rst short school
year ran from April to November, and hence did not include much of the
typical ‡u season, while the second short school year from December to July
included the bulk of the ‡u season.
    While the evidence is less than clear cut, it certainly suggests some ad-
justments to the short school years. The role of additional instructional time
during the short school years seems to be minor, although additional hours
were used in some cases. There also seems to have been a concentration
of resources on the core academic subjects, to the detriment of other …elds,
with music being frequently mentioned. The e¤ort of teachers, parents, and
students (through additional homework) may have been higher during the
short school years. But it also has to be kept in mind that the school sys-
tem already was under strain during this period because of the large baby
boom cohorts being educated, and because of the general expansion of the
education system. Hence, it seems unlikely that the adjustments were able
to undo all or most of the e¤ects of the short school years on students, and
this seems to be borne out by some of the evidence below.


3    The Data
In order to study the impact of the short school years on student perfor-
mance, I analyze data on grade retention and secondary track choice. The
number of students repeating a grade and the total number of students en-
rolled in each grade are published annually by the Federal Statistical O¢ ce
in the serial Fachserie A. Bevölkerung und Kultur, Reihe 10, I, Allgemeines
Bildungswesen. Thus, I have the population data on grade retention avail-


                                     16
able.
    I measure enrollment in the highest secondary school track (Gymnasium)
from the same data source, but it is harder to get a clean measure of this.
The Federal Statistical O¢ ce does not report a consistent series of students
leaving fourth grade to enter Gymnasium during the required time period.
Instead, I use the number of students entering 5th grade of Gymnasium in a
particular school year divided by the number of fourth graders in the state
during the previous year, since this is the only measure that I can construct
consistently. This measure is slightly problematic, because some students
may move across state borders when they change school. In addition, some
entry into 5th grade of Gymnasium is from other grades than grade 4 in
primary school (e.g. from later grades in basic school). Finally, some states
allow entry into Gymnasium after grade 6 in addition to grade 4. In order to
minimize the impact of this, I limit the analysis to states other than Berlin
and Bremen, where this is a particular problem.13
    Earnings data are taken from three data sets, each with its own strength
and weaknesses.14 The …rst is the Quali…cation and Career Survey (QaC)
collected by the Institut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (IAB) and
the Bundesinstitut für Berufsbildung (BIBB). This is a repeated cross section
of employed workers of German nationality in the age group 15 to 65. I use
the four waves for 1979, 1985-86, 1991-92, and 1998-99 each of which samples
about 25,000 workers. The large sample sizes are one of the main advantages
of this data set.
    The earnings variable in the surveys is gross monthly earnings. Respon-
dents in the 1979 survey were asked to report their earnings in 13 brackets,
in the 1985-86 survey in 22 brackets, in 1991-92 in 15 brackets, and 1998-
  13
      In addition, the 1970 edition of Fachserie A. Bevölkerung und Kultur, Reihe 10, I,
Allgemeines Bildungswesen did not report data which allowed me to construct a measure
consistent with the other years. Therefore, data for the school years starting in 1969 or
1970 are missing for some states.
   14
      Some other data sources could in principle be used for this analysis. For example, the
German Socioeconomic Panel (GSOEP), which has tracked respondents since 1984, would
allow annual observations on the same individuals for about 18 years, but does not o¤er
any particular advantages compared to the datasets used here.


                                            17
99 in 18 brackets. I assign each individual earnings equal to the bracket
midpoint.15 I then convert the variable to an hourly wage by dividing by
the number of weekly hours. I also present results using monthly earnings
directly.
    The year of school entry is not available in the QaC, but it provides year
of birth, the year when the individual graduated from secondary school, and
the highest secondary school degree attained. This allows various ways to
construct variables for the students a¤ected by the short school years. I
construct variables for the number of short school years an individual was
exposed to using the interaction of cohort and track. This is done in two
ways. The …rst is to use year of birth and the highest secondary school degree
obtained. German children enter school in the year after they have reached
their 6th birthday. Using this information, it is possible to determine how
many short school years an individual should have been exposed to in a state
with the short school years.
    Table 1 displays how this assignment is done for the birth cohorts from
1946 to 1960. There are a few caveats. First, some students enter school early
or late, and I do not have any information on this. Secondly, somebody born
in 1960 might have entered school either in November 1966 and experienced
one short school year, or in summer 1967 missing the short school years
altogether. Since approximately an equal number of individuals will have
had zero and one short school years, I assign everybody born in 1960 half a
short school year. Because I adjust the value of the covariate appropriately,
this assignment will lead to a consistent estimate of the e¤ect of the short
school years despite the measurement error introduced by not knowing the
true value.
    Alternatively, I construct a similar measure using the year of birth and
  15
    Because of the large number of brackets this is unlikely to introduce much more
measurement error than is done by respondents’rounding continuous amounts. The top
bracket in 1979 was DM 5,000 or more which I assigned a value of DM 7,500, in 1985-86
and 1998-99 it was DM 15,000 or more which I assigned a value of DM 17,500, and in
1991-92 it was DM 8,000 or more which I assigned a value of 12,500. Only 1.0 percent of
sample observations are in the top income bracket.



                                          18
year of graduation. There is a similar missing information problem here.
Everybody born in 1960 is again assigned half a short school year. Individ-
uals graduating in 1966 might have also experienced either zero or one short
school year, and are assigned half a short school year as well. Both measures
of the short school year are scaled so that they measure the amount of in-
structional time missed in years, and regression coe¢ cients in the earnings
regressions are directly comparable to estimates of the returns to schooling.
    The two measures of exposure to the short-school year will naturally
di¤er. The variable based on year of graduation will count individuals as
treated by the short school years if the individual was still in school in 1966/67
because of earlier grade repetition. These individuals will not be assigned
short school years using the assignment based on the highest degree. If indi-
viduals repeating grades have lower earnings for reasons other than the short
school year, then the measure based on highest grade will overestimate the
relative earnings of those exposed, while the measure based on school leav-
ing will underestimate these earnings. Of course, there are reasons to believe
that both variables have substantial measurement error from other sources
as well. There will be misreporting both of the highest degree attained and
the year of graduation. To the degree that the measurement error stems from
year of birth, there is nothing I can do about this. Measurement error in
the other variables can be …ltered out by using one of the exposure measures
as an instrument for the second, as long as these measurement errors are
independent.
    Unfortunately, the QaC does not identify the state in which an individual
grew up or attended school. Only the state of residence is available. The
short school year measures constructed above are set to zero for residents
of Bavaria, Hamburg, and Berlin. For residents of Niedersachsen, they are
also set to zero for respondents with basic school degrees and the middle
school cohorts which were una¤ected. The state of residence is only a good
proxy for the state an individual went to school in if individuals do not move
frequently between states. I present some evidence on this below.
    I also construct a measure of years in school de…ned as year of graduation


                                       19
minus year of birth minus 6. This measure is fairly noisy, because I do
not have detailed enough information on birthdays to know the exact date
when the person …rst entered school, and because there is some parental
discretion. Nevertheless, this variable is useful as it lets me assess whether
students exposed to the short school years received less schooling. I limit
the QaC sample to respondents for whom this length of schooling variable is
in the range of 6 to 15 years, in order to minimize the e¤ect of misreporting
on the estimates.
    The second data set I use is the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS)
from 1980 to 2000. This is also a repeated cross section survey. It samples
about 3,000 respondents of German nationality who are 18 years or older in
each wave. The surveys were conducted every two years with an additional
smaller survey for 1991, right after German uni…cation. I only use the west
German portion of the waves after 1990.
    The only income variable in the survey is net monthly income. The ques-
tionnaire is not very explicit what types of incomes to include (e.g. whether
respondents are supposed to report asset income). Income was elicited as a
continuous variable. Respondents refusing to report income were asked a
second question, which allows them to report their income in 22 brackets.
This increases the response rate substantially. I incorporate the bracketed
income information by assigning midpoints again.16 Despite the di¤erent
concepts, the distribution of income looks very comparable to the distribu-
tion of earnings in the QaC data. A weekly hours variable is available from
1984 onwards but is missing for many observations. Because the sample
is relatively small to begin with, I use the monthly income directly in the
regressions.
    The ALLBUS provides year of birth and the highest secondary school de-
gree attained,17 which allows me to construct the …rst measure for the number
of short school years an individual was exposed to as described above. From
  16
     The top bracket is DM 15,000 or more to which I assign a value of DM 17,000, the
mean among respondents reporting a continuous income amount above DM 15,000.
  17
     Starting in 1990, there is also a variable on the total number of years of schooling. I
do not use this variable because it is only available for a few waves.


                                            20
1982 onwards, the survey also collected month of birth. This information
is useful to decide whether someone born in 1960 attended one short school
year or none. I use the information where available, and assign everybody
born in 1960 half a short school year in the 1980 wave or if the month of
birth information is missing.
    The ALLBUS identi…es the state of residence in every wave. I use this
in the same way as for the QaC data. In addition, the 1991, 1992, 1994, and
2000 waves also ask about the state of birth and since when an individual
has lived in the current state of residence. This information lets me assess
to what degree individuals have moved across state lines from the time they
grew up. Table 2 displays some summary statistics about the interstate
mobility of individuals. It reveals that about 80 percent of all respondents
live in their state of birth. The rates di¤er slightly, depending on whether the
calculation is based on the state of birth variable or the variable asking about
the time in the current state. There is relatively little mobility between birth
and age 18. Therefore, state of birth will be a better indicator than state of
current residence for the state in which an individual attended school. Most
relevant for the purpose of this paper, more than 80 percent of individuals
at risk of participating in the short school years (the birth cohorts 1947 to
1960) have lived in their current state already in 1965. The percentage of
people in their state since 1965 or earlier is even higher for current residents
of Bavaria and Niedersachsen, but it is very low for residents of Hamburg
and Berlin. While the latter are relatively small states, there will be some
measurement error introduced by the fact that many individuals move in out
of these states. If migration is unrelated to the e¤ects of the short school
years this measurement error will lead to pure attenuation.
    The third data set comes from social security records. It is based on the
IAB Employee Sample (IAB Beschäftigtenstichprobe), a 1 percent sample
of social security records. The sample includes only records on employed
individuals, and excludes civil servants, self-employed, and those in marginal
employment because these groups are not covered by the general social se-
curity system. This includes about 80% of all workers. The dataset is a


                                      21
panel. Once sampled, an individual is followed as long as a social security
record appears for that individual. The dataset is described in more detail
in Bender and Hilzdegen (1995) and Bender, Haas, and Klose (2000).
    I obtained cell level means, medians, and standard deviations of earnings,
as well as characteristics of the individuals spanning the period 1975 to 1995.
The sample is restricted to Germans living in the west German states. The
cells are based on year, age, state, and level of schooling. The regional
indicator is the state of the workplace. Every individual was assigned the
state where they worked in 1975 or when they …rst entered the dataset.
    The earnings measure provided is gross pay subject to social security
contributions, and it is truncated at the social security maximum. For each
cell, I know now many observations are at the maximum, and I only use cells
where the fraction at the maximum is 50 percent or less. I also discard 106
cells based on a single observation. The sample used in the analysis has 8605
cells, based on 2 to 1447 observations. The mean number of observations in
the cells is 206, the median is 82, and there are in total more than 1.7 million
micro records underlying the cell statistics.
    The advantage of the social security data is its large sample size. How-
ever, this is mitigated by the fact that it is a panel with repeated observations
on the same individuals. Another drawback is the coarse information on ed-
ucation. As a result, the QaC is my preferred data set for this analysis, and
I will present the most detailed results from that data source.


4     Results
4.1    The Impact of the Short School Years on Years in
       School
The …rst question raised by the introduction of the short school years is
whether a¤ected students did actually spend less time in school. While the
nominal time reduction due to the short school years was about two thirds
of a school year, students’behavior might have adjusted to undo part of this


                                       22
reduction. In the QaC data, I can construct a measure of the length of
time a respondent spent in primary and secondary school. Regressing this
variable on the short school year measure can be interpreted as the …rst stage
of the problem. I only do this for the …rst measure of the short school years
based on tracks because there is a mechanical correlation between the second
measure based on graduation year and the length in school variable (and
hence measurement error in both will drive the correlation). Conditioning
on secondary school track and gender as well as a full set of year, year of
birth, age, and state of residence dummies, I …nd that the short school years
reduced time in school by 0.39 months (with a standard error of 0.05) for
each month of time nominally lost by the short school years. The e¤ect is
far less than one, and it is quite precisely estimated.
    One of the main reasons why the length of schooling variable is not pick-
ing up the full e¤ect of the short school years is probably that the length
variable can only be computed in full years, while the short school years
were a fractional year treatment. I therefore would not expect these results
to be very precise. Individuals, who attended the …rst short school year
should report graduating an entire year ahead of the schedule had they just
attended school years of regular length (because both the beginning and the
end of the …rst short school year were during the same calendar year). Since
most a¤ected individuals participated in both short school years, this might
actually lead to an overstatement of the e¤ect, since the measured length of
schooling would be reduced by a whole year rather than two thirds of a year.
Furthermore, there were some changes in the exact dates when children be-
came eligible to enter school when the beginning of the school year shifted.
This is not re‡ected in the length measure.
    It is worthwhile keeping in mind that the measurement of the short school
year regressor is likely to be imperfect as well. Individuals presumably misre-
port both their year of birth and their highest level of schooling. For example,
Ashenfelter and Rouse (1998) …nd that about 6 percent of the variance in
highest grade completed is due to measurement error in a sample of twins.
    In addition, some individuals will have moved between states since they


                                      23
went to school. The impact of this latter measurement error can be assessed
with the aid of the ALLBUS data, which have both state of residence and
state of birth. These data come from the 1991, 1992, 1994, and 2000 waves
of the ALLBUS, therefore respondents are slightly older on average than in
the QaC sample, so that the degree of mobility in the ALLBUS data is likely
somewhat overstated. In addition, assuming that state of birth corresponds
to the state of schooling ignores that some students moved between birth
and the time they went to school, again overstating mobility. Nevertheless,
using a measures of exposure to the short school year based both on year of
birth, call it Di , and year of residence, Di , allows me to quantify the bias
from measurement error. If the measure based on year of birth was correct,
then the coe¢ cient from a regression of Di on Di measures the attenuation
from using Di as a regressor instead of the true measure. Including the other
covariates mentioned above, this attenuation factor is 0.84 in the ALLBUS
with a standard error of 0.02. This implies that the short school years
reduced schooling by 0.39/0.84 = 0.45. While I do not want to put too
much credence in the numerical estimates obtained here, it is comforting
that the data show a clear and very signi…cant impact of the short school
years on the actual time in school.

4.2    The Impact on School Performance
The most direct method to assess school performance is to compare the re-
sults of standardized tests. There is no standardized testing system in Ger-
many, which allows such a comparison. However, I will present the results of
three studies undertaken at the time of the short school years. The authors
of two of them tested the a¤ected students themselves, while the third study
relied on tests routinely given as part of the secondary track selection proce-
dure. I will also present some indirect results based on grade repetition and
transition into the more academic secondary school track.
    The …rst two studies are dissertations, and both authors administered
tests themselves. One tested students in the Saarland (Meister, 1972), the


                                      24
second students in Baden-Württemberg (Thiel, 1973). Both exploit the
quasi-experimental design of the short school years, and are competently exe-
cuted. Nevertheless, both have a number of limitations as well. One problem
is that both studies relied on existing tests, which may not be exactly ap-
propriate for the time at which students were tested. The samples were not
overly large: 435 and 449 children in 13 classrooms for the Saarland, and
between 146 and 365 students in 5 to 10 classrooms in Baden-Württemberg.
    The third study was conducted in the city of Frankfurt in the state of
Hessen (Schlevoigt, Hebbel and Richtberg, 1968) and relied on tests routinely
given to 4th graders there. The tests were speci…c to the grade level, and
similar in format to regular tests during the school year. The samples were
much larger, covering between 1148 and 3124 students (with the exception
of one subtest, where only 291 students were tested after the short school
years). The treatment groups were tested in 1968, i.e. one year after the
end of the short school years, so that they were in 2nd and 3rd grade during
the short school years. The control groups were tested in 1963 or 1965. One
drawback of the study is that the only publication is a terse, two page article
in a journal for teachers. The results of the studies are summarized in Table
3. Results were the students in the treatment group performed better are
shaded in grey.
    The study by Meister (1972) for the Saarland focused on teaching meth-
ods in the early primary grades, and hence he only tested 2nd graders. The
tests for the treatment group were performed after the end of the second
short school year, i.e. after the tested students had been exposed to two
short school years. The control group consisted of students in the same
schools who started school in summer 1967, i.e. after the short school years
were over. They were tested after a period that was equivalent to the short
school years, i.e. during the middle of their second school year. The author
chose this timing because he was interested in a control group of the same age
as the treatment group. The design therefore is trying to establish whether
learning was faster during the short school years but not whether the same
amount of material could be learned by the end of the school year. The re-


                                      25
sults in the …rst panel of Table 3 show that the treated students consistently
performed much better than the control group.
    One problem with the design is that the tests used may have been most
appropriate for the end of the second school year. The students exposed to
the short school year should therefore have covered all the required material,
while some of the tested material might not have been as easy for the control
group.18 Another problem is the possibility of knock-on e¤ects of the short
school years: if teachers expanded more e¤ort during the short school years,
they could have been doing a worse job in the subsequent years, so that
teaching quality for the control group was worse.
    The second study by Thiel (1973) for Baden-Württemberg addresses more
directly the question I am interested in here, namely whether the a¤ected
students learned the same amount as students in regular school years. He
tested 2nd, 4th and 8th graders. The treatment group was tested twice,
…rst at the end of the second short-school year, and the second time at the
end of a period equivalent to two regular school years. The treated students
will generally have been in the following grade during this retest, and they
were given parallel forms of the same test at the two testing dates. The
control groups used in this study are generally samples of tested students
used to norm the tests, i.e. these tests will have been performed prior to
the short school years in all the states of West Germany. The problem with
this comparison is that the curriculum may be di¤erent in other states, and
the test may therefore be more appropriate for the treatment or the control
group. Some of the control tests also date back various years, and standards
in schools may have changed over time. In some cases, the control group
results were collected by the author or his colleagues in Bavaria (with no
short school years) or in Baden-Württemberg after the short school years (as
in the case of the Saarland study).
    The second panel in Table 3 shows that the results for the second graders
  18
    Thiel (1973), who uses the same test describes it as designed to test knowledge at the
end of the 2nd grade. On the other hand, he goes on to say that the test is too easy for
the 2nd graders in Baden-Württemberg at that stage.



                                           26
generally con…rm the …ndings of the Saarland study: treated students per-
formed better after spending two full school years in school (the regular-
regular comparison). Nevertheless, they did not reach the control group
standards at the end of the short school years (the regular-short compari-
son), although the writing di¤erence is not signi…cant. Thiel (1973) discounts
the results for the writing test somewhat because he believes that it is too
easy for the 2nd graders in Baden-Württemberg.
    The results for 4th graders (third panel in Table 3) generally shows the
treated students at par with the control group at the end of the short school
year (the regular-short comparison) and at par or outperforming the control
group after a similar time in school (the regular-regular comparison). The
exceptions are the reading, vocabulary, and mental arithmetic subtests. Thiel
(1973) attributes the reading and vocabulary results to the fact that learning
in these skill categories may be more in‡uenced by maturation and hence age
(because a lot of reading takes place outside school) rather than training.
Since the treated students are about eight months younger at the end of the
short school year than the control group students, this di¤erence may explain
the results. The test for mental arithmetic contained in a number of questions
on fractions, a subject not covered in Baden-Württemberg until grade 5. This
would explain the lower performance of the treatment group compared to the
national control after the short school years, and the catching up when the
same students were retested during the 5th grade.
    Thiel (1973) also tested one group of 4th graders in 1969. This group
would have been a¤ected by the short school years during the …rst two grades.
Except in reading and vocabulary the results for this group are at par with
the control group. Even though he found de…ciencies for the 2nd graders in
writing and math right after the short school years, the children seemed to
have made up these de…ciencies within the next two years. The students are
again weaker than the control group in reading and vocabulary, which may
again be attributable to their lower age. On the other hand, the results for
this group do not bear out Thiel’s interpretation for the mental arithmetic
test. The 4th graders who were a¤ected by the short school years earlier


                                     27
were able to perform as well as the norm despite the fact that they would
not have been instructed in calculations involving fractions.
    Schlevoigt et al. (1968) does not report means of the scores on the tests
or t-statistics, but only tabulates the distribution. I have therefore calculated
the fraction of students scoring at some level around the median on each test.
I have also constructed t-statistics based on the counts given in the paper.
These will be somewhat inexact because of rounding in the publication. They
will also overstate the true signi…cance levels, because they do not take into
account the sampling at the class room and school level.
    The results in the Schlevoigt et al. (1968) study fall somewhere between
the regular-short comparison and the two years later comparisons in Thiel
(1973), since the treated students in Frankfurt experienced the short school
years in grades 2 and 3. The results di¤er markedly from those obtained
by Thiel. In all tests, the treated students performed worse, although the
di¤erence is only large and clearly signi…cant in writing. Curiously, writing
is the subject where the students tested by Thiel actually did slightly better
after the short school years.
    Finally, students a¤ected by the short school year in 8th grade generally
performed as well as the control group in the Thiel (1973) study. However,
the testing instrument may have been weak for that group. The writing test
only tested spelling but not punctuation, and hence focused on skills generally
acquired earlier. Similarly, the math test contained numerous questions on
material of the earlier grades.
    In summary, these studies show that the a¤ected students may have had
some de…ciencies at the end of the short school years in the core subjects of
reading, writing, and math, although these subjects presumably received the
most attention at the time.19 On the other hand, the students were always
  19
    Thiel (1973) also presents results from a small survey of teachers, informally assessing
the knowledge of the students at the end of the short school years. He distinguishes the
teachers who taught the students during the short school years, and those who taught
them in the subsequent year. In both cases, 62 percent of the respondents thought that
the a¤ected students learned the required material fully, while 38 percent saw de…ciencies.
The teachers saw the most problems outside the core subjects.



                                            28
on par and typically ahead of their peers when tested at the same age. The
results also reveal that any immediate e¤ects on learning seem to have been
eradicated when students were tested two years later. This indicates that the
eventual e¤ects of the short school years on learning of the a¤ected cohorts
should be small at best.
    In order to corroborate these …ndings, I present some results on grade
repetition and on the fraction of students going on to Gymnasium, the high-
est secondary school track, after grade 4. Data on grade retention of a¤ected
and una¤ected grades in primary school are presented in Table 4. States
are grouped into one of three groups: seven states with the short-school year,
Bavaria with the regular school year, and Berlin and Hamburg with the long
school year. I exclude Niedersachsen from this table because of its special
provisions for graduation, which makes it unclear whether students attend-
ing primary grades should have actually been a¤ected by the short school
years. Berlin and Hamburg are control states, because schools should have
adapted the curriculum to the long school year, since students would eventu-
ally graduate after the normal length of total schooling. Retention rates are
presented for the school year 1965-66, the last year before the transition, the
2nd short school year (1966-67) and the following four regular school years.
During those years, older grades will have been a¤ected by the transition,
but not new grades entering since 1967. This allows a variety of contrasts.
    Looking at …rst grade, it is apparent that retention rates did not ‡uctuate
much over the period in either the states with the short school year or the
control states. Things look di¤erent for 2nd grade. In both years when 2nd
grades are a¤ected, grade repetition jumps by about 1 percentage point in
the short school year states, and remains rather steady in Bavaria and the
long school year states. Similar e¤ects are visible for grades 3 and 4. Grade
repetition drifts up by about 1 percentage point in the two years after the
short school years and then drops back by about the same amount for the
una¤ected grades entering school after the short school years. The e¤ects of
the short school years on grade repetition often seem to be long lived, and
are visible even a few years after the short school years. This may be due to


                                      29
the fact that material had to be taught more quickly during the school years
immediately after 1966 as well. The contrast with Bavaria for grades 2 to 4
are also displayed in Figures 2 to 4.
    Data on the fraction of students entering Gymnasium are presented in
Table 5. These data are presented for the cohorts entering 5th grade from
1964 to 1971. The three years from 1964 to the beginning of the 1st short
school year in 1966 are pre-treatment years, since students completing fourth
grade at that time were una¤ected by the short school years. The next tran-
sition is presented for 1967, the …rst regular school year after the short school
years. Students starting grade 5 during the years 1967 to 1969 will have been
exposed to both short school years in the treatment states. 1971 represents a
post treatment year.20 The treatment states are being compared to Bavaria
and Hamburg, since the data on Berlin are not comparable. Results for
Niedersachsen are also presented in the table but it is again unclear whether
Niedersachsen should be a treatment or control state.
    A notable feature of Table 5 is that the fraction of students attending
Gymnasium increased over this period. Furthermore, the upward trends
seem to di¤er across states. They are much more moderate in the treatment
states and Bavaria then in Hamburg. The strong rise of Gymnasium enroll-
ment in Hamburg may stem from the fact that these results are calculated
from the number of students entering Gymnasium in a state. For example,
some of the students starting Gymnasium in Hamburg might have come from
primary schools from outside the state (which is basically a city) as more and
more suburban parents sent their children to attend city schools during this
period when Gymnasium enrollments expanded. Gymnasium enrollment in
Niedersachsen is slightly below trend during the treatment years. There-
fore, it matters exactly how this state is treated in assessing the impact of
the short school years.
    Table 6 presents regression results for the e¤ects of the short school years
on grade repetition and entering Gymnasium. Controlling for grade, year,
and state e¤ects, I …nd sizeable e¤ects of the short school year on grade
 20
      Data for 1970 are not available for all states.


                                               30
retention. Retention rates have increased by about 0.8 to 0.9 percentage
points due to the short school years and the estimates are highly statistically
signi…cant. The e¤ects are also large in magnitude, since only 2 to 5 percent
of students repeat grades every year. The results do not depend very much on
whether Niedersachsen is treated as a treatment or control state or dropped
from the sample altogether. Column (2) shows that the results are changed
little when state*grade interaction e¤ects are controlled for. Column (3)
presents results that are limited to grades 2 to 4, where grade repetition
is most likely to re‡ect academic achievement. The results are again very
similar.
     The last column in Table 6 presents the results for entering Gymnasium.
As was obvious from Table 5, here the treatment of Niedersachsen matters
more. When Niedersachsen is treated as a treatment state, the e¤ects on
track choice are zero. On the hand, the data suggest that more students
exposed to the short school years attended Gymnasium when Niedersachsen
is treated as a control state. However, in neither case do the data suggest
that reducing the length of school during primary grades led to fewer students
attending Gymnasium.
     The grade repetition and secondary school transition results therefore
give a picture that complements the earlier discussion of the testing results.
The grade repetition results indicate that predominantly weaker students
may have been hurt by the reduction in the length of the school year, maybe
because these students need more repetition to e¤ectively grasp the material
being taught.21 Students further up in the ability distribution do not seem
to have been adversely a¤ected by the short school years, as evidenced by the
results on Gymnasium entry. At the time, about 80 percent of students did
not enter Gymnasium after grade 4, so that these results speak on impacts
fairly high up in the ability distribution.
     How much of the reduction in the length of schooling will be undone by
  21
    This actually contrasts with the …ndings of Meister (1972), who looks at percentile
comparisons across the distribution of test results. He does not …nd any evidence that
weaker students performed worse during the short school years. The same is true in the
results presented in Schlevoigt et al. (1968).


                                          31
the fact that reducing term length will cause some students to repeat grades?
Students on average stayed in school for 10.1 years. Someone a¤ected by
the short school years will have on average 5 more years of schooling after
the short school years. Taking an impact of 0.009 on grade repetition as
representative, and assuming that this e¤ect persists for a¤ected students for
each year after primary school, implies that grade repetition added about
0.05 of a school year to the average time students spent in school, which is
not very large compared to the initial reduction of two thirds of a school
year.

4.3    The Impact on Earnings
Table 7 presents regressions of log wages and earnings on the short school
year indicators using the QaC data. The regressions control for the maximal
set of year, age, and year of birth dummies, secondary school track, state of
residence, and gender. This means that identi…cation is achieved by using
both the second and third level interactions implied by the short school year
measures. The regressions use the cohorts potentially a¤ected by the short
school years (1947 to 1960) as well as four adjacent birth cohorts (i.e. the
sample consists of the cohorts 1943 to 1964). The absence of second or third
level interactions of year of birth, state, and track, apart from e¤ects due
to the short school years, should be most plausible in this relatively narrow
sample. Di¤erent sources of identi…cation are explored below. The top panel
in the table reports coe¢ cients using log hourly wages as the dependent
variable, while the bottom panel reports similar regressions using log monthly
earnings.
    The short school year measures are scaled so that they correspond to the
fraction of a calendar year lost because of the reform. The coe¢ cients on
the short school year measures can therefore be interpreted analogously to
a return to a year of school. The results for the measure based on tracks
in column (1) are basically zero and they are relatively precisely estimated.
The 95 percent con…dence interval for the e¤ect of reducing time in school by


                                     32
a year ranges from -0.03 to 0.02. Taking a return to schooling of 7.5 percent
as the benchmark, the estimates in column (1) suggest that the negative
e¤ect of the short school years was at most 40 percent as large. These results
indicate that the short school years did not seem to have any detrimental
e¤ect on the earnings of a¤ected students, and large e¤ects can be ruled
out.22
    Using the second measure of the short school years based on graduation
year in column (2) yields very similar results. Coe¢ cients are slightly positive
when the second measure is used as an instrument for the …rst, as is shown
in column (3). This indicates that measurement error may bias the results
in column (1) towards zero, but the true coe¢ cient is positive, rather than
negative. Column (4) shows regressions which are limited to men for whom
selective labor force participation should not be much of an issue. The e¤ects
are again slightly positive.
    Table 8 probes the speci…cation further by changing the exact set of
treatment and control cohorts included in the sample. Column (1) only
uses cohorts in primary school during the short school years, and column
(2) uses those a¤ected in grades 1 to 9. These speci…cations also include
the adjacent una¤ected cohorts born from 1943-46 and 1961-64 again. The
coe¢ cient estimates change little from the previous table, and there is no
particular pattern to the results for earnings and wages, suggesting that any
di¤erences are likely due to sampling variation.
    The identi…cation in these speci…cations only relies on the interaction of
state and year of birth but not secondary school track, since everybody in
grades 1 to 9 in a treatment state was a¤ected by the short school years.
The only exception to that rule is the state of Niedersachsen. Column (3)
therefore uses the same sample as column (2) without Niedersachsen. It is
  22
     In principle, one should assess the e¤ect of the short school years on the present value
of life-time earnings, rather than earnings in just one year. Since the short school years
increased grade repetition and grade repetition involves the loss of a year in the labor
market, this e¤ect will not be captured by the results. However, this e¤ect will be trivial
because working lives are relatively long and the e¤ects on grade repetition were modest
in the aggregate.



                                             33
then possible to omit the controls for secondary school track. The results are
again positive, indicating that controlling for track does not bias the results
upwards.23 This is not surprising, since the short school years did not seem
to a¤ect track choice very much in Table 6.
    Column (4) includes only secondary school students, but omits primary
school students from the sample. The di¤erences are small when comparing
the results to the primary school sample in column (1). This indicates that
the absence of e¤ects of the short school year is not particular to reducing
term length in either primary or secondary school. It is interesting to take
this even one step further, and assess how the impact of the short school
years di¤er depending on the grade when a student was a¤ected. For ex-
ample, it might be that there was a detrimental e¤ect only for students in
higher grades, because these students had little time to catch up with missed
material before graduation. Figure 5 plots the coe¢ cients of this exercise to-
gether with a 95 percent con…dence band. The grade by grade estimates are
less precise, and the width of the con…dence interval is about 10 percent and
wider for low and high grades. Nevertheless, the plot reveals no particular
pattern of the coe¢ cients by the grade level when students were a¤ected.
    The results from the ALLBUS, shown in Table 9, indicate a slightly neg-
ative impact of the short school years. The point estimate in column (1)
is -0.018, implying almost a 2 percent loss in earnings for each year less in
school. Unfortunately, the ALLBUS samples are much smaller, leading to
a relatively imprecise and insigni…cant estimate. This is true even more in
column (2), where the sample is restricted to the four waves from 1991, 1992,
1994, and 2000. The basic story changes little in this subsample. Since
these waves of the ALLBUS data identify state of birth, they allow a coding
of the short school year measure which should be more accurate than the
measure based on state of residence. In fact, a comparison of results using
the two measures in columns (3) and (4), including state of birth e¤ects,
  23
     The coe¢ cients in column (3) are also more positive when compared to a regression
that excludes the Niedersachsen observations and includes track dummies, which is the
relevant comparison here.



                                          34
reveals that measurement error may play some role, but the coe¢ cient based
on the measure using state of birth in column (4) is again more positive. This
…nding also suggests that it is unlikely that the true coe¢ cient is negative,
and the …nding of a small e¤ect is simply due to attenuation from mobility
across states. But the precision of the results does not allow any strong
conclusions.
    Finally, I estimated the same model on the social security data. Recall
that the social security earnings are truncated at the taxable maximum. In
order to deal with the truncation and the grouped nature of the data, I used
median regression in this case. I follow Chamberlain’s (1994) suggestion to
estimate a regression on the cell medians which are not subject to truncation,
using the cell sizes as weights. This estimator can be interpreted as a
minimum distance estimator. It is similar to Powell’s (1984) censored least
absolute deviations estimator for the underlying micro data. The calculation
of the standard errors, which account for the serial correlation introduced by
the panel character of the data, is described in the appendix.
    The estimate of the short school year e¤ect is 0.019 with a standard error
of 0.020. Unlike the baseline estimates from the QaC or the ALLBUS, this
estimate is slightly positive but it is also not signi…cantly di¤erent from zero.
The most useful way to look at the estimates together, is to combine them
into a single meta-estimate. The mean of the estimates, weighted by the
inverse of their sampling variances, is 0.003. Assuming that the samples
are drawn from the same population, and that the estimates re‡ect the same
parameter, the sampling variance of the meta-estimate, vm , is given by
                             1      1   1   1
                               =      +   +         :
                            vm      v1 v2 v3
This yields a standard error of 0.011. Overall, the results from the three data
sets do not indicate any negative e¤ects of the short school years on earnings.
The combined estimate is precise enough to rule out any sizeable negative
e¤ects: the 95 percent con…dence interval ranges from -0.019 to 0.026. Various
checks on the speci…cation and potential biases from measurement error all
indicate that this is not because the estimates are biased up, at least not too

                                       35
any signi…cant degree. Hence, this is fairly strong evidence that a moderate
reduction of term length in Germany did not have adverse e¤ects on earnings.

4.4    The Impact on Civic Outcomes
My …ndings so far indicate that the short school years had little impact
on the learning of key labor market relevant skills and on later earnings.
Nevertheless, this result may have come about because educators shifted
resources away from subjects like music, arts, and physical education to the
core academic subjects. In addition, schools may have had less time to spend
on activities like civic education. Economists have recently become rather
interested in these aspects of education. There have been a number of recent
studies investigating the impact of schooling on health, crime, and voting
behavior.24
    Following some of this work, I use the ALLBUS data to look at these
issues. The dataset contains various questions on political participation and
voting behavior. I use these to create a variety of measures of political
disinterest, and I run regressions similar to the ones in Table 9. Table 10
displays the results. Every survey asked respondents which party they would
vote for if there was a national election next Sunday. Because participation
in general elections is typically high, and respondents may not want to admit
to not voting, only 6.1 percent of the sample indicate that they would not
vote. However, being a¤ected by the short school year does not alter that
fraction.
    Slightly more respondents, 9.8 percent, say that they did not actually
vote in the last national election. However, this question was not asked in
1980 and 1982, 1994, and 2000, resulting in a slightly smaller sample. Those
a¤ected by the short school years are slightly more likely to respond that
they did not vote but the di¤erence is not signi…cant. Another question asks
respondents to assess their political interest on a …ve point scale (missing in
  24
    See Lleras-Muney (2002) and Currie and Moretti (2002) on health, Lochner and
Moretti (2001) on crime, and Dee (2003) and Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos (2003)
on voting.


                                        36
1988 and 2000). 23 percent of respondents show little or no political interest
(the two lowest categories). Political interest is higher among those a¤ected
by the short school year by 2 percentage points, and the result is again not
signi…cant. Using these three di¤erent measures, my results are clustered
around zero, and show no systematic impact of the short school years.
    Apart from political participation, I would like to evaluate whether indi-
viduals a¤ected by the short school yeas are more likely to sympathize with
more radical parties. The voting questions are not very helpful in this regard,
because the fraction of the vote going to extreme parties is tiny. However,
in 1980, 1984, and 1994, the survey also asked respondents to assess how
much they liked various parties. I classify the NPD and Republikaner as
extreme parties on the right, and the DKP and PDS as extreme parties on
the left. The answers are given on an eleven point scale, so that …ve points
are associated with a positive attitude, …ve with a negative attitude and one
with a neutral attitude. I consider any of the …ve positive answers for one
of the extreme parties as favoring this party to some degree. The mean of
this variable is 5.8 percent, and the impact of the short school years is very
large with 4.4 percentage points in comparison. The coe¢ cient is marginally
signi…cant with a p-value of 12 percent.
    Many of the reports by teachers have singled out music as one of the
subjects that was frequently subject to reduced hours or attention during
the short school years. In order to test whether this might be the case, and
whether it could have an e¤ect on later behavior, I exploit the fact that Ger-
many has an important culture of participation in clubs. All surveys except
the 2000 one asked about club membership. I aggregate all the answers for
participation in a choir, orchestra, or other music related club or group. 3.6
percent of respondents are members of such a club, and exposure to the short
school years reduces membership by 1.8 percentage points, with a p-value of
15 percent.
    These last two results indicate that the short school years may have had
an e¤ect on civic attitudes and participation in music or the arts. While
the point estimates are large, the results in the small ALLBUS samples are


                                      37
only marginally signi…cant at best, so that it is not possible to draw strong
conclusions. Nevertheless, these results indicate that the short school years
may have had some cost in terms of civic education and appreciation for the
arts.


5    Conclusion
This paper presents estimates from a reform in the West-German school sys-
tem which manipulated the length of schooling for a¤ected students without
a¤ecting the highest grade completed or secondary school degree obtained
directly. The results of this paper therefore speak directly to the impact of
changes in term length or other changes in the length of schooling which
are independent of the highest grade completed, and the curriculum studied.
The results suggest that some of the reduction in instructional time is be-
ing undone by students, for example through grade repetition. Apart from
increased grade repetition, I do not …nd negative e¤ects of shorter school-
ing. The literature on learning outcomes also did not show any consistent
and permanent negative e¤ects of the reduced instructional time. Neither
the secondary school track attended nor later earnings seem to have been
a¤ected adversely by the short school years.
    To what degree do these …ndings generalize to other settings? One
reason for the minor e¤ect of the short school years could be that there were
many compensatory measures at work, including some which might have
been special to this particular reform. For example, teachers and students
could have worked harder during the time when school years were shortened
because of the special circumstances. I have no direct evidence whether this
was the case but I doubt that it explains the results. The grade repetition
results seem to indicate quite clearly that some students were a¤ected by the
loss in instructional time. Furthermore, anecdotal evidence suggests that
school resources were already under great strain in the mid-1960s because
of the e¤ects of the baby boom. This suggests that there were not a lot of
reserves to draw on to provide higher quality instruction during this period.


                                     38
    A further problem is that German wages are highly regulated by union
wage setting, and the wage schedules may not have adapted to the speci…cs
of the short school years. Nevertheless, wages may adapt if such changes
are made a permanent feature of the educational system. However, German
wages do seem to be ‡exible enough that the impact of other di¤erences in
education can easily be discerned. The returns to schooling in Germany
are very close to linear and of a similar magnitude as is the case in other
countries.
    Of course, the short school years are not exactly the same as a reduction
in term length. The German episode lead to compression in instructional
time for a given curriculum for a short period, probably about two to four
years. A reduction in term length, which corresponded to a similar reduction
over the student’s time in school, would only amount to about two weeks less
per year. However, if there are few discernible e¤ects of the short school
years, a more spread out reduction in term length is unlikely to have larger
e¤ects. The German results may also not carry over to other countries
because Germany has one of the longest school years in the developed world.
On the other hand, German school days are short, and total instructional
time per year in Germany is actually below the OECD average.
    The …ndings are not encouraging for policy makers who wish to use
lengthening the school year as a measure to boost the performance of their
students, and this is more or less consistent with the previous literature. The
enthusiasm of the authors of a “Nation at Risk”for longer school years may
therefore have been misplaced. While 52 percent of Americans advocate
that children spend more time in school, there has been little change in the
length of school terms during the last two decades. Interestingly, the 1994
study “Prisoners of Time,”while putting time in school at the center of their
agenda, move somewhat away from simply adding instructional time to the
use of that time for core academic activities. This may well be the correct
conclusion, and this paper has little to say on the issue of how time in school
is used.
    There has been a discussion in west Germany after uni…cation about


                                      39
reducing the time to reach the university entrance quali…cation Abitur (ob-
tained at the end of the Gymnasium track) from 13 to 12 years. One reason
for this proposal is the fact that the East German school system only required
12 years for the same degree. Apart from possible cost savings, it has also
been seen as a useful device to reduce the age at which university graduates
enter the job market. Critics object to these proposals on the grounds that
educational quality might be compromised. Only one of the west German
states has reduced the number of grades in Gymnasium so far (Saarland,
although experiments are running in various other states), while three of the
eastern states require 13 years for an Abitur now. The short school year
experience suggests that it might be possible to eliminate the last year of
Gymnasium without much adverse e¤ects on the labor market performance
of the students.
    One caveat that has to be kept in mind is that there are some students who
were hurt by the short school years: those who ended up repeating a grade as
a result of the reform, and this result is also mirrored by Lee and Barro (2001)
in their cross country evidence. The most poorly performing students may
not be able to keep up with an increased pace implied by a shorter school
year. This indicates that the length of instructional time matters di¤erently
for di¤erent students. Of course, grade repetition seems a rather ine¢ cient
mechanism to overcome the problems of poorly performing students. The
move of school districts in the United States towards introducing mandatory
summer school for poorly performing students seems to be a more adequate
response. Another cost of shorter instructional time may be a shift away
from civic education, but more study of this issue is certainly necessary before
any …rm conclusions can be drawn.




                                      40
6    Appendix: Estimation of the Standard Er-
     rors for the Social Security Data
The structure of the social security data is similar to the problem posed
in Chamberlain (1994). I …t a weighted linear regression through the cell
medians using the cell size as the weight, i.e. I estimate

                       ^ = arg min(m    X )0 W (m      X )                 (2)

where m is the vector of cell medians, X is the matrix of regressors, and W
is a diagonal matrix with elements wj = nj =n on the diagonal, where nj is
the size of cell j. This can be thought of as a minimum distance estimator.
Hence the covariance matrix would have the form

                      1            1                       1
                   1   =(X 0 W X) X 0 W W X (X 0 W X)                       (3)
                      n
where is a diagonal matrix with the sampling variance of the cell median
on the diagonal.
    The sampling variance of the median involves the density of the data. I
assume that earnings are distributed log normally in each cell. If the earnings
data are truncated, I calculate the standard deviation of the uncensored
distribution j using the estimate of the median, the censoring point cj , the
fraction at the maximum pj , and the normality assumption using

                                       cj      mj
                               j   =    1 (1    pj )
where ( ) is the cumulative standard normal distribution function. Given
the uncensored standard deviation, the j-th element of is calculated as
                                               2
                                               j
                               !j =
                                       4wj (0)2

where ( ) is the standard normal density function.
    Chamberlain also suggests an adjustment to the covariance matrix to
allow for the fact that the model estimated in eq. (2) does not …t the data

                                       41
exactly (e.g. the medians do not line up linearly). In this case, the estimates
can be thought of as a linear approximation. De…ne r = m X as the
vector of approximation errors. In this case the covariance matrix will be
equal to 1 + 2 where

            1             1                                                                   1
    2   =     (X 0 W X)       X 0 W diag(w1 1 r12 ; w2 1 r22 ; :::; wJ 1 rJ2 )W X (X 0 W X)
            J
and J is the number cells.
    A further complication arises from the fact that the cell level medians
are calculated from a panel, so the same individuals will recur in di¤erent
cells. The median estimates within a cohort will therefore be correlated. In
order to allow for this serial correlation, I need an estimate of the covariance
matrix of earnings. I have up to 21 years of data for some cohorts, and I am
not aware of any such estimate for Germany (or any other country) for such
a long time span. Hence, I use the results reported in Card (1994) for the
United States. Card estimates a parametric model for the earnings process
on eight years of data from the PSID. Using this model, I calculate the …rst
20 implied autocorrelations. Biewen (2002) presents estimates for German
household level income. The autocorrelations reported by Biewen are about
20 to 30 percent lower than those calculated from Card’s model.
    Let S denote the resulting autocorrelation matrix, and Sk the submatrix
for the k-th cohort (which may have less than 21 observations in the data).
The middle part of 1 in eq. (3) can therefore be written


                                     1=2      1=2                     1=2     1=2
   X 0W      0
                 W X = X10 W1        1 S1
                                                         0
                                              1 W1 X1 + X2 W2         2 S2    2 W2 X2     +
                                   0          1=2   1=2
                          : : : + XK WK       K SK K WK XK

where the subscripts now refer to one of K cohorts rather than cells. An
analogous adjustment is made for 2 .
   This autocorrelation adjustment is likely to overstate the degree of serial
correlation. While individuals occur repeatedly in the data, some individuals
enter and leave the dataset. The correlation of the cell statistics over time

                                                42
should therefore be lower than the correlation of the individual level data.
Hence, the standard errors estimated in this way are likely to be rather
conservative. An alternative way to estimate standard errors is by using
Stata’s aweights (to allow for the cell level data) and cluster by cohort (to
allow for a non-parametric estimate of the serial correlation structure). The
Stata standard error on the short school year variable is 0.013 compared to
0.020 calculated with the procedure described above.




                                     43
References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Jörn-Ste¤en Pischke (1999) “Beyond Becker:
    Training in Imperfect Labor Markets,”Economic Journal Features 109,
    F112-142.

[2] Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger (1999) “Empirical Strategies in Labor
    Economics,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.) Handbook of
    Labor Economics, vol. 3A, 1277-1366.

[3] Ashenfelter, Orley and Cecilia Rouse (1998) “Income, Schooling, and
    Ability: Evidence from a New Sample of Identical Twins,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 113, 253-284.

[4] Bender Stefan, Anette Haas and Christoph Klose (2000) “IAB Employ-
    ment Subsample 1975-1995 Opportunities for Analysis Provided by the
    Anonymised Subsample.”IZA Discussion Paper No. 117.

[5] Bender, Stefan and Jürgen Hilzdegen (1995) “Die IAB-
    Beschaftigtenstichprobe als Scienti…c Use File,” Mitteilungen aus
    der Arbeitsmarkt und Berufsforschung 28, 76-95.

[6] Betts, Julian R. and Eric Johnson (1998) “A Test of Diminishing Re-
    turns to School Spending,”mimeographed, University of California San
    Diego.

[7] Biewen, Martin (2002) “The Covariance Structure of East and West
    German Incomes and its Implications for the Persistence of Poverty and
    Inequality.”IZA Discussion Paper No. 459.

[8] Card, David (1999) “The Causal E¤ect of Education on Earnings,” in
    Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics,
    vol. 3A, 1801-1863.




                                   44
 [9] Card, David (1994) “Intertemporal Labor Supply: An Assessment,”
     in Christopher Sims (ed.), Advances in Econometrics, Sixth World
     Congress. New York: Cambridge University Press.

[10] Card, David and Alan Krueger (1992) “Does School Quality Matter?
     Returns to Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the
     United States,”Journal of Political Economy 100, 1-40.

[11] Chamberlain, Gary (1994) “Quantile Regression, Censoring and the
     Structure of Wages,” in Christopher Sims (ed.), Advances in Econo-
     metrics, 6th World Congress vol. 1, New York: Cambridge University
     Press.

[12] Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti (2002) “Mother’s Education and the
     Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from Col-
     lege Openings and Longitudinal Data.”NBER Working Paper No. 9360.

[13] Dee, Thomas (2003) “Are There Civic Returns to Education?” NBER
     Working Paper No. 9588.

[14] Eide, Erik and Mark H. Showalter (1998) “The E¤ect of School Quality
     on Student Performance: A Quantile Regression Approach”, Economics
     Letters 58, 345-350.

[15] Grogger, Je¤ (1996) “Does School Quality Explain the Recent
     Black/White Wage Trend?” Journal of Labor Economics 14, 231-253.

[16] Heckman, James, Anne Lane-Farrar, and Petra Todd (1986) “Does Mea-
     sured School Quality Really Matter? An Examination of the Earnings
     Quality Relationship,”in Gary Burtless (ed.) Does Money Matter? The
     E¤ect of School Resources on Student Achievement and Adult Success.
     Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 192-289.

[17] Lang, Kevin and David Kropp (1986) “Human Capital versus Sorting:
     The E¤ects of Compulsory Attendance Laws,”Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 101, 609-624.

                                   45
[18] Lee, Jong-Wha and Robert Barro (2001) “School Quality in a Cross-
     Section of Countries,”Economica 68, 465-488.

[19] Lleras-Muney, Adriana (2002) “The Relationship Between Education
     and Adult Mortality in the United States,” NBER Working Paper No.
     8986.

[20] Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti (2001) “The E¤ect of Education
     on Crime: Evidence from Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports.”
     NBER Working Paper No. 8605.

[21] Meister, Hans (1972) Zur Unangemessenheit des Anfangsunterrichts in
     der Grundschule. Vergleichende Untersuchung des Ein‡usses der Kurz-
     schuljahre auf Schulleistungen. Dissertation, Universität des Saarlandes.

[22] Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos (2003) “Does
     Education Improve Citizenship? Evidence from the U.S. and the U.K.”
     NBER Working Paper No. 9584.

[23] NCES      (2000)     Digest   of    Education        Statistics    1999.
     http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2000/2000031.pdf

[24] Powell, James (1984) “Least Absolute Deviations Estimation for the
     Censored Regression Model,”Journal of Econometrics 25, 303-325.

[25] Rizzuto, Ronald and Paul Wachtel (1980) “Further Evidence on the
     Returns to School Quality,”Journal of Human Resources 15, 240-254.

[26] Schlevoigt, G., G. Hebbel and W. Richtberg (1968) “Soll und Haben
     nach zwei Kurzschuljahren,”Hessische Lehrerzeitung 21, 183-184.

[27] Statistisches Bundesamt (various years) Fachserie A. Bevölkerung und
     Kultur, Reihe 10, I, Allgemeines Bildungswesen. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer
     Verlag.




                                     46
[28] Thiel, Bertold (1973) Die Auswirkung Verkürzter Unterrichtszeit auf die
     Schulleistung. Untersuchung zur Problematik der Kurzschuljahre. Dis-
     sertation, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen.

[29] Wöß  mann, Ludger (2003) “Schooling Resources, Educational Institu-
     tions and Student Performance: the International Evidence,” Oxford
     Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 65, 117-170.




                                    47
                                         Table 1
                      Numbers of Short School Years by Birth Cohort
                              and Secondary School Track

Year Quarter Year of          Year of Graduation from    Number of Short School Years
 of    of    School         Basic     Middle Gymnasium Basic      Middle Gymnasium
Birth Birth   Entry        School     School             School School
 46    all     53            62         63          66     0         0          0
 47    all     54            63         64        66/Dec   0         0          1
 48    all     55            64         65          67     0         0          2
 49    all     56            65         66          68     0         0          2
 50    all     57            66       66/Dec        69     0         1          2
 51    all     58          66/Dec       67          70     1         2          2
 52    all     59            67         68          71     2         2          2
 53    all     60            68         69          72     2         2          2
 54    all     61            69         70          73     2         2          2
 55    all     62            70         71          74     2         2          2
 56    all     63            71         72          75     2         2          2
 57    all     64            72         73          76     2         2          2
 58    all     65            73         74          77     2         2          2
 59    all     66            74         75          78     2         2          2
 60     1    66/Dec          75         76          79     1         1          1
 60     2    66/Dec          75         76          79     1         1          1
 60     3      67            76         77          80     0         0          0
 60     4      67            76         77          80     0         0          0

Note: This table shows years of school entry and graduation based on school entry in the year
after the 6th birthday, no grade repetition, and 9 years of basic school.




                                            48
                                        Table 2
                      Percentage of Respondents Who Have Lived
                      in Current State Since Specific Age or Time
                      ALLBUS, 1991, 1992, 1994, and 2000 Waves

 Has Lived in Current                                 State of Current Residence
 State Since                                                                    Berlin/
                              All States       Bavaria      Niedersachsen     Hamburg
                                       All Respondents
 Birth (State of Birth)           84             90               88             59
 Birth (In State Since)           80             85               82             51
 Age 6                            83             86               85              55
 Age 12                           85             86               86              58
 Age 18                           86             88               87              64
 1965 or earlier                  61             59               60              45
                               Respondents Born 1947-1960
 Birth (State of Birth)           83             91               88             54
 Birth (In State Since)           79             85               82             45
 Age 6                            82             85               83              52
 Age 12                           84             86               86              56
 Age 18                           85             88               86              59
 1965 or earlier                  84             86               86              56

Note: The first row is based on whether state at birth is the same as state of current
residence. The other rows are based on a question asking how long the respondent has
lived in the state of current residence. Number of observations is 2445 for all states (1133
for respondents born 1947-60), 567 (237) for Bavaria, 273 (125) for Niedersachsen, and
148 (75) for Berlin/Hamburg. There are slightly fewer observations for the first row
(respondent still in state of birth) in each case.




                                            49
                                              Table 3
                           Test Results of Short School Year Students
                                   (t-statistics in Parentheses)

                                           Control Groups                 Treatment Groups
                                            Tested After                    Tested After
                                                                                         2 Years
Test               Mean of                 Short    Regular         Short     Regular
                                                                                          Later
                                   2nd graders (Meister, 1972)
                                                                    16.2
Reading            Mistakes                19.6
                                                                    (5.4)
                                                                     8.3
Writing            Mistakes                15.0
                                                                    (8.8)
                                                                     6.7
Math               Mistakes                16.3
                                                                   (11.3)
                                      nd
                                     2 graders (Thiel, 1973)
                                                                    13.5       8.5
Writing            Mistakes                             11.8
                                                                    (1.5)     (3.9)
                                                                    18.2      29.9
Math               Correct Answers                      27.0
                                                                    (4.5)     (1.9)
                                     4th graders (Thiel, 1973)
                                                                      10.2    12.7        11.9
Reading            Correct Answers                      12.7
                                                                     (7.3)    (0.1)       (2.1)
                                                                      17.1    20.5        18.9
Vocabulary         Correct Answers                   19.8
                                                                     (5.1)    (1.9)       (1.7)
                   Correct                                            14.1    15.4        14.0
Writing                                              13.5
                   Answers                                           (1.6)    (6.8)       (0.9)
Mental                                                                 7.7     9.9         9.2
                   Correct Answers                    9.5
Arithmetic                                                           (4.4)    (1.3)       (0.6)
Written                                                               11.5    11.4        11.3
                   Correct Answers                   11.3
Arithmetic                                                           (0.5)    (0.3)       (0.0)
                   Correct                                            11.0    12.3        12.1
Math Problems                                        11.2
                   Answers                                           (0.3)    (3.3)       (2.1)
                                4th graders (Schlevoigt et al., 1968)
Text               Fraction 12+                                       0.54
                                                     0.58
Comprehension      Points (20 total)                                 (2.7)
                   Fraction <12                                       0.38
Writing                                              0.55
                   Mistakes                                          (9.5)
                   Fraction 20+                                       0.57
Arithmetic                                           0.60
                   Points (30 total)                                 (2.0)
                   Fraction 10+                                       0.57
Math Problems                                        0.59
                   Points (20 total)                                 (0.7)
                          8th graders in basic school track (Thiel, 1973)
                                                                      18.6    18.0
Writing            Mistakes                          17.9
                                                                     (0.9)    (0.4)
                                                                      32.9    34.2
Math               Correct Answers                   30.2
                                                                     (0.9)    (1.6)

Notes: Fractions and t-statistics for Schlevoigt et al. (1968) are calculated by the author
from the tabulated distribution of results.



                                                   50
                                           Table 4
                       Fraction of Students Repeating Primary Grades
                                 1966 to 1971 by State Group

                                      Grade 1        Grade 2        Grade 3             Grade 4
                                    1965-66 School Year
States with Short School Years         0.045          0.044          0.036               0.034
Bavaria                                0.036          0.026          0.020               0.014
States with Long School Years          0.037          0.052          0.043               0.040
                         1966-67 School Year (2nd Short School Year)
States with Short School Years         0.045          0.053          0.040               0.037
Bavaria                                0.038          0.026          0.021               0.015
States with Long School Years          0.029          0.048          0.039               0.034
                                    1967-68 School Year
States with Short School Years         0.047          0.057          0.046               0.043
Bavaria                                0.040          0.028          0.020               0.015
                                    1968-69 School Year
States with Short School Years         0.048          0.049          0.049               0.048
Bavaria                                0.037          0.026          0.019               0.015
States with Long School Years          0.034          0.043          0.028               0.030
                                    1969-70 School Year
States with Short School Years         0.053          0.044          0.038               0.045
Bavaria                                0.038          0.027          0.018               0.016
States with Long School Years          0.033          0.048          0.034               0.025
                                    1970-71 School Year
States with Short School Years         0.053          0.042          0.032               0.032
Bavaria                                0.039          0.027          0.019               0.017
States with Long School Years          0.034          0.044          0.032               0.027

Source: Statistisches Bundesamt, Fachserie A. Bevölkerung und Kultur, Reihe 10, I,
Allgemeines Bildungswesen, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, various issues.
Note: States with short school years are Schleswig-Holstein, Bremen, Nordrhein-Westfalen,
Hessen, Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland, and Baden-Württemberg (Niedersachsen is excluded from
this group), states with long school years are Berlin and Hamburg. Shaded areas indicate grades
affected by the short school years. No Berlin data on grade repetition are available for the 1967-
68 school year.




                                              51
                                            Table 5
                    Fraction of Students Entering Gymnasium after Grade 4
                                  1963 to 1971 by State Group

School Year                              States with   Bavaria    Hamburg      Niedersachsen
                                        Short School
                                           Years
1964                                        0.198      0.188        0.217           0.140
1965                                        0.227      0.214        0.251           0.175
1966 (start of 1st short school year)       0.237      0.213        0.271           0.182
1967                                        0.248      0.220        0.290           0.173
1968                                        0.256      0.220        0.395           0.183
1969                                        0.273      0.231        0.405           0.162
1971                                        0.289      0.266        0.380           0.225

Source: Statistisches Bundesamt, Fachserie A. Bevölkerung und Kultur, Reihe 10, I,
Allgemeines Bildungswesen, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, various issues.
Note: States with short school years are Schleswig-Holstein, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Rheinland-
Pfalz, Saarland, and Baden-Württemberg (Bremen, Hessen and Niedersachsen are excluded from
this group). Shaded area indicates grades affected by the short school years.




                                                52
                                          Table 6
                Regression Estimates of the Effect of the Short School Years
                 on Grade Repetition and Secondary School Track Choice
                              (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                                                         Dependent Variable
                                                    Grade Repetition              Entered
                                                                                 Gymnasium
Independent Variable/Specification          (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
Mean of Dependent Variable                0.0389        0.0389       0.0372        0.237
Affected by Short School Years            0.0078        0.0067       0.0070         0.004
(Niedersachsen is Treatment)             (0.0018)      (0.0017)     (0.0021)       (0.011)
Affected by Short School Years            0.0088        0.0094       0.0109         0.017
(Niedersachsen is Control)               (0.0017)      (0.0016)     (0.0019)       (0.009)
Affected by Short School Years            0.0096        0.0088       0.0096         0.010
(Sample without Niedersachsen )          (0.0013)      (0.0011)     (0.0012)       (0.011)
Year Dummies
State Dummies
Grade Dummies
State*Grade Interactions
Number of Observations                      256          256           192            70

Note: States with short school years are Schleswig-Holstein, Bremen, Nordrhein-Westfalen,
Hessen, Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland, and Baden-Württemberg. Niedersachsen is treated differently
in different specifications. Data on grade repetition cover grades 1 to 4 and the school years
ending 1966 to 1971. Berlin data are missing for the 1967-68 school year. The regressions are
weighted by the number of students in each grade, year, and state. Column (3) only includes
grades 2 to 4. Data on entering gymnasium cover the years 1964 to1971, Bremen and Berlin are
excluded, and there are missing observations for Hessen in 1969 and Hamburg, Niedersachsen,
Baden-Württemberg and Bavaria in 1970. The regressions are weighted by the number of fourth
graders in the year and state.




                                            53
                                            Table 7
                                     Earnings Regressions
                               Qualification and Career Survey
                                    Cohorts Born 1943-64
                                (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                                                                                     Only Men
                                              OLS          OLS             IV          OLS
Independent Variable                           (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)
                             Dependent Variable: Log Hourly Wage
Short School Year                              -0.003                     0.005        0.009
                                                              ---
Definition Based on Tracks                    (0.013)                    (0.014)      (0.015)
Short School Year                                           0.004
                                                  ---                      ---           ---
Definition Based on Graduation Date                        (0.012)
                         Dependent Variable: Log Monthly Earnings
Short School Year                              -0.001                     0.009        0.016
                                                              ---
Definition Based on Tracks                    (0.015)                    (0.016)      (0.017)
Short School Year                                           0.007
                                                  ---                      ---           ---
Definition Based on Graduation Date                        (0.013)
Secondary School Track Dummies
Year Dummies
State of Residence Dummies
Year of Birth Dummies
Age Dummies
Female Dummy
Number of Observations                        45521         45521        45521         26990

Note: Standard errors are adjusted for clusters at the track * year of birth * state level. The
short school year measure based on graduation date is used as an instrument for the short school
year measure based on tracks in column (3).




                                             54
                                           Table 8
                                    Earnings Regressions
                              Qualification and Career Survey
                               (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                                          Primary                                    Secondary
Cohorts Affected in                        School          Grades 1-9                  School
                                          1943-46            1943-46                  1943-55
Cohorts                                   1957-64            1952-64                  1961-64
Independent Variable                         (1)         (2)         (3)                 (4)
                            Dependent Variable: Log Hourly Wage
Short School Year                             0.009        -0.001        0.027        -0.009
Definition Based on Tracks                   (0.017)       (0.014)      (0.048)       (0.016)
                         Dependent Variable: Log Monthly Earnings
Short School Year                             -0.007       -0.011        0.010         0.001
Definition Based on Tracks                   (0.020)       (0.016)      (0.050)       (0.018)
Secondary School Track Dummies
Year Dummies
State of Residence Dummies
Year of Birth Dummies
Age Dummies
Female Dummy
Number of Observations                       23632         35113         32040         33660

Note: Standard errors are adjusted for clusters at the track * year of birth * state level.
Observations from Niedersachsen are omitted from the specification in column (3).




                                             55
                                       Table 9
                                 Earnings Regressions
                                 ALLBUS 1980-2000
                       Dependent Variable: Log Monthly Earnings
                            (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Waves                                      All             1991, 1992, 1994, and 2000
Independent Variable                       (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)
Short School Year                          -0.018       -0.005      -0.005
                                                                                       ---
Definition Based on State of Residence    (0.033)      (0.070)      (0.071)
Short School Year                                                                  0.041
                                            ---          ---           ---
Definition Based on State of Birth                                                (0.071)
Secondary School Track Dummies
Year Dummies
State of Residence Dummies
State of Birth Dummies
Year of Birth Dummies
Age Dummies
Female Dummy
Number of Observations                     6215         1649         1649             1649

Note: Samples include employed workers in cohorts born 1943-64. Standard errors are
adjusted for clusters at the track * year of birth * state level.




                                          56
                                                Table 10
                        Political Participation and Attitudes, Interest in Music
                                   ALLBUS 1980-2000, various years
                                     (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

 Dependent Variable                        Would not      Did not      Little       Likes      Member of
                                           Vote Next     Vote Last    Political    Extreme      Choir,
                                            Sunday       Election     Interest      Party      Orchestra
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)
 Mean of Dependent Variable                  0.061         0.098       0.226        0.058       0.036
 Short School Year                           -0.002        0.016       -0.020       0.044         -0.018
 Definition Based on State of Residence      (0.017)      (0.030)     (0.030)      (0.028)       (0.012)
 Secondary School Track Dummies
 Year Dummies
 State of Residence Dummies
 Year of Birth Dummies
 Age Dummies
 Female Dummy
 Number of Observations                       6057         4477         5952        2029          6925

Note: Samples include cohorts born 1943-64. Standard errors are adjusted for clusters at the track *
year of birth * state level.




                                                  57
                                                                       Figure 1: Teacher Absences

                                       10

                                        9
     Average Number of Days per Year




                                        8

                                        7

                                        6

                                        5

                                        4

                                        3

                                        2

                                        1

                                        0
                                                1964/65   1965/66         SSY 1           SSY 2        1967/68        1968/69    1969/70
                                                                                     School Year



                                                               Figure 2: Grade Repetition Rates Grade 2

                                       0.06

                                                                                                                    SSY States
                                       0.05
Fraction Repeating




                                       0.04



                                       0.03



                                       0.02
                                                                                                          Bavaria

                                       0.01



                                            0
                                                   1966         1967              1968             1969              1970         1971
                                                                                  School Year Ending




                                                                                     58
                                   Figure 3: Grade Repetion Rates Grade 3

                     0.06



                     0.05
                                                                                       SSY States
Fraction Repeating




                     0.04



                     0.03



                     0.02



                     0.01
                                                                           Bavaria



                       0
                            1966     1967        1968            1969                1970           1971
                                                  School Year Ending



                                   Figure 4: Grade Repetion Rates Grade 4

                     0.06

                                                                                             SSY States
                     0.05
Fraction Repeating




                     0.04



                     0.03



                     0.02



                     0.01
                                                                        Bavaria

                       0
                            1966     1967        1968            1969                1970           1971
                                                  School Year Ending




                                                   59
                         Figure 5: Earnings Effects of the Short School Years by Grade
                                          Qualification and Career Survey

              0.3


              0.2


              0.1
Coefficient




                0


              -0.1


              -0.2


              -0.3


              -0.4
                     1         2      3       4           5           6     7   8    9   10
                                                              Grade




                                                     60
