                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            SCALE AND SCOPE ECONOMIES IN THE GLOBAL ADVERTISING
                      AND MARKETING SERVICES BUSINESS

                                              Alvin J. Silk
                                             Ernst R. Berndt

                                          Working Paper 9965
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9965


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




An earlier version of this paper was presented at “Globalization of Markets” Colloquium, Harvard Business
School, May 28-30, 2003. For assistance in obtaining data, we thank Barbara Esty, David Doft, and Lauren
Rich Fine and their staffs at Baker Library, CIBC, and Merrill Lynch, respectively. We are also indebted to
Masako Egawa and Yumi Sudo at HBS’ Japan Research Office, Tokyo for their help in collecting data. The
encouragement and advice of John Quelch is gratefully acknowledged, as is the support of the Division of
Research, Harvard Business School. A special note of thanks is due to members of the “Harvard/MIT
Advertising Agency Research Seminar” for valuable discussions, especially Charles King, Tuba Ustuner and
Andrew von Nordenflycht. The usual disclaimer applies. We dedicate this paper to the memory of Diane D.
Wilson. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2003 by Alvin J. Silk and Ernst R. Berndt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Scale and Scope Economies in the Global Advertising and Marketing Services Business
Alvin J. Silk and Ernst R. Berndt
NBER Working Paper No. 9965
September 2003
JEL No. L1, L2, L8, M3

                                            ABSTRACT

We assess size and scope-related economies in the global advertising and marketing services
business. A translog cost function is employed wherein a firm's costs vary according to its scale and
two dimensions of the scope of its operations. Parameters of the model are estimated via three stage
least squares using annual data for 1989-2001 for an unbalanced panel consisting of the eight largest
firms in this industry.


A firm's total variable costs are affected by its scale, scope (mix of services and markets served), and
by the interaction of the two dimensions of scope. The latter effect suggests that economies of
coordination may accompany the strategy of jointly offering advertising and marketing services
globally. Estimates indicate that the industry's long-run cost function is subject to very slight
economies of scale. Diseconomies of scale accompany growth in volume obtained by extending
either breadth of service offerings or market coverage. A small cost advantage, typically of one to
two percent, is uniformly associated with joint production of services for the domestic and overseas
markets, as compared to splitting up the firm into smaller stand-alone entities. Scope economies of
a similar magnitude arise consistently from the joint production of advertising and marketing
services.

Alvin J. Silk                                          Ernst R. Berndt
Graduate School of Business Administration             Sloan School of Management
Harvard University                                     Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Soldiers Field                                         50 Memorial Drive
Boston, MA 02163                                       Cambridge, MA 02141-1347
asilk@hbs.edu                                          and NBER
                                                       eberndt@mit.edu
      SCALE AND SCOPE ECONOMIES IN THE GLOBAL
    ADVERTISING AND MARKETING SERVICES BUSINESS
                            Alvin J. Silk and Ernst R. Berndt


                                     I. INTRODUCTION

       The large body of theoretical and empirical studies on the economics of advertising has

tended to focus almost exclusively on issues relating to the amounts firms expend for advertising

and the effects those outlays have on consumers and competition. For an extensive review, see

Bagwell (2002). However, analysis of the “production” side of advertising has been largely

neglected by economists. Over the past two decades the organization of the advertising and

marketing services business has undergone a major structural change. In response to shifts in

client demand, advertising agencies in search of growth have globalized and diversified their

services. Concurrently, after long maintaining a diverse and unconcentrated size structure, the

advertising agency and marketing services business has become more consolidated, with

publicly-owned holding companies now dominating this industry.

        Despite these developments, there has been surprisingly little empirical study of the

economics of firms engaged in the production of global advertising and marketing services. The

purpose of this paper is to address that void. How important are scale and scope economies in the

global advertising and marketing services business? Much of the rationale underlying the growth

strategies of these organizations emphasizes size-related advantages (Elliot 2002). At the same

time, whether global firms possess a sustainable competitive advantage over smaller, regional

players is the subject of an ongoing debate within the industry (Anholt 2000). Several waves of

mergers and acquisitions have fueled concerns about the rising concentration level in the

industry (Kim 1995). The holding company model employed by global firms has also recently



                                                                                                  3
come under renewed scrutiny (Cardona 2002b, Khermouch 2003). For all these reasons then, the

issue of size-related economies in this industry is one deserving empirical analysis. To the best of

our knowledge, this is the first econometric study of such cost economies

       We treat holding companies as multiproduct firms and estimate a translog model of firm

costs applying three-stage least squares to a time series of annual data for an unbalanced panel

consisting of the eight leading global advertising and marketing services firms. Collectively this

group of holding companies accounted for more than ninety percent of the estimated total

revenue earned in 2001by the hundred largest firms in this industry.

       Our results can be briefly summarized. We demonstrate that a firm’s costs are affected by

its size, scope (mix of services offered and markets served) and the interaction of the latter two

dimensions of firm scope. The presence of the interaction effect supports a major but

controversial element of holding company strategy; namely, that coordination economies are

available from the delivery of integrated advertising and marketing services globally. Using the

parameter estimates for the translog cost function, we then investigate the extent to which overall

scale economies/diseconomies and product-specific scale and scope economies/diseconomies are

available to firms in this industry. Our estimates indicate that the industry’s long-run cost

function is subject to very slight economies of scale. Growth obtained by extending either the

breadth of services offered or market coverage is accompanied by diseconomies of scale, a result

we show not to be inconsistent with the existence of overall or global economies of scale. These

findings do not point to any substantial level of potential scale economies that remains to be

exploited by the largest firms in this industry. Such findings are to be expected in a highly

competitive industry with relatively low fixed costs.




                                                                                                     4
         Small scope economies involving cost savings of one to two percent are realized through

diversification of either lines of business or market coverage. The institutional constraint arising

from the longstanding industry norm that prohibits an agency from serving competing accounts

that Silk and Berndt (1995) hypothesized to limit the growth and diversification potential of

traditional full service advertising agencies appears to have been obviated by the holding

company form of organization.

         The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the global advertising and

marketing services business and the holding company form of organization used by firms in this

industry. Section III sets forth the econometric model and method employed here along with

measures of scale and scope economies. In Section IV, the database is described and estimation

results are presented. Section V summarizes our findings on scale and scope economies. Section

VI discusses implications of the results and possible limitations and extensions of the present

study. Section VII presents our conclusions.


        II. THE GLOBAL ADVERTISING AND MARKETING SERVICES BUSINESS

II.1.    Globalization of Advertising and Marketing Services

         The beginning of the internationalization of the advertising and marketing services

industry dates back at least as far as 1899 when J. Walter Thompson opened an office in London

(West 1987). In 1927 Thompson became General Motors’ “export agency” and embarked on a

rapid international expansion. In the late 1920’s and early 1930’s, Thompson opened thirty-four

branch offices in Europe, the Middle East, South Africa, India, Australia, and South America

(Merron 1999). Thompson was not GM’s domestic agency and its appointment on the export

account lasted only five years. Interestingly, Merron (1999, p. 469) observed: “the key to the

branch offices’ survival was that they aggressively pursued local clients.” Weinstein (1974)



                                                                                                   5
traced the international expansion of fifteen U.S. agencies over the period 1915-1971 and found

that the rate at which agencies opened offices in countries for the first time almost quadrupled

over the period 1960-1971.

       Comparatively little appears to have been written about the international expansion of

Asian or European agencies. A notable exception is West’s (1988) insightful study of

multinational competition in the British advertising agency business over the period 1936-1987.

West’s analysis identified two distinct phases of development. The first, beginning in the

interwar period and lasting until the late 1970’s, is characterized- as the “Americanization of

British advertising.” The share of total advertising billings in the U.K. held by U.S.

multinational agencies grew from thirteen percent in 1936, peaking at forty-two percent in 1970.

Unlike the U.S., the agency business in Britain has long been a highly concentrated industry. The

billings share of the ten largest agencies was seventy percent in 1936 and reached eighty-two

percent in 1970. The pioneering U.S. agencies in the U.K. were greenfield entrants following the

multinational growth path of their U.S-based clients. Reciprocal alliances between American

and British agencies became commonplace in the interwar period. Later in the post-World War II

period, West shows that acquisitions became important, noting that between 1957 and 1967, U.S.

agencies purchased thirty-two British agencies.

       The second phase of West’s historical analysis covers the comeback of the British. The

share of U.K. billings held by U.S. multinational agencies fell from a high of forty-two percent in

1970, to 34 per cent in 1980 and 22 per cent in 1987. The major developments in this period

were the aggressive growth and stunning success, at home and abroad, of two London-based

firms: first, Saatchi & Saatchi (beginning in the late 1970’s); and then WPP, in the late 1980’s.

West (1988) contrasts the advantage exploited by the British in their domestic comeback and




                                                                                                    6
international expansion with that of the earlier American penetration of the high end of the U.K.

market:

        The advantage accruing to British advertising agencies in the changing trends in foreign
        direct investment flows in the 1980’s was different from that previously held by the
        Americans.It provided access to capital, rather than to the patronage of large advertisers.
        Throughout the entire period, British agencies have never been able to exploit the
        indigenous British-based MNE advertiser in the same way that U.S. agencies have used
        American MNEs (p. 487).

        West argues that Saatchi & Saatchi’s domestic success inspired confidence within the

British financial community, giving advertising agencies improved access to capital and

permitting them to grow by means of acquisitions: “The new ease in raising capital facilitated the

spectacular entrance of British multinational advertising agencies into the American domestic

market from 1982 onward” (p. 499). That advance was marked by two highly publicized deals:

Saatchi & Saatchi’s acquisition of New York-based Ted Bates Worldwide in May 1986, and

WPP’s takeover of J. Walter Thompson in June 1987.

        In the next section, we consider the dominant organization form that the industry has

adopted in pursuit of growth and globalization, namely, the public holding company.


II.2.   The Holding Company Concept

          The world’s largest advertising and marketing services firms are all public holding

companies that own (partially or outright) numerous operating companies offering a wide variety

of related and/or competing services to clients. To varying degrees, the parent organization

performs a coordinating role and supplies subsidiary organizations with support programs,

systems, and resources. However, as the chief financial officer of a leading firm in this industry

was recently quoted as saying: “There is no single model for a successful holding company.

Their success depends on how they perform their functions, whether as a hands-off financial

entity or a structure to help networks work together” (Cardona 2002b).


                                                                                                      7
       The pioneering global advertising and marketing services holding company is the

Interpublic Group of Companies. Marion Harper, who served as its Chairman and CEO

throughout the 1960’s, is widely acknowledged to have been the architect of this organizational

innovation. Harper saw adherence to the industry’s longstanding norm that an agency not serve

competitors in the same category of business as a major impediment to achieving the twin goals

of growth and diversification (American Association of Advertising Agencies 1979). He

proposed the holding company concept as a means of circumventing that stricture. His

biographer and colleague reported Harper as having said: “I don’t see why it shouldn’t be

possible for us to own more than one agency and serve competing accounts, as long as we keep

the two agencies completely separate” Johnson (1982, p. 96). Despite initial resistance from

clients and criticism from competitors, Harper eventually prevailed and the holding company

concept gained acceptance and spread.

       Silk and Berndt (1995) analyzed the industry norm on conflict policy as an institutional

mobility barrier (in the sense of Caves and Porter (1977)) that induces individual agencies to

grow by diversifying their lines of service offerings rather than by expanding existing ones. A

second institutional factor identified by Silk and Berndt (1995) as affecting agency growth and

diversification strategies of advertising agencies was the industry practice of agencies bundling

creative and media services, a strategy encouraged by the fact that it is customary for clients to

advertise simultaneously in several media. Based on these two considerations, Silk and Berndt

(1995, p. 439) advanced the hypothesis of “excessive” diversification: “the joint presence of

media bundling on the demand side and conflict policy on the supply side constitute institutional

constraints that induce firms to diversify more extensively than might otherwise be cost

justified.” Consistent with this hypothesis, in a cross-sectional analysis of 1987 data for 401 U.S.




                                                                                                     8
advertising agencies, Silk and Berndt (1995) found that media-specific scope economies were

negatively related to agency size.

       Silk and Berndt’s (1995) analysis and empirical study were conducted at the level of

individual advertising agencies, rather than that of holding companies. Two important structural

changes have occurred since 1987, the year of the data Silk and Berndt utilized. First, over the

past two decades there has been a growing tendency for advertising agencies to unbundle their

services as multi-product clients have sought to gain bargaining power with media suppliers by

consolidating media buying for their brands in organizations specializing in media planning and

buying (Horsky 2002). Secondly, all of the major holding companies have established media

planning and buying units that are available to perform these functions for clients of the

networks of agencies controlled by the holding companies (Mandese 2002). Thus, it may be

these changes have allowed holding companies to obviate the disadvantage of excessive

diversification Silk and Berndt (1995) argued as being present at the level of individual agencies

in 1987.

       Holding company management face an ongoing challenge to achieve a balance between

policies that favor centralization in ways that may improve coordination and profitability, versus

those that allow decentralization in order to foster creativity and maintain credibility with clients

as to the independence of individual organizations. For example, Omnicom has the reputation for

granting considerable autonomy to its operating divisions (Elliot 2002). WPP is one of the

organizations studied by Raynor and Bower (2001) in their research on how strategic integration

is accomplished in contemporary diversified companies facing dynamic and uncertain

environments. They observe that WPP has been successful in building a strategically flexible




                                                                                                    9
organization by pursuing different degrees of relatedness among the operating divisions, some

being closely linked, others less so. See Bower and Hunt (2001) for details.

        Based on Advertising Age’s estimates of holding companies worldwide gross incomes,

the annual nominal growth rate of the world’s ten largest holding companies averaged almost

thirteen per cent over the twelve year period, 1990-2001. This growth is almost three times

greater than the growth rate of worldwide expenditures for advertising and marketing services

that averaged only four and a half percent over the same time period.1

        Scale and scope economies figure prominently in the reports of investment analysts who

follow this industry closely, especially with respect to how cost economies relate to the basic

elements of firm strategy (growth, globalization, diversification) and industry consolidation.

Among the major industry trends emphasized by Doft et al. (2002) are client demand for

integrated marketing services and cross national consistency in brand communications, as well as

interest in consolidating the multiplicity of accounts with fewer service suppliers. Fine et al.

(2003) point out that the growth rate and margins of marketing services tend to be greater than

those for advertising-related services. However, they see size-related improvements in margins

as being difficult to realize, in part because of client cost-consciousness and bargaining power.

Diversification with respect to both lines of service offered and markets served may also affect

the sensitivity of holding companies’ performance to the business cycle. However, Fine et al.

(2003) note that diversification can serve not only to dampen downturns, but may also limit

speed of recoveries.

        Against this background, we move on to a discussion of the modeling framework and

analytical methods used in our empirical study.


1 This growth rate calculation was based on WPP’s estimates of the size of the worldwide marketing
communications expenditures presented each year in their annual report.


                                                                                                     10
                         III. ECONOMETRIC MODEL AND METHOD

         We begin this section with the specification of the cost function employed in the

empirical analysis. Definitions of the measures of scale and scope economies reported later are

then presented along with expressions for estimating them in terms of the variables and

parameters of the translog cost function. Detailed derivations are given in Appendix A.


III.1.   Model Specification

         We employ a translog (transcendental logarithmic) model to represent a firm’s total

variable costs of producing its output of services. Widely used in empirical econometrics, the

translog model is a “flexible” functional form that can be used to capture a variety of size-related

cost phenomena arising from the operations of multiproduct firms, including in particular, scale

and scope effects (Berndt 1991, Paul 1999). The translog cost function for firm i (i=1,…,k) may

be written as follows:

         ln TVCi = ln αi + β1 ln Yi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ MidPia                   (1)

where:

            TVCi = total variable cost

               Yi = a measure of the scale of total output

              Mid = share of firm’s output (Y) produced for the U.S. market, rather than for the

                            overseas’ markets, (1-Mid), Mid ≤ 1

               Pia = share of firm’s total output consisting of advertising services, rather than of

                            other marketing services, (1-Pa), Pai ≤ l

where αi ,β1, β2 ,γ, δ, and θ are parameters to be estimated.




                                                                                                  11
Now the firm’s average variable cost (AVCi) is given by:

        ln AVCi = ln (TVCi / Yi ) = ln TVCi – ln Yi

                   = ln αi + (β1- l) ln Yi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia            (2)

       This specification of the translog cost model allows for the possibility of both scale and

scope effects. Depending on the signs and magnitudes of the scale parameters, β1 and β2, the

AVC function may be either everywhere decreasing or U-shaped in Y.

       The two potentially important sources of scope effects discussed in Section II are

represented in the translog cost function. The first arises from how a firm’s total output is

distributed across the regional markets it serves. We attempt to capture this effect by treating the

global market as a dichotomy, consisting of a domestic (U.S.) segment and a composite

“overseas” market. These account for Mid and (1- Mid) of the firm’s total output, respectively.

       The other dimension of scope relates to the composition of the firm’s output with respect

to its lines of business or products/services. We treat a firm’s output as consisting of either

“advertising” or “other marketing” services, representing Pia and (1- Pia), respectively, of its total

output. Note that the definitions treat these two dimensions of the firm’s scope as completely

separate from one another.

       The final term of (2) is the cross-product of the shares of firm output accounted for by the

domestic (U.S.) market (Mid) and advertising services (Pia), respectively. This interaction term

allows for the two dimensions of scope to affect costs jointly as well as separately. A negative

sign on the coefficient for this interaction term would be consistent with the view that firms may

realize a cost-reducing benefit through their pursuit of a key feature of their business strategies,

that of providing global clients with “one stop shopping” for a broad array of advertising and

marketing services (Lawrence 2000). Economies of coordination may be achieved through




                                                                                                    12
exploiting synergies in delivering a variety of services to a geographically dispersed client base

that are not available when operations are more specialized and localized. Alternatively, firms

may incur additional coordination costs in providing global clients with an array of services that

are absent in more specialized and localized operations. Even when economies of coordination

are available, they may be bargained away in negotiating compensation and service levels with

clients (Fine et al., 2003). Such conditions would suggest that “one stop shopping” could raise

costs and lead to a positively-signed coefficient for the interaction term. Thus, a priori, it is not

clear whether the expected sign for the coefficient of the cross-product of the share terms for the

two dimensions of scope should be positive or negative.

         We now turn to defining explicit measures of scale and scope effects.


III.2.   Scale Economies

         In traditional economic theory, the firm produces a single product, and in such cases

returns to scale are measured by the inverse of the elasticity of total cost with respect to output:

the percentage change in total cost associated with a one percent increase in output (cf. Pindyck

and Rubinfeld 1995). The returns-to-scale measure is also equal to the ratio of average cost to

marginal cost.

         In the case of a multiproduct or multi-service firm, the notion of average cost is not well-

defined since the mix of outputs may change with overall size. To circumvent this problem,

returns to scale are defined in terms of the effects on total cost when all the service outputs are

increased proportionately, i.e., holding the mix of service outputs constant. This concept is

referred to as global or ray returns to scale (Bailey and Friedlander 1982) and in the present

context is defined as:

            RRSi = (TVCi /Yi) / (∂TVCi /∂Yi), evaluated at Mid = M*id, Pia = P*ia                   (3)



                                                                                                        13
For our translog cost model (1), it is readily shown that:

               ∂ln TVCi /∂ln Yi = (∂TVCi /∂Yi) ( Yi / TVCi)

                                    = β1 + β2 ln Yi                                              (4)

Re-arranging terms, we obtain:

                             RRSi = 1/ (β1 + β2 ln Yi)                                           (5)

       When there are economies of scale, total cost (TVC) increases less than proportionately

with output (Y), marginal cost (∂TVC/∂Y) is less than average cost (TVC/Y), both of which

are declining in Y, and RRS is greater than one. When there are diseconomies of scale, marginal

cost exceeds average cost, and RRS is less than one.

       Another measure of scale economies that is particularly useful for the multiproduct or

multi-service firms is that of product-specific scale economies (Bailey and Friedlander 1982). In

the present context, one may view a firm as producing two types of outputs: advertising-related

services (denoted by the subscript a) and other marketing services (m). We assume that the mix

of domestic (U.S.) and overseas volume is the same for both types of services and equal to the

share, Mid, and (1-Mid), respectively so that the composition of the firm’s total volume in terms

of markets served is unchanged.

       SCL(MS)i, is then defined as the ratio of average incremental cost, AICim, to the marginal

cost, MCim of producing other marketing services (m), in addition to advertising (a):

      SCL(MS)i = AICim / MCim,                                                                   (6)

where average incremental cost (AICim) is defined as the incremental cost of adding other

marketing services to firm previously producing only advertising-related services,




                                                                                                    14
           AICim = [TVC(Yi) – TVC(Yia)]/Yim,                                                      (7)

         with Yi = Yia + Yim,

and where TVC(Yi) is the total variable cost of producing both advertising and other marketing

services as defined above by (1). TVC(Yia) is the total variable cost of producing only

advertising-related services (with Yia = Pia Yi ) and Yim= (1- Pia )Yi is output of other marketing

services. MCim is marginal cost is defined as ∂TVC(Yi) /∂Yim.

        For the multiproduct cost function (1), SCL(MS)i turns out to be (see Appendix A for

details of the derivation):

                  [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia}

                  - exp{ln αi + β1 ln (Pia Yi) + ½ β2 (ln Pia Yi )2 + (γ + θ)Mid + δ}]

SCL(MS)i = ______________________________________________________                                 (8)

                  [{β1 + β2 ln Yi}exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mdi

                              + δ Pi + θ Mdi Pia}]

        The above analysis may be viewed as assessing the scale economies associated with

adding “other marketing services” to the firm’s existing offering of advertising-related services.

Such an analysis is meaningful in that it reflects the growth path of our sample of firms.

Historically, these firms were initially full service advertising agencies and over time expanded

their operations to include other marketing services.

        In our scale economy calculations we assume that the mix of U.S. and overseas volume is

the same for both types of services and equal to that for the firm’s total output, as given by Mid.

Note that for a dichotomous scope variable, the sign of its coefficient in the cost model (1) and

the expression above (8) for product-specific scale economies are both sensitive to the manner in

which the dichotomous scope variable is defined, i.e., Pia vs. (1-Pia) and Mid vs. (1-Mid).



                                                                                                    15
        It is also of interest to assess the scale economies associated with becoming “global” by

adding the volume sold in the overseas market ([1-Mid]Yi) to that for the domestic (U.S.) market

(Mid Yi). For these calculations, we assume that the mix of advertising and marketing services is

the same for both the domestic (U.S.) and overseas markets and equal to the share of the firm’s

total output of advertising and marketing services, as given by Pia, and (1-Pia), respectively.

        We define a product-specific index of scale economies, SCL(OV)i associated with

extending operations from the domestic (U.S.) market (d) to the overseas market (denoted by the

subscript o). SCL(OV)i is the ratio of average incremental cost, AICio, to the marginal cost, MCio

of producing the volume sold in the overseas market (o) in addition to that being sold in the

domestic market (d):

      SCL(OV)i = AICio / MCio,                                                                     (9)

where average incremental cost (AICio) is defined as the incremental cost associated with

producing for the overseas market incurred by a firm previously producing only for the domestic

(U.S.) market:

           AICio = [TVC(Yi) – TVC(Yid)]/Yio,                                                      (10)

         with Yi = Yid + Yio,

where TVC(Yi) is the total variable cost of producing the volumes sold in both the domestic

(U.S.) and overseas markets as defined by (1) above. In this context, TVC(Yid) is the total

variable cost of producing only the volume sold in domestic (U.S.) market (Yid = Mid Yi ) and

Yio= (1- Mid)Yi is the output sold overseas. MCio is marginal cost and is defined as∂TVC(Yi) /

∂Yio.

        For the multiproduct cost function (1), SCLio may be shown to be (see Appendix A for

details of the derivation):



                                                                                                   16
                  [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia}

                  - exp{ln αi + β1 ln (Mid Yi) + ½ β2 (ln Mid Yi )2 + (δ + θ)Pia + γ}]

 SCL(OV)i = ______________________________________________________                               (11)

                  [{β1 + β2 ln Yi }exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid

                            + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia }]

         Note that SCL(MS)i and SCL(OV)i may differ because in general, TVC(Yia) ≠ TVC(Yid).

The manner in which both AICio and MCio are defined above assumes that a firm expands

operations from its “home base” in the U.S. to serve the “overseas” market. As will become

apparent in section IV.2 below, this assumption is consistent with the operational definition of

the scope variable for “markets served” as the share of output arising from U.S. operations used

later in the estimation of the cost model (Equation (1)). Analysis of product-specific scale

economies associated with expansion from a home base in the U.S. to the overseas market

conforms to the history of four of our sample of eight firms identified in Section IV.1 that

follows (Grey, Interpublic, Omnicom, and WPP). However, the historical growth paths of the

other four firms were different. In the cases of the other four firms in our sample (Cordiant,

Dentsu, Havas, and Publicis), their operations were initially in overseas markets and later

expanded to the U.S. Hence for the latter firms, SCL(OV)i as defined in (9) and (11), does not

have an historically meaningful and comparative interpretation. For this reason, we report

estimates of SCL(OV)i only for the former four firms (Grey, Interpublic, Omnicom, and WPP).


III.3.   Scope Economies

         Scope economies arise when cost savings are realized from producing multiple services

and/or from serving multiple markets rather than splitting up the firm into separate smaller

entities, each producing just one service and/or serving a single market. See Bailey and



                                                                                                   17
Friedlander 1982 for a detailed discussion of the distinction between scale and scope economies

in a multiproduct firm, as well as references to the literature.

         To measure the degree to which there are scope economies in the case at hand, we

estimate the percentage of the total variable cost of production that is saved when the

advertising-related and other marketing services are produced jointly by the same firm rather

than produced by two stand-alone firms. As in the case of scale economies discussed in III.2, we

consider two alternative ways of splitting production: according to either: (a) service mix,

advertising-related versus other marketing services; or (b) market served, U.S. versus overseas.

         Consider first cost savings that arise from joint rather than stand-alone production of

different lines of business, i.e., components of the service mix. For that split, returns to scope

(RSPLBi) or the percentage cost savings realized from joint versus individual production is:

         RSP(LB)i = [TVC(Yia) + TVC(Yim) – TVC(Yi)]/ TVC(Yi)                                         (12)

         When economies of scope are present, the joint cost, TVC(Yi), is less than the sum of the

individual costs, TVC(Yia) + TVC(Yim), and RSP(LBi) is greater than zero. If the joint cost

exceeds the sum of the stand-alone costs, RSP(LBi) is negative and there are diseconomies of

scope.

         For the multiproduct cost function (1), it can be shown that (see Appendix A for details):

                  [exp{ln αi + β1 ln Pai Yi + ½ β2 (ln Pia Yi )2 + (γ + θ) Mid + δ ]

                  + [exp{ln αi + β1 ln (1- Pia )Yi + ½ β2 (ln (1-Pia )Yi )2 + γ Mid ]

 RSP(LB)i = ________________________________________________                            -l           (13)

                  [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia}]

         For the alternative stand-alone split based on market served, returns to scope, RSP(GL)i,

the percentage cost savings gained from joint versus stand-alone production is:




                                                                                                      18
         RSP(GL)i = [TVC(Yid) + TVC(Yio) – TVC(Yi)]/ TVC(Yi)]                                        (14)

where [TVC(Yid + TVC(Yio)] is the sum of the costs of producing the volumes sold in the

domestic (U.S.) and overseas markets (Yid, and Yio, respectively), and TVC(Yi) is the total cost

of producing these outputs jointly. As is shown in Appendix A, for the multiproduct cost

function (1), RSP(GL)i turns out to be:

                   [exp{ln αi + β1 ln Mid Yi + ½ β2 (ln Mid Yi )2 + γ + (δ + θ) Pia]

                   + [exp{ln αi + β1 ln (1- Mid )Yi + ½ β2 (ln (1-Mid )Yi )2 + δ Pia ]

 RSP(GL)i = ________________________________________________                             -l          (15)

                   [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia}]

         Note that RSP(MS)i and RSP(GL)i may differ because in general, [TVC(Yid) +

TVC(Yio)] ≠ TVC(Yia) + TVC(Yim). We also note in passing that in the case of two products, the

measures of global and product-specific scope economies are numerically equivalent.


III.4.   Estimation Procedure

         The database available for estimation is an unbalanced panel consisting of a cross section

of eight global advertising and marketing service firms with a maximum of thirteen time series

observations per firm. For estimation purposes it is convenient to work with (2). To capture the

diversity among these firms, we allow αi in equation (2) to vary cross-sectionally and thus we

treat them as fixed effects. The parameters for the scale and scope variables are assumed to be

equal across the eight firms. Adding a normally distributed disturbance term to (2), our

estimation equation becomes:

         ln AVCit = ln αi + (β1- l) ln Yit + ½ β2 (ln Yit )2 + γ Midt + δ Piat + θ Midt Piat + uit   (16)

                 i = 1,…,8; t = 1989,…2001.




                                                                                                      19
       The scale, scope, and interaction explanatory variables are likely to be jointly determined,

along with average variable costs. To accommodate this endogeneity, we utilize two types of

instruments, each one correlated with the scale, scope, and interaction variables, but not

correlated with the random disturbance term in the cost equation. The first instrument is common

to all eight firms, and is defined as the growth rate of real worldwide GDP, lagged one year. A

second set of instruments varies by firm. The firm-specific variables are the book value of

shareholder equity, long-term debt, and tax payments as well as the cross-product of shareholder

equity and taxes. Each of these instruments is expressed in constant U.S. dollars, following the

convention of using average daily and end-of-the year exchange rates for income statement and

balance sheet items, respectively.

       Below we report econometric results allowing the scale, scope, and interaction variables

to be endogenous using instrumental variable methods. In light of the fact that the firms in our

cross section regularly compete directly with one another, contemporaneous correlations in the

residuals across firms can be expected. Each firm is therefore treated as a separate equation, in

the context of a system of equations framework. Parameter estimates are obtained via three stage

least squares (3SLS) that allows for both heteroskedasticity and contemporaneous correlation in

the residuals. Assuming the vector of disturbances across the eight firms is multivariate normal,

then the parameter estimates for (16) are consistent and asymptotically efficient. See Schmidt

(1975) and Wooldridge (2002) for further details. The estimation was executed using EViews 4.0

(2000, Chapt. 19).




                                                                                                    20
                         IV. DATABASE AND ECONOMETRIC RESULTS

IV.1. Cross Section of Global Advertising and Marketing Services Firms

         Our cross section of firms consists of the eight largest Global Advertising and Marketing

Services firms, according to Advertising Age’s (AA) size rankings of the world’s leading “ad

organizations” for 2001 (Endicott 2002, p. S10). Table 1 lists the firms alphabetically along with

their worldwide gross incomes for 2001 (as presented in their annual reports) and the length of

times series for which data were available for use in the analysis.

                                               INSERT TABLE 1

         The absence of publicly available data precluded extending the sample to include

additional firms or earlier time periods. For six of the eight firms, thirteen annual observations

were available. Only four years of data were available for Cordiant which was not formed until

late 1997, following a de-merger from Saatchi & Saatchi. Reports covering ten years of Havas’

history as a public company were obtained. Thus, the maximum number of observations

available for estimation purposes was 92. Missing data for certain variables reduced that number

of observations available for the econometric analyses undertaken to 83.

         Collectively, these eight firms accounted for 93.9 percent of the combined 2001 gross

income of the world’s 100 largest ad organization identified by AA.2 Although these eight firms

dominate the industry’s size structure, they differ considerably in scale: a pair of firms (Cordiant

and Grey) had gross incomes in 2001 of $0.9 –$1.2 billion, three mid-range firms (Dentsu,




2
  It bears noting that the gross incomes and ranking shown in Table 1 differ from those reported by AA for two
reasons. First, in contrast to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), AA calculates a parent firm’s gross
income by weighting the gross incomes of subsidiary organizations according to the percentage of equity owned by
the parent. Under GAAP, the parent company reports the income of a subsidiary only when ownership exceeds 50
percent of the subsidiary’s equity. Second, AA does not include in gross income revenues derived from several non-
advertising-related services, including public relations and research. See Endicott (2002, p. S-2) for further details.


                                                                                                                    21
Havas, and Publicis) earned gross incomes of $2.2 –$ 2.7 billion, and three “giants” had gross

incomes of $6-$7 billion.


IV.2. Definitions of Variables

         Table 2 lists the measures used to operationalize the variables in our translog cost model

(1). Firm annual reports were the primary sources of our data. Worldwide gross income (WGI),

consisting of commissions and fees paid by clients, has long been recognized as the preferred

measure of firm size in the advertising and marketing services industry (Paster 1981).3

                                               INSERT TABLE 2

         Total variable costs (TVC) are operating expenses and consist primarily of employee

salaries and benefits, plus office expenses. Depreciation and amortization charges were excluded

in an effort to reduce inter-firm and or cross-national differences in accounting methods and

standards. Average variable cost (AVC) was computed as the ratio of total variable costs to gross

income (TVC/WGI). Note that (1-AVC) is equal to the firm’s gross margin, a measure routinely

monitored and discussed by firm management and industry analysts.

         Two dimensions of firm scope, corresponding to markets served and line of services

offered, respectively, were treated separately from one another. Each was measured as a

dichotomous share of total firm gross income, i.e., share from the U.S. market (USS, (vs. the

overseas market, (1-USS)) and share from advertising-related services (ADS, vs. other marketing



3
 Agency size is sometimes gauged by the magnitude of its clients’ “billings” which include outlays for media space
and time, charges for production advertising and promotional material, and the like. Estimates of billings are
notoriously suspect as a measure of agency output or scale inasmuch as to varying degrees, they represent
“capitalized billings,” calculated by capitalizing an agency’s gross income at some rate, such as the reciprocal of the
commission rate on media expenditures used to compensate a “full service” agency. Over time, capitalized billings
have departed from “true” billings as agencies have expanded and unbundled the mix of services they offer and as
clients have come to rely more on fee-based, and less on commission-based compensation methods. Cf. Cardona
(2002a).


                                                                                                                    22
services, such as promotion, public relations, and research, (1-ADS)). Finally, the cross-product

term, XAUS = ADS x USS, was created as an interaction term for the two dimensions of scope.

       Systematic measurement error arising from inter-firm and/or cross national differences in

accounting methods and standards was mitigated by applying consistent definitions of variables

across firms and time. When comparing the quality of our measures, we judge the advertising

share, ADS, as the most problematic due to the absence of detail and consistency in reporting the

decomposition of gross revenue by lines of services. Both inter-firm differences and intra-firm

variability were apparent. Further, this was the one variable that was most likely to be missing

from the firm annual reports, particularly in the early phase of our time series. In the interests of

preserving degrees of freedom, estimates from external sources were used, as noted in Table 2.

To the extent that measurement errors are firm-specific and fixed over time, we capture them by

specifying a fixed effect intercept for each firm.

       Finally, we attempt to control for any remaining sources of systematic error by treating

the intercept term in (2) as a firm fixed effect, thereby allowing the unobserved firm intercept

term to be arbitrarily correlated with the explanatory variables (Wooldridge 2002, Chapter 10).

       Table 3 presents summary descriptive statistics for the data base. The wide variation

present in the scale and scope variables is evident from the diverse values of the median, max,

and min. Intercorrelations among the variables used in average cost model are shown in the

lower panel of Table 3. Not unexpectedly, LWGIit and (LWGIit)2 are virtually perfectly collinear

(r=0.9989). The market scope variable, USSit, and scope interaction term, XAUSit, are also

highly intercorrelated (r=0.9137).

                                        INSERT TABLE 3




                                                                                                   23
IV.3. Parameter Estimates

       Table 4 presents the three stage least square estimates of the twelve parameters (eight

coefficients for the firm fixed effects and four coefficients for the scale variable, two scope

variables and their interaction) obtained using the 83 observations from the unbalanced panel

available for estimation of the average variable cost model (2). The dependent variable of (2) is

the natural logarithm of average variable cost (LAVC). Note that since it is expressed relative to

revenues, this log-transformed variable is less than zero, reflecting the fact that average variable

cost (AVC) is always less than one.

                                        INSERT TABLE 4

       Referring to column (1) of Table 4, we see that the estimate of the coefficient for scale

variable, (β1 -1), has the expected negative sign but is less than its estimated standard error. The

coefficient for the quadratic scale term (β2/2) is also negative and less than its standard error. The

negative sign of β2/2 implies that over the considerable range of scale represented in our panel

data, AVC is everywhere decreasing with increases in scale. A Wald test (EViews 2000, pp. 352-

356) indicated that the null hypothesis that (β2/2)=0 is not be rejected (p=0.7589). However,

another Wald test indicated that the null hypothesis of constant returns [(βi -1)=0, (β2/2)=0] can

be decisively rejected (p<0.000l).

       The coefficient estimates for the scope variables (γ and δ, respectively) in the full model

(Column (1), Table 4) are both positive (and statistically highly significant), indicating that AVC

increases as the share of gross income contributed by either U.S. operations or advertising-

related services rises. The former effect is almost eighty percent greater than the latter. However,

what is especially noteworthy is that the coefficient for the interaction of the two scope variables

(θ) has a negative sign and is more than four times greater than its standard error. If the effects of



                                                                                                   24
the two scope variables were independent of one another, we would expect the estimate of θ to

be zero. That does not appear to hold for these data, and indeed, the interaction effect of the two

scope variables on total costs appears to be in the opposite direction from that of their individual

effects. This result is consistent with the view firms may realize cost economies through the joint

production of both advertising and marketing services. Apparently, the coordination economies

accompanying the pursuit of the strategy of “one-stop shopping ” are not completely bargained

away in negotiations with client about compensation and service levels. The coefficients for the

fixed firm effects are in all cases at least twice their standard errors.

        Given the collinearity of linear (LWGI) and quadratic terms ((LWGI)2) of the scale

variable noted earlier, we omitted the latter and re-estimated the model with only the linear term

included. The results are shown in Column (2) of Table 4. It is immediately apparent that signs

of all of the coefficients remain unchanged but the magnitude and precision of the estimates has

increased considerably. The coefficient on LWGI increases markedly in absolute magnitude by a

factor of more than thirty and is now more than four times its estimated standard error. The

coefficients for the two scope variables, USS and ADS, each increase in magnitude by about ten

percent and the precision of these estimates also improves modestly. The coefficient for the

interaction of the two scope variables remains negative but increases in absolute magnitude by

about twenty percent. The precision of this estimate also increases modestly. In this simpler

specification, the estimates of all eight coefficients for the fixed firm effects decrease

algebraically, but their precision increases dramatically, the estimates now all being at least

seven times their estimated standard errors.

        With three stage least squares, the usual goodness-of-fit statistics such as adjusted R2 are

not well-defined. As an alternative summary indicator of fit, we regressed the fitted values of




                                                                                                  25
LACR on their observed values using the parameter estimates reported in Column (2) of Table 4.

This yields a value of R2 equal to .657. We conclude that dropping the quadratic scale term from

(2) results in an adequate specification of the behavior of average variable costs here. Based on

the parameter estimates from Column (2) of Table 4, we now proceed to investigate scale and

scope effects.


                  V. ESTIMATES OF SCALE AND SCOPE ECONOMIES

V.1.   Scale Economies

       Earlier in II.2, we discussed the concept of global or ray returns to scale (RRS) as one

possible measure of size-related economies. See (3) for the definition. RRS is the ratio of

average variable cost to marginal cost for the firm’s total gross income, holding fixed its mix of

outputs which we have operationalized in terms of shares of gross income contributed by

different markets and lines of services.

       As noted above, in our preferred model specification β2 =0 and hence the expression for

RRS (5) simplifies to:

            RRS = AVC/MC =1/ β1.                                                                (5a)

       From Table 4, we have ( βˆ 1 -1) = -0.0247 and hence βˆ 1= 0.9753. Substituting the

estimate for βˆ 1 in (5a), we find RRS = 1.0253.

       Note that RRS is not firm-specific. If we interpret our results as representing a point on

the long-run average cost curve (Pindyck and Rubinfield 1995) for a typical firm in the

advertising and marketing services industry, then given that RRS is slightly greater than one, we

may infer that firms in this industry are operating on a long–run cost curve that is subject to very

slight economies of scale. It also bears noting that the alternative hypotheses of constant returns

to scale (β1= 1 and hence RRS=1) was decisively rejected by a Wald test (p<0.000l).


                                                                                                    26
       We also computed the indices of product-specific scale economies defined in IV.2 as the

returns to scale associated with two alternative strategies for expanding a firm’s scale: (a)

extending its line of business from advertising to marketing service, SCL(MS)i and (b) extending

the markets it serves from the domestic to overseas, SCL(OV)i. Recall each is defined as the

ratio of average incremental cost to marginal cost for the additional volume gained by extending

the firm’s service mix or market reach. Firm-specific values of both indices were computed for

each year using the parameter estimates for our preferred model (with β2 =0) in (8) and (11). The

results are summarized in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5.

                                        INSERT TABLE 5

       Across all eight firms and time period for which data were available, diseconomies of

scale prevailed for extending lines of business from advertising to marketing services. As may be

seen in column (1) of Table 5, the mean and median for this index were both less than one: 0.282

and 0.239, respectively, for SCL(MS)i. The range of values for the 83 observations of this index

was from 0.052 (MIN) to 0.609 (MAX). For each of the eight firms, a separate Wald test was

performed of the null hypothesis that returns to scale were constant (i.e., AIC = MC and SCL

=1). For all eight firms, the null hypothesis of constant returns was strongly rejected (p <

0.0001).

       In the cases of the four firms where the extension of markets served from the U.S. to

overseas could be validly assessed, diseconomies of scale were also uniformly observed for all

time periods for which data were available. The mean and median for this scale index

(SCL(OV), column (2) of Table 5)) were again both less than one (0.492 and 0.501,

respectively), as were the extreme observed values (MIN = 0.333) and (MAX = 0.654). Here




                                                                                                 27
again, Wald tests indicated that the null hypothesis of constant returns was strongly rejected (p <

0.0001) for all (four) firms.

       Whereas our estimates indicated global scale economies (RRS = 1.053), product-specific

diseconomies of scale for both extension of lines of business and expansion of markets served.

None of the calculated values of either SCLMS or SCLOV summarized in Table 5 exceeded

unity. To see why global scale economies are consistent with product-specific scale

diseconomies in this context, consider Eq. (8) for SCL(MS)i which, with β2 =0, may readily be

shown to simplify to:

       SCL(MS) =          [TVC(Yi) – TVC(Yia)]        1                                           (8a)
                               TVS(Yi)                β1

       The first term on the right-hand side of (8a) is the estimated incremental total cost of

producing marketing services separately as a proportion of the total costs of jointly producing

both advertising and marketing services. The second term in (8a) is the index of global scale

economies (5), ray returns to scale (RRS = 1/ β1). Since our estimate of β1= 0.975, product-

specific diseconomies will obtain unless the incremental total cost of producing the addition to

the line of business as a proportion of the total cost of producing both lines of services is equal to

or greater than β1= 0.975. Inasmuch as the maximum value of marketing service’s share of firm

gross income in our sample was 0.610, it is not surprising that the latter condition does not hold

here for the addition of market services. Hence we find the latter strategy is accompanied by

diseconomies of scale (SCL(MS)i < 1). A similar analysis accounts for why extending market

coverage overseas was also found to involve diseconomies of scale (SCL(OV)i <1). The

maximum value of the overseas market’s share of firm total gross income for the four firms

included in our analysis of SCL(OV) was 0.640.




                                                                                                   28
       To gain insight into the sources of variation in the magnitude of scale diseconomies

across firms and times, we regressed the scale indices on the four scale, scope, and scope

interaction variables affecting the scale indices, as indicated by equations (8) and (11). Given

that these expressions indicate that the relationship between the product-specific scale indices

and the measures of scale and scope variables is nonlinear, linear and quadratic terms were

included in the regressions for the three scale and scope variables. The results are summarized in

columns (1) and (2) of Table B1 in Appendix B, where the standard partial regression

coefficients are shown for the aforementioned set of explanatory variables. The estimated

standard partial regression coefficients measure the change in a scale index as a fraction of its

standard deviation associated with a change of one standard deviation in the explanatory

variables (Ezekiel and Fox 1959). The regressions are intended to serve only as a means of

describing how scale economies covary with measures that reflect the size and composition of a

firm’s output. Below we highlight the key features of the relationships with firm size and the

scope variable relevant to each type of product-specific scale economy. Details for the full set of

covariates are given in columns (1) and (2) of Table B1 in Appendix B. In interpreting these

results, the reader should be mindful of our basic finding that diseconomies of scale prevailed

across all firms and over all time periods for both SCL(MS) and SCL(OV).

       Consider first the results pertaining to variation in scale diseconomies relating to firms’

broadening their lines of business to include marketing services as well as advertising-related

ones. The relationship between SCL(MS) and the firm size (WGI = worldwide gross income in

constant dollars) was found to be non-monotonic (concave from below) with SCL(MS)

increasing over a small range of values of firm size: from WGI’ MIN of $484.7 million to a

gross income level of $767.7 million, which is well below WGI’s median value of $1599.0




                                                                                                    29
million. The range from MIN to the inflexion point encompassed almost twenty-eight percent of

our sample of 83 observations. Beyond the inflexion point, SCL(MS) declined with further

increases in size for the remaining sixty-two percent of observations. Not unexpectedly,

SCL(MS) decreases at a slightly decreasing rate (convex from below) as advertising service’s

share of firm gross income (ADS) increases over the entire range of observations.

       Turning to the variability in the diseconomies of scale associated with extending

coverage from the U.S. to overseas markets, we find that SCL(OV) bears no reliable relationship

with firm size. While the sample of relevant observations (n = 44) here was restricted to only

four of the eight firms, it nonetheless encompassed a wide range of values of the firm size

variable (WGI; MIN = $603.1 mill., MAX = 6296.3 mill.). As is to be expected, SCL(OV)

decreases at a slightly decreasing rate (convex from below) with increases in the U.S. share of

firm gross income (USS) over the range of available observations.


V.2.   Scope Economies

       The possible advantages accruing to a firm with a broad product line rather than a narrow

one, or cost advantages arising from serving the global market rather than just the U.S. market

may be assessed by estimating returns to scope. As defined in (12) and (14), our index of scope

economies represents the percentage cost savings realized from the joint production of some mix

of services (or for a combination of markets) over the costs of producing the services separately

(or for the markets separately). In the case of two products (or markets), global and product-

specific scope economies are identical.

       Substituting the parameter estimates for our preferred model (with β2 =0) into (13) and

(15), we calculated for all firms and time periods scope economy indices which estimate the

percent savings for joint production as compared to stand-alone production of: (a) advertising-



                                                                                                  30
related and other marketing services (RSP(LB)i), and (b) U.S. and overseas markets (RSP(GL)i).

The results are summarized in columns (4) and (5) of Table 5.

       It is immediately apparent from Table 5 that economies of scope were realized by all

firms in all time periods from joint as opposed to separate production for both diversification

strategies. The cost savings were small but uniformly positive. The median savings for either

expanding the line of services offered or extending the scope of markets served was less than two

per cent, with the variation in savings distributed over a limited range of less than one percent to

under four percent. For the case of the joint production of advertising and marketing services, the

estimated cost savings was less than one percent for only about six percent of the sample

observations. Realization of only minimal cost savings was more frequent for the joint

production of services for the U.S. and overseas markets; the estimated cost savings was less

than one percent for nineteen percent of the sample observations. However, the null hypotheses

that the joint costs equal the sum of the stand-alone costs (RSP(LB)=0 or RSP(GL)=0) was

strongly rejected (p<0.000l) for all eight firms for both indices of scope economies.

       As with the indices of scale economies, we analyzed variation in the magnitude of scope

economies by regressing each of the indices of scope economies on the four scale, scope, and

scope interaction variables. Here we limit the discussion to focus on relations involving the size

and relevant scope variable. Detailed results for the full set of covariates are presented in

columns (3) and (4) of Table B1 in Appendix B.

       The estimated relationship between scope economies associated with joint production of

advertising and marketing services and firm size was found to be J-shaped (convex from below)

with the minimum level of RSP(LB) occurring when firm size was $813.4 mill. Thus RSP(LB)

fell as firm size increased for almost a quarter of the sample observations and then increased




                                                                                                  31
over the subsequent range of observations which accounted for the remaining three-quarters of

the sample observations.

       The estimated relationship between SCL(LB) and the share of firm revenue arising from

advertising services (ADS) was concave (from below). However, over the range of observations

of RSP(LB) contained in the sample, RSP(LB) decreased monotonically as advertising share

increased. That relationship is consistent with the expectation that as firms add marketing

services to their prior line of advertising services, savings from the joint production of both

increase with increases in the share of firm revenue realized from marketing services since the

latter share equals (1-ADS).

       In the case of the other dimension of scope (RSP(GL), the form of the relationship

between firm size and savings from producing for both the U.S. and overseas markets jointly

rather than separately was found to be J-shaped (convex from below), similar to the manner in

which RSP(LB) and firm size were found to be related. RSP(GL) declined as size increased

when gross income was $1,462.4 million or less (which accounted for about forty-two percent of

the observations) and then increased as firm size increased beyond that level for the remaining

fifty-eight percent of the sample observations. For at least a majority of our sample of

observations, both RSP(LB) and RSP(GL) increased as firm size increased. Thus, in contrast to

Silk and Berndt’s (1995) results for individual advertising agencies, we find no evidence of any

tendency for large holding companies to over diversify. To the contrary, at low levels of firm

size, scope economies appear to decrease with increases in firm size and hence small firms may

be under diversified in the sense that greater scope economies could be realized were they able to

achieve gross incomes above the inflexion point in J-shaped relationship between size and scope

economies.




                                                                                                  32
       Contrary to expectations, the parameter estimates for the relevant standardized partial

regression coefficients indicated that RSP(GL) increased (rather than decreased) monotonically

as share of firm revenue from U.S. operations (USS) increased (convex from below). This

counterintuitive result may be accounted for by the presence of an influential cluster of

observations for firms based outside the U.S. with extremely small shares of their gross income

coming from U.S. operations, especially in the early years of the time series. When that set of

observations was removed, the expected negative relationship between RSP(GL) and USS

emerged.


                                        VI. DISCUSSION

VI.1. Scale and Scope Economies

       Our results suggest that the industry’s long-run cost function is subject to very slight

economies of scale. We also find that modest diseconomies of scale accompanied the

broadening of lines of business (from advertising to marketing services) or market coverage

(from the U.S. to overseas). Product-specific scale diseconomies were shown to be consistent

with overall or global scale economies in this context, given the limited level of global scale

economies available and the composition of firm income with respect to lines of business and

markets served. Taken together, these findings do not point to any substantial level of potential

scale economies that remains to be exploited by the largest firms in this industry. Such findings

are to be expected in a highly competitive industry with relatively low fixed costs.

       However, two cautions should be noted. First, recall that the parameter estimate for the

quadratic term in our cost model turned out to be non-significant. Hence, we have been unable to

learn much about the shape of the long-run cost curve or how firms might be arrayed along it.

Second, we have not attempted to model the adjustment processes surrounding mergers and



                                                                                                  33
acquisitions and that omission may have clouded our results. In particular, the adjustment costs

associated with digesting mergers and acquisitions could manifest themselves in our empirical

analyses as diseconomies of scale. See Johnson and Simon (1970) for a provocative but now

dated study of advertising agency mergers and acquisitions.

       Our estimates of scope economies indicate that a small cost advantage, typically only one

to two percent, is realized through the joint rather than separate production of advertising and

marketing services and for the domestic and overseas markets. Obviously this is a crude

partitioning of the global market and a more fine-grained decomposition would be preferable,

especially one that separated the overseas market into European and Asian components. A more

detailed disaggregation of firm revenue shares with respect to both lines of business and markets

served would allow the scope and interaction variables to be defined and measured in terms of

specific combinations of services and markets. These issues are deserving of further research.

       We also note the possible threats to the validity of statistical conclusions posed by

currencies fluctuations, cross-national differences in accounting standards, and by intra-firm and

inter-firm differences in accounting methods. The adequacy of our estimates of firm fixed effects

as controls for those factors remains to be assessed.


VI.2. The Advantage of the Holding Company Form of Organization

       In earlier studies we investigated the role of scale and scope economies in the domestic

operations of U.S. agencies (Schamalensee, Silk, and Bojanek 1983 and Silk and Berndt 1993,

1995). Using a proxy for average cost (employees per dollar of gross income) in a cross sectional

analysis of 400 agencies, Silk and Berndt (1993) found that both scale and particularly scope

economies (measured by shares of output in different advertising media) were highly significant

in the operations of U.S. agencies. They estimated the minimum efficient size of a domestic



                                                                                                   34
agency to be $3-4 million of gross income in 1987 dollars ($6-8 million in 2001 dollars). Of the

approximately 10,000 firms comprising the industry in 1987, 200- 250 had domestic gross

incomes at that level or larger and therefore had output levels and media-mixes sufficient to take

full advantage of all the size-related efficiencies seemingly available at that time.

       The 2001 worldwide gross income of the smallest of the eight holding companies

included in this study (Cordiant) was more than a hundred times greater than the aforementioned

estimate of minimum efficient size of a domestic agency; the largest in our present study

(Omnicom) was almost eight hundred times greater. The overwhelming difference in scale

raises the question: what, exactly, are the advantages of the holding company structure not

available in a single agency structure?

       Fine et al. (2003, p. 123) suggests that the answer lies in cost economies and the ability to

cope with the constraints imposed by the account conflicts. Our results are consistent with such

advantages in the sense that we find that holding companies appear to be operating in the vicinity

of a point on the long-run cost curve subject to scale economies, albeit quite modest ones, and

are generally diversified to an extent that permits realization of positive scope economies, again

of quite limited magnitude. Furthermore, our analyses of how variability in scope economies is

related to firm size indicated that holding companies are not subject to the excessive

diversification which Berndt and Silk (1995) found in their study of individual advertising

agencies and which they attributed to the constraints on growth imposed by conflict policy and

the bundling of services. Thus, the holding company appears to be a form of organization which

circumvents the institutional constraints which restricted the growth and diversification

opportunities of the traditional full service advertising agency.




                                                                                                  35
           Holding companies are publicly-owned enterprises and no explicit attention has been

given to that condition in the present study. Research underway by von Nordenflycht (2003)

emphasizes the advantages of holding companies with respect to access to capital markets and

the ability to exploit size as a proxy for capabilities. Interestingly, he finds no relationship

between public vs. private agency ownership and winning awards for creativity.


VI.3. Organization of the Advertising and Marketing Services Industry

           Historically, the U.S. advertising agency business has been characterized as a classic

example of an industry with minimal barriers to entry, low fixed costs and geographically

dispersed demand—i.e., roughly forty to forty-five per cent of total U.S. advertising expenditures

are accounted for by local, as opposed to national advertisers. Silk and Berndt (1995) argued that

the structure of demand and costs in the U.S. advertising agency business conforms to the

conditions Macdonald and Slivinski (1989) showed were required for an industry to sustain an

equilibrium with diversified firms. A highly diverse and unconcentrated size structure has long

persisted in the U.S. advertising agency industry and over time, it has become more

geographically dispersed (King, Silk, and Kettelhohn 2003). That size structure has enabled

holding companies to cherrypick from a large and varied pool of mid-sized and small U.S.-based

agencies (and human capital) in making hundreds of acquisitions over the past several decades.

           More than a decade and a half ago, Sheth (1986) predicted that three global firms would

eventually dominate the industry.4 Silk and King (2003) found that the concentration level in the

U.S. advertising agency business, as traditionally defined, rose during the 1990’s—although not

to the extent that has sometimes been suggested. Their estimates indicate that the major

advertising agency brands controlled by the eight largest holding companies represented about a


4
    Also see Sheth and Sisodia (2002).


                                                                                                    36
quarter of the total gross income earned from traditional advertising-related services in 2001 by

all U.S. agencies. How the industry structure in other countries that represent smaller regional

and local markets has been affected by globalization and diversification awaits further study. The

shifts in client demand toward more global and diversified advertising and marketing services

has, of course, also raised barriers to entry and fixed costs for suppliers of those services. The

nature of the industry equilibrium that can be sustained under these altered conditions is also an

important topic for further research.


                                        VII.   CONCLUSION

       This paper reported an econometric analysis of cost economies experienced by holding

companies operating in the global advertising and marketing services business. Treating holding

companies as multi-product firms, we estimated a translog model of costs. A firm’s total variable

costs are affected by its scale, scope of its lines of business and market coverage, and the

interaction of the latter two dimensions of scope. Our results indicate that the long-run cost

function for firms in the global advertising and marketing services business is subject to very

slight scale economies. Growth in volume obtained through either extending the lines of business

to include marketing services in addition to advertising services or expanding market coverage

overseas from the U.S. were subject to modest levels of product-specific diseconomies of scale.

These findings do not point to any substantial level of potential scale economies that remains to

be exploited by the largest firms in this industry. Such findings are to be expected in a highly

competitive industry with relatively low fixed costs.

       Small scope economies amounting to a few percentage points of cost savings accompany

diversification through both extending lines of business and expanding market coverage. While

small in percentage terms, in an industry where firms strive to achieve operating margins of


                                                                                                     37
fifteen percent and where income and costs are measured in billions, these economies

(diseconomies) clearly matter. The institutional constraints, especially adherence to the industry

norm of an agency not serving competing accounts, that limited the potential of traditional full

service advertising agencies for growth and diversification appear to have been obviated by the

holding company form of organization.




                                                                                                   38
                                       REFERENCES

American Association of Advertising Agencies (1979), “A Practical Solution to Client-Agency
Account Conflicts,” New York, July.

Anholt, Simon (2000), “Updating the International Advertising Model,” Admap, No. 407 June),
18-21.

Bagwell, Kyle (2002), “The Economic Analysis of Advertising,” unpublished paper, Columbia
University, August.

Bailey, Elizabeth E. and Ann F. Friedlander (1982), “Market Structure and Multiproduct
Industries,” Journal of Economic Literature, 20 (September), 1024-1048.

Berndt, Ernst R.(1991), The Practice of Econometrics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Bower, Joseph L. and Sonja Ellingson Hunt, (2001) “WPP—Integrating Icons to Leverage
Knowledge,” Harvard Business School Case 9-396-249, November 14.

Cardona, Mercedes, M. (2002a), “Billings Lose Agency Value,” Advertising Age, 73 (July 22),
6.

___________________(2002b),”Ad Holding Company Model Defended at Conference,”
AdAge.Com accessed November 22, 2002 at http://adage.com/news.cms?newsId=36625.

Caves, Richard E. and Michael E. Porter (1977), “From Entry Barriers to Mobility Barriers:
Conjectural Decisions and Contrived Deterrence to New Competition,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 91, 241-261.

.Doft, David B., Ashley M. Ammon, and Ken Gawrelski (2002), “The Evolution of Advertising
2003,” Equity Research, CIBC World Markets, New York, November 14.

Elliot, Stuart (2002), “Advertising’s Big Four: Its Their World Now,” New York Times,(March
31), Section 3, 2 and 10.

Endicott, R. Craig (2002), “58th Annual Advertising Agency Report,” Advertising Age, 73,
(April 22), 1 and S1-S21.

Eviews4 (2000), User’s Guide. Irvine, CA: Quantitative Micro Software.

Ezekiel, Mordecai and Karl A. Fox (1959), Methods of Correlation and Regression Analysis, 3rd
ed. New York: Wiley.

Fine, Lauren Rich, Tom Deitz, Sara Gubins, Karl Choi, Stacy Fleck, and Di Howie (2003),
“Advertising & Marketing Services: Global Ad Primer,” Global Securities Research &
Economics Group, Merrill Lynch, New York, February 20.




                                                                                             39
Horsky, Sharon (2002), “The Changing Architecture of Advertising Agencies,” unpublished
paper, Arison School of Business, Herzliya, Israel, July.

Johnson, Harold W. and Julian L. Simon (1970), “The Success of Mergers of Advertising
Agencies,” in Julian L. Simon, Issues in the Economics of Advertising. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press, 139-144.

Johnson, Russ (1982), Marion Harper. Chicago: Crain Books.

Khermouch, Gerry (2003), “Interpulic Group: Synergy—or Sinkhole?” BusinessWeek, (April
21), 76-77.

Kim. Kwangmi Ko (1995), “Spreading the Net: The Consolidation Process of Large
Transnational Advertising Agencies in the 1980s and Early 1990s,” International Journal of
Advertising, 14, No. 3, 195-217.

King, Charles King III, Alvin J. Silk, and Niels Kettelhohn (2003) “Knowledge Spillovers and
Growth in the Disagglomeration of U.S. Advertising Agency Industry,” Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy, 12 (Fall), in press.

Lawrence, Robyn Griggs (2000), “Parents and Progeny,” Agency, 10 (Spring), 10-11.

MacDonald, Glenn M. and Alan Slivinski (1989), “The Simple Analytics of Competitive
Equilibrium with Multiproduct Firms,” American Economic Review, 77 (December), 941-953.

Mandese, Joe (2002), “Consolidation or Consolation? Madison Avenue’s Big Get Bigger,”
ADMAP, Issue 430 (July/August), p. 8.

Merron, Jeff (1999), “Putting Foreign Consumers on the Map: J. Walter Thompson’s Struggle
with General Motors’ International Advertising Account in the 1920’s,” Business History
Review, 73 (Autumn), 465-502.

Paul, Catherine J. Morrison (1999), Cost Structure and the Measurement of Economic
Performance. Boston: Kluwer.

Paster, Harry (1981), “Measuring the Size of an Advertising Agency,” American Association of
Advertising Agencies Newsletter, (September), 2.

Pindyck, Robert S. and Daniel L. Rubinfield (1995), Microeconomics, 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Raynor, Michael E. and Joseph L. Bower (2001), “Lead from the Center: How to Manage
Divisions Dynamically,” Harvard Business Review, 79 (May), 93-100.

Schmalensee, Richard L., Alvin J. Silk, and Robert Bojanek (1983), “The Impact of Scale and
Media Mix on Advertising Agency Costs,” Journal of Business, 56 (October), 453-475.




                                                                                               40
Schmidt, Peter (1975), “A Note on the Estimation of Seemingly Unrelated Regressions Using
Unequal Numbers of Observations,” unpublished paper, University of North Carolina.

Sheth, Jagdish N. (1986), “The Future of the Advertising Agency Business,” Speech delivered at
the Annual Meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, March 10.

______________and Rajendra Sisodia (2002), The Rule of Three. New York: Free Press.

Silk. Alvin J. and Ernst R. Berndt (1993), “Scale and Scope Effects on Advertising Agency
Costs,” Marketing Science, 12 (Winter), 53-72.

___________________________ (1995), “Costs, Institutional Mobility Barriers, and Market
Structure: Advertising Agencies as Multiproduct Firsms,” Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy, 3 (Fall), 47-480.

__________and Charles King III (2003), “Changes in the Structure of U.S. Advertising Agency
Industry,” Working Paper, Harvard Business School, forthcoming.

von Nordenflycht, Andrew (2003), “The Rise of Global Advertising Holding Companies,”
unpublished paper, Sloan School of Management, M.I.T., February.

West, Douglas C. (1987), “From T-Square To T-Plan: The London Office of the J. Walter
Thompson Advertising Agency,” Business History, 29 (April), 199-217.

_____________(1988), “Multinational Competition in the British Advertising Agency Business,
1936-1987,” Business History Review, 62 (Autumn), 467-501.

Weinstein, Arnold K. (1974), “The International Expansion of U.S. Multinational Advertising
Agencies,” M.S.U. Business Topics, (Summer), 29-35.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.




                                                                                              41
                                          Table 1
                                  CROSS SECTION OF FIRMS

Firm                  Head-              Time Series    2001 World
                     quarters                           Gross Income
                                       Period  No. Yrs. (Millions Current $ U.S.)
Cordiant             London          1998-2001    4       $ 871.26
Communications
Group plca

Dentsu               Tokyo           1989-2001      13          2,417.7b

Grey Global Group    New York        1989-2001      13          1,217.0
Inc.

Havas Advertisingc   Levallois-      1992-2001      10          2,241.4
                     Perret

Interpublic Group    New York        1989-2001      13          6,726.8

Omnicom              New York        1989-2001      13          6,889.4
Communications
Group Inc.

Publicis Groupe SA Paris             1989-2001      13          2,718.9

WPP Group plc        London          1989-2001      13          5,791.7

TOTAL                                                        $ 28,874.1
a
  Cordiant was taken over by WPP on August 1, 2003.
b
  For fiscal year ending 3/31/02.
c
  Data for 1992-1994 are for Euro RSCG which then became Havas Advertising in 1995.

Source: Annual Reports. For non-U.S. firms, conversions to $U.S. of gross income reported in
other currencies were made at the daily average exchange rates for 2001.




                                                                                               42
                                     Table 2
                    VARIABLE DEFINITIONS AND DATA SOURCES*

Abbreviation                           Definition
WGIit           World-wide gross income from commission and fees for agency i in
                year t in millions of constant $ U.S. i = 1,…,8; t = 1989,…,2001.

LWGIit          Natural logarithm of WGIit.

TVCit           Total variable operating costs in millions of constant $ U.S.

AVCit           Average variable operating costs, calculated as TVCit /WGIit.

LAVCit          Natural logarithm of AVCit.

ADSit           Share of WGIit accounted for advertising-related services. The share
                contributed by other marketing services is: (1-ADSit).

USSit           Share of WGIit accounted for output sold in the U.S. market. The share
                for the overseas market is (1-USSit).

XAUSit          Interaction term, XAUSit = ADSit x USSit.
         *
          Annual reports for each of the firms were sources for the income and cost data used to
compute the set of variables listed above. For non-U.S. firms, variables reported in foreign
currencies were converted to U.S. dollars following the accounting convention of making the
conversion of income and costs at the average daily exchange rate for each year. Quantities of
current U.S. dollars were transformed into constant U.S. dollars using the GDP implicit price
deflator. In cases where data for ADS and USS were not included in the annual reports, estimates
found in the reports of financial analysts or in the annual issues of Advertising Age’s “Agency
Report,” were used, where such data were available.




                                                                                             43
                                     Table 3
            SUMMARY OF STATISTICS FOR REVENUE AND COST VARIABLES
                                     (n=83)
Vari-                Mean      Std. Dev.     Median Max      Min
 Able
AVCit                 0.8491         0.0384       0.8478      0.9271     0.7489
WGIit               1932.928       1381.857     1598.954    6296.295   484.664
ADSit                 0.7200         0.1340       0.7200      0.9471     0.3900
USSit                 0.3251         0.1854       0.3985      0.6383     0.0102
XAUSit                0.2179         0.1271       0.2306      0.4482     0.0073

LAVCit               -0.1664         0.0468      -0.1651     -0.0757     -0.2892
LWGIit                7.3415         0.6728       7.3771      8.7477      6.1835



                             CORRELATION MATRIX
                                   (n = 83)
               LAVCit    LWGIit (LWGIit)2   USSit            ADSit     XAUSit
LAVCit          1.0000
LWGIit         -0.2439    1.0000
(LWGIit)2      -0.2437    0.9989       1.0000
USSit           0.4289    0.3948       0.4002     1.0000
ADSit          -0.0840   -0.5275      -0.5390    -0.4024.    1.0000
XAUSit          0.4623    0.1312       0.1327     0.9137    -0.0145    1.0000




                                                                                   44
                                   Table 4
   THREE-STAGE LEAST SQUARE PARAMETER ESTIMATES FOR ALTERNATIVE
             SPECIFICATIONS OF LOG AVERAGE COST MODEL
                                   (n = 83)
                                    Dependent Variable: LAVCit
Vaiable    Parameter                    Parameter Estimate
                      (Ratio of Parameter Estimate to Asymptotic Std Error)
                                  (1)                        (2)

LWGIit          (βi -1)        -0.008517                -0.024713
                               (0.247)                  (4.698)

(LWGIit)2       β2/2           -0.000705
                               (0.307)

USSit           γ               0.579196                 0.662785
                               (5.710)                  (6.406)

ADSit           δ               0.324241                 0.363235
                               (6.196)                  (6.715)

XAUSi           θ              -0.636157                -0.763902
                               (4.501)                  (5.297)

Firm-Specific   ln αi
Intercept
     i=1                       -0.327982                -0.278684
                               (2.394)                  (7.742)
    i=2                        -0.382490                -0.332183
                               (2.677)                  (8.538)
    i=3                        -0.305785                -0.250309
                               (2.220)                  (7.364)
    i=4                        -0.328578                -0.276019
                               (2.376)                  (8.793)
    i=5                        -0.387107                -0.327275
                               (2.807)                  (9.434)
    i=6                        -0.358471                -0.302363
                               (2.574)                  (9.124)
    i=7                        -0.355101                -0.305281
                               (2.574)                  (9.512)
    i=8                        -0.292106                -0.235310
                               (2.095)                  (7.146)




                                                                              45
                               Table 5
   SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR ESTIMATES OF SCALE AND SCOPE ECONOMIES

                  Returns to Scale: AIC/MC            Scope Economies: % Cost
                                                    Savings from Joint Production
                                                   over Stand-Alone Production for:
                      (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
               Extending Lines      Extending       Advertising         U.S. and
               of Business from   Markets Served     and Mktg.         Overseas
               Advert. to Mktg.    from U.S. to       Services          Markets
                   Services          Overseas
                  SCL(MS)i           SCL(OV)i        RSP(LB)i          RSP(GL)i
Mean                0.282              0.492           1.709            1.733

Std. Dev.           0.146             0.073             0.521            0.920

Median              0.239             0.501             1.713            1.777

Max                 0.609             0.654             3.755            3.688

Min                 0.052             0.333             0.518            0.152

Number of             83               44                83               83
Observations

Number of             8                 4                8                 8
Firms




                                                                                      46
    APPENDIX A: DERIVATION OF INDICES OF SCALE AND SCOPE EFFECTS

                              A.1. Product-Specific Scale Economies

A.1.a. Advertising and Marketing Services as Separate Products

       Given that a firm is producing advertising-related services, we wish to measure the scale
economies (or diseconomies) associated with adding other marketing services to its service mix.
Following Bailey and Friedlander (1982, p.1030), we may define the returns to scale for this case
as:

      SCL(MS)i = AICim / MCim                                                                (A1)

where AICim is the average incremental cost of producing the quantity Yim of marketing services
in addition to its output of advertising-related services, Yia.

            AICim = [TVC(Yi) – TVC(Yia)]/Yim,                                                (A2)

where:

               Yim = (1-Pia)Yi                                                               (A3)

       The numerator of the right hand side of (A2) is the difference between the total costs of
producing both products jointly, TVC(Yi), and the total cost of producing the advertising
services separately, TVC(Yi). For our translog cost model (1), TVC(Yi) is:

         TVC(Yi) = exp(ln αi + β1 ln Yi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ MidPia)         (A4)

       Now if advertising services were produced separately, the volume of such services would
remain unchanged (i.e., Yia=Pia Yi), but would now account for all of the output (i.e., Pa=1). We
assume that the composition of the advertising services volume in terms of mix of production for
the U.S. and overseas markets remains the same as for the firm as a whole, as given by the share,
Mid and (1-Mid), respectively. Substituting in (A4), we obtain:

         TVC(Yia) = exp(ln αi + β1 ln PiaYi + ½ β2 (ln PiaYi )2 + (γ + θ) Mid + δ)           (A5)

The denominator in (A1) is the marginal cost defined as:

             MCim = ∂TVC(Yi) / ∂Yim                                                          (A6)

Using (A4) and taking the partial derivative of TVC(Yi) with respect to Yim we obtain:

             MCim = [{β1 + β2 ln Yi}exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia

                             + θ Mid Pia}] / (1-P ia )Yi                                     (A7)



                                                                                               47
Substituting (A3), (A4), (A5) in (A2) for Yim, TVC(Yi), and TVC(Yia), respectively, and
dividing by (A7) in (A1), we get:

                 [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia}

                 - exp{ln αi + β1 ln (Pia Yi) + ½ β2 (ln Pia Yi )2 + (γ + θ)Mid + δ}]

SCL(MS)i = ______________________________________________________                              (A8)

                 [{β1 + β2 ln Yi}exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia

                           + θ Mid Pia}]


A.1.b. Markets Served as Separate Products

       The product-specific index of scale economies, SCLio associated with extending
operations from the U.S. market (d) to the overseas market (o) is defined as SCLio, the ratio of
average incremental cost, AICio, to the marginal cost, MCio of producing the volume sold in the
overseas market (o) in addition to that sold in the U.S. market (d):

      SCL(OV)i = AICio / MCio,                                                                 (A9)

        AICio is defined as the incremental cost of adding volume sold in the overseas market to
the costs incurred by a firm previously producing only for the U.S. market:

           AICio = [TVC(Yi) – TVC(Yid)]/Yio,                                                  (A10)

where:

             Yio = (1-Mid)Yi                                                                  (A11)

TVC(Yi) is the total variable cost of producing the volume sold in both the domestic and
overseas markets and is given by (A4).

         TVC(Yid) is the total variable cost of producing only the volume sold in U.S. market
(Yid = Mid Yi ) and Yio= (1- Mid )Yi is output sold overseas. MCio is marginal cost and defined as
∂TVC(Yi) / ∂Yio . If output for the overseas market were produced separately, the quantity
required for that segment would remain unchanged (i.e., Yia=Pia Yi), but would now account for
all of the output (i.e., Pa=1). We assume that the composition of the advertising services volume
in terms of mix of production of advertising and marketing services remains the same as before
for the firm as a whole, as given by the share, Mid and (1-Mid), respectively. Substituting in (A4),
we obtain:

      TVC(Yid) = exp{ ln αi + β1 ln (Mid Yi) + ½ β2 (ln Mid Yi )2 + (δ + θ)Pia + γ}           (A12)




                                                                                                 48
The denominator in (A1) is the marginal cost defined as:

           MCio = ∂TVC(Yi) / ∂Yio                                                          (A13)

Using (A4) and taking the partial derivative of TVC(Yi) with respect to Yio we obtain:

           MCio = [{β1 + β2 ln Yi}exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia

                           + θ Mid Pia}] / (1-Mid)Yi                                       (A14)

Substituting (A11), (A4), (A12) in (A10) for Yio, TVC(Yi) , and TVC(Yio), respectively, and
dividing by (A14) in (A9), we get:

                [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 γ Mdi + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia}

                - exp{ln αi + β1 ln (Mid Yi) + ½ β2 (ln Mid Yi )2 + (δ + θ)Pia + γ}]

SCL(OV)i = ______________________________________________________                          (A15)

                [{β1 + β2 ln Yi}exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ P

                           + θ Mid Pia }]


                                 A.2. Global Scope Economies

A.2.a. Advertising and Marketing Services as Separate Products

       We wish to measure the cost savings (or dissavings) that may arise when the two lines of
business (i.e., advertising versus marketing services) that constitute the firm’s service mix are
produced jointly in the same organization rather than separately in separate organizations, each
producing a different lines of business. For this case, returns to scope (RSPLBi) or the
percentage cost savings realized from joint versus individual production is:

      RSP(LB)i = [TVC(Yia) + TVC(Yim) – TVC(Yi)]/ TVC(Yi)                                  (A16)

where TVC(Yia) and TVC(Yim) are the costs of producing advertising (denoted by the subscript
a) and marketing services separately(m), respectively, and TVC(Yi) is the cost of producing
those services jointly.

        If advertising services were produced separately, then the volume of such services would
remain unchanged (i.e., Yia = PiaYi) but that volume would account for all of the output of the
specialized organization (i.e, Pia = 1). We assume that the volume of both the specialized
organizations with respect to the shares of output produced for the U.S. and overseas markets
remain the same as for the firm under joint production, i.e., Mid , and (1-Mid), respectively.




                                                                                               49
       Applying these assumptions to our translog cost model (1), we find the total variable cost
of producing advertising services separately to be:

      TVC(Yia) = exp{ln αi + β1 ln Pia Yi + ½ β2 (ln Pia Yi )2 + (γ + θ) Mid + δ}            (A17)

       Next we derive the total variable cost of producing marketing services separately,
TVC(Yim). The volume of that output is Yim = (1-Mia), but Pia = 0, since only marketing services
are produced. Inserting these assumptions into the translog cost model (1), we find:

      TVC(Yim) = exp{ln αi + β1 ln (1- Pia )Yi + ½ β2 (ln (1-Pia )Yi )2 + γ Mid}             (A18)

As before, the total variable cost of joint production, TVC(YI), is given by (A4).

        Substituting (A17), (A18), and (A4) in (A16) for TVC(Yia), TVC(Yim), and TVC(Yi),
respectively, we get:

                 [exp{ln αi + β1 ln Pai Yi + ½ β2 (ln Pia Yi )2 + (γ + θ) Mid + δ}]

                 + [exp{ln αi + β1 ln (1- Pia )Yi + ½ β2 (ln (1-Pia )Yi )2 + γ Mid} ]

 RSP(LB)i = ________________________________________________                            -l   (A19)

                 [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mii Pia}]


A.2.b. Markets Served as Separate Products

       For the alternative split based on market served, returns to scope, RSPMSi, the
percentage cost savings gained from joint versus separate production is:

      RSP(MS)i = [TVC(Yid) + TVC(Yio) – TVC(Yi)]/ TVC(Yi)]                                   (A20)

        Following similar reasoning to that discussed above with reference to the costs of split
production of advertising and marketing services, we obtain the following expressions for the
total variable costs of separating production for the U.S. and overseas markets, TVC(Yid) and
TVC(Yio), respectively:

      TVC(Yid) = exp{ln αi + β1 ln Mid Yi + ½ β2 (ln Mid Yi )2 + γ + (δ + θ) Pia}            (A21)

      TVC(Yio) = exp{ln αi + β1 ln (1- Mid )Yi + ½ β2 (ln (1-Mid )Yi )2 + δ Pia}             (A22)




                                                                                                   50
        Substituting (A21), (A22), and (A4) for TVC(Yid), TVC(Yio), and TVC(Yi),
respectively, in (A20), we obtain:

                [exp{lnαi + β1 ln Mid Yi + ½ β2 (ln Mid Yi )2 + γ + (δ + θ) Pia}]

                + [exp{ln αi + β1 ln (1- Mid )Yi + ½ β2 (ln (1-Mid )Yi )2 + δ Pia}]

 RSP(GL)i = ________________________________________________                        -l   (A23)

                [exp{ln αi + β1 lnYi + ½ β2 (ln Yi )2 + γ Mid + δ Pia + θ Mid Pia}]




                                                                                           51
  APPENDIX B: STANDARDIZED REGRESSIONS RELATING SCALE AND SCOPE
                     INDICES TO FIRM VARIABLES

         Each of the four product-specific indices of scale and scope economies summarized in
Table 5 were separately regressed on the four size, share, and share interaction variables
affecting the indices, as given by equations (8), (11), (13), and (15) which define the indices.
Inasmuch as those expressions suggest that the relationship are nonlinear, we both linear and
quadratic terms were included in the regressions for the three size and share variables. To
facilitate comparisons across the regressions, all dependent and explanatory variables were
scaled in units of the sample values of their standard deviations. Table B1 below presents the set
of estimated standard partial regression coefficients for each regression. Standard partial
regression coefficients measure the change in a scale index, expressed as a proportion of the
sample value of its standard deviation, associated with a change of one standard deviation in an
explanatory variable (Ezekiel and Fox 1959. Given the panel structure of our data, parameter
estimates were obtained by treating each of the four equations as a set of seemingly unrelated
regressions (SUR), one per firm. The intercept term was allowed to vary across firms (and
treated as fixed effects) while the coefficients for the explanatory variables were assumed to be
equal across firms. In the interests of conserving space, estimates of the intercept terms are not
shown.




                                                                                               52
                                  Table B1
            STANDARDIZED REGRESSIONS FOR SCALE AND SCOPE INDICES

                                            Dependent Variable
                     Returns to Scale: AIC/MC               Scope Economies: % Cost
                                                          Savings from Joint Production
                                                        over Stand-Alone Production for:
                        (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)
                 Extending Lines        Extending         Advertising        U.S. and
                 of Business from Markets Served           and Mktg.         Overseas
                 Advert. to Mktg.      from U.S. to         Services          Markets
                     Services            Overseas
                    SCL(MS)it            SCL(OV)it         RSP(LB)it         RSP(GL)it
Explanatory                       Standardized Regression Coefficients
Variable                         (Ratio of Coefficient to Standard Error)
LWGIit                 0.139               -0.033             -1.442         -0.791
                      (9.847)              (1.486)            (2.266)        (2.810)

 (LWGIit)2            -0.155               0.038             1.594           0.804
                     (10.273)             (1.550)           (2.386)         (2.604)

ADSit                 -0.857              0.503              0.872          -1.754
                    (116.409)           (34.989)            (3.054)        (12.969)

 (ADSit)2              0.091             -0.125             -2.184           1.268
                     (15.923)           (12.026)            (8.812)        (10.814)

USSit                  0.605             -0.978             -4.005           1.323
                     (45.922)           (76.485)            (8.697)         (5.182)

 (USSit)2             -0.019              0.120              1.086           0.994
                      (5.177)           (12.449)            (9.799)        (15.332)

XAUSit                -0.355               0.037             2.165           0.268
                     (33.118)             (4.435)           (5.853)         (1.310)

No. of Observ.          83                 44                83                83

No. of Firms            8                  4                  8                 8

Adjusted R2            0.999              0.999              0.712           0.890

Std. Error Of          0.011              0.005              0.536           0.331
Estimate




                                                                                           53
