                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             WAGE DETERMINATION AND EMPLOYMENT FLUCTUATIONS

                                             Robert E. Hall

                                         Working Paper 9967
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9967


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




This research is part of the research program on Economic Fluctuations and Growth of the NBER. I am
grateful to George Akerlof, Garey Ramey, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Robert Shimer and to numverous
seminar and conference participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Determination and Employment Fluctuations
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 9967
September 2003
JEL No. E24

                                            ABSTRACT

Following a recession, the aggregate labor market is slack – employment remains below normal and

recruiting efforts of employers, as measured by vacancies, are low. A model of matching frictions

explains the qualitative responses of the labor market to adverse shocks, but requires implausibly

large shocks to account for the magnitude of observed fluctuations. The incorporation of wage-

setting frictions vastly increases the sensitivity of the model to driving forces. I develop a new model

of wage friction. The friction arises in an economic equilibrium and satisfies the condition that no

worker-employer pair has an unexploited opportunity for mutual improvement. The wage friction

neither interferes with the efficient formation of employment matches nor causes inefficient job loss.

Thus it provides an answer to the fundamental criticism previously directed at sticky-wage models

of fluctuations.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
rehall@stanford.edu
I.          Introduction

       Modern economies experience substantial fluctuations in aggregate output and
employment. In recessions, employment falls and unemployment rises. In the years
immediately after a recession, the labor market is slack—unemployment remains high and
the vacancy rate and other measures of employer recruiting effort are abnormally low.
Unemployment is determined by the rate at which workers lose jobs and the rate at which
the unemployed find jobs. I develop a model of fluctuations embodying both matching and
wage frictions. The incorporation of a wage friction makes employment realistically
sensitive to driving forces. My characterization of the wage friction is rather different from
earlier ideas of wage rigidity and more closely integrated with the matching process. The
model with both wage and matching frictions describes an economic equilibrium and
overcomes the arbitrary disequilibrium character of earlier sticky-wage models.
       A line of research starting with Diamond [1982], Mortensen [1982], and Pissarides
[1985]—nicely summarized in Pissarides’s [2000] book and in Shimer [2003]—provides
an account of unemployment as a productive use of time. I adopt many of the elements of
their model—the DMP model—in this paper. The DMP model views the labor market in
terms of an economic equilibrium where workers and employers interact purposefully. A
friction in matching unemployed workers to recruiting employers accounts for the
existence of unemployment. Variations in the economic environment lead to fluctuations
in unemployment. The DMP model portrays wage determination as a Nash bargain, where
employers receive a constant fraction of the match surplus. The payoff to recruiting
activity—the employers’ share of the surplus—is not very sensitive to driving forces.
Hence the DMP model cannot explain the magnitude of movements in recruiting activity.
In reality, the labor market slackens substantially in recessions and workers encounter




                                              1
difficulty in finding jobs, but the DMP model with Nash-bargain wage determination
suggests stability in job-finding rates under plausible variations in the driving forces.
       In a model with matching frictions, the bargaining set for wage determination is
relatively wide, because the difficulty in locating matches creates match capital the
moment a tentative match is made. The value of the match capital determines the gap
between the minimum wage acceptable to the worker and the maximum wage acceptable
to the employer. From the perspective of bilateral bargaining theory in general, any wage
within the bargaining set could be an outcome of the bargain. The Nash bargain sets the
wage at a weighted average of the limiting wages, with a fixed weight over time. The
alternative I offer permits variations over time in the position of the wage within the
bargaining set. When the wage is relatively high—closer to the employer’s maximum—the
employer anticipates less of the surplus from new matches and puts correspondingly less
effort into recruiting workers. Jobs become hard to find, unemployment rises, and
employment falls.
       In the wage-friction model I develop, when changes in the economic environment
shift the boundaries of the bargaining set, at first the wage remains close to constant. Then
the wage adjusts over time because—thanks to heterogeneity in matches—the wage in
some cases falls outside the bargaining set and is then moved to the boundary of the set.
This mechanism guarantees that wage rigidity never results in an allocation of labor that is
inefficient from the joint perspective of worker and employer. Consequently, the model
provides a full answer to Barro’s [1977] condemnation of sticky-wage models for invoking
an inefficiency that intelligent actors could easily avoid. Unlike frictions portrayed as
essentially arbitrary restrictions on the ability to set wages or prices—such as in Calvo’s
[1983] well-known model for prices—the friction considered here arises within an
economic equilibrium. It satisfies the criterion that no employer-worker pair foregoes
bilateral opportunities for mutual improvement.
       Although wage rigidity has no effect on the formation of a job match once worker
and employer meet and no effect on the continuation of the match, rigidity does have a




                                             2
profound influence on the search process. If wages are toward the upper end of the
bargaining set, the incentives that employers face to look for additional workers are low. I
start the paper with evidence about the remarkably strong procyclical movements of help-
wanted advertising and vacancies. This evidence supports the mechanism proposed here.
       I then turn to the model. I adopt the matching friction of the DMP model. But as
Shimer [2003] and Veracierto [2002] have stressed, the DMP model and others with the
same basic view of the labor market do not offer a plausible explanation of observed
fluctuations in unemployment. The magnitude of changes in driving forces needed to
account for the rise in unemployment and decline in recruiting effort during slumps is
much too large to fit the facts about the U.S. economy. For this reason—and following
Shimer’s suggestion—I introduce the wage friction into the DMP setup. The resulting
model makes recruiting effort, job-finding rates, and unemployment remarkably sensitive
to changes in determinants. A small decline in the product price, productivity, or increase
in input prices results in a slump in the labor market. With the wage friction, these changes
depress employers’ returns to recruiting substantially. The offsetting decline in the wage
that occurs instantly in the DMP model is delayed by the wage friction. The immediate
effect is a decline in recruiting efforts, a lower job-finding rate, and a slacker labor market
with higher unemployment.



II.         Variations in Recruiting Effort

       The DMP model captures recruiting effort in the vacancy rate. Prior to the
beginning of the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) in December 2000,
no direct measures of vacancies have been available for the U.S. labor market. Previous
authors have suggested—reasonably persuasively—that data on help-wanted advertising
provided good evidence about variations in vacancies over time. Figure 1 shows the
Conference Board’s index of help-wanted advertising since 1951. Recruiting effort as




                                             3
measured by advertising is remarkably volatile. It is not uncommon for advertising to fall
by 50 percent from peak to trough, as it did from 2000 to 2003.

 120



 100



   80



   60



   40



   20



    0
        1951
               1953
                      1955
                             1957
                                    1959
                                           1961
                                                  1963
                                                         1965
                                                                1967
                                                                       1969
                                                                              1971
                                                                                     1973
                                                                                            1975
                                                                                                   1977
                                                                                                          1979
                                                                                                                 1981
                                                                                                                        1983
                                                                                                                               1985
                                                                                                                                      1987
                                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                                    1991
                                                                                                                                                           1993
                                                                                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                                                                                         1997
                                                                                                                                                                                1999
                                                                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                                                                              2003
Figure 1. Index of Help-Wanted Advertising

Source: The Conference Board, http://www.globalindicators.org


               Table 1 shows data from JOLTS on vacancies by industry for the period of
slackening of the labor market since late 2000. The figures confirm the high volatility of
vacancies suggested by the data on help-wanted advertising. The data show that vacancies
have declined in almost all industries. Although the forces that caused the downturn in the
economy disproportionately affected a few industries far more than others—notably
computers, software, and telecommunications equipment—the softening of the labor
market was economy-wide. The new data strongly confirm the position of Abraham and
Katz [1986] that recessions are times when the labor markets of almost all industries




                                                                                            4
slacken—not times when workers move from industries with slack markets to others with
tight markets. I conclude that a realistic model of the labor market needs to invoke a
market-wide force that has powerful effects on the recruiting efforts of employers.



Industry                                  Ratio of
                                      vacancy rates in
                                      12/02 and 12/00
Mining                                     0.36
Construction                               0.38
Durables                                   0.45
Nondurables                                0.48
Transportation and utilities               0.80
Wholesale trade                            0.52
Retail trade                               0.60
Finance, insurance, and real estate        0.79
Services                                   0.68
Federal government                         0.54
State and local government                 0.70

Table 1. Change in Vacancy Rates by Industry in JOLTS, December 2000 to December 2002




III.           Model of the Labor Market


A.         The Matching Process and Recruiting Effort
           I adopt the standard view of the matching friction in the labor market. The flow of
candidate matches results from the application of a constant-returns matching technology
to vacancies, v , and unemployment, u (both are expressed as ratios to the labor force). Let
x be the ratio of vacancies to unemployment and let φ ( x ) be the per-period probability




                                                   5
                                                          φ ( x)
that a searching worker will find a job. Let ρ ( x ) =           be the per-period probability that
                                                            x
an employer will fill a vacancy. φ is an increasing function and ρ is a decreasing
function. Employers open vacancies and initiate the recruiting process whenever it is
profitable to do so.
       The vacancy/unemployment ratio, x, serves as the indicator of labor-market
conditions in the model. In a tight market with a high ratio of vacancies to unemployment,
the unemployed find it easy to locate new jobs, so the job-finding rate φ ( x ) is high.

Employers find it difficult to locate new workers, so the job-filling rate ρ ( x ) is low. The

matching model gives a precise meaning to the notion of tight and slack markets.
       A standard specification for the matching technology is

                                         φ ( x ) = ω xα                                     (3.1)


The parameter ω controls the efficiency of matching and the parameter α splits the
variation between changes in job-finding rates and changes in job-filling rates. The
underlying matching function gives an elasticity of α to vacancies and 1 − α to
unemployment.

B.     Separations
       For simplicity, I assume a fixed hazard, s, that a job will end. In the U.S. labor
market, separations that result in unemployment appear to rise somewhat when
unemployment rises, but separations involving direct re-employment in new jobs decline.
JOLTS measures the sum of the two flows; the sum rose moderately from December 2000
through the most recently reported data. The situation is further complicated by the flows
into unemployment of people who were previously out of the labor force and the flows of
unemployed people back out of the labor force (see Blanchard and Diamond [1990]). My




                                              6
model in its present form does not claim to do justice to these aspects of labor-market
dynamics.
        It is straightforward to extend the model to make separations endogenous. The key
properties considered here would not be altered by that extension. Because the U.S. has a
well-defined Beveridge curve, nicely traced out by the data from JOLTS and the
unemployment survey for the contraction that began in early 2001, separations cannot be
too sensitive to driving forces, else the model would be unable to explain the high
amplitude of variations in vacancies documented in Table 1. Higher separations in slack
markets would require higher vacancies to maintain stochastic equilibrium in the market
and this influence could flatten the Beveridge curve unrealistically (see Shimer [2003]).
        In addition to ruling out endogenous movements of the separation rate, my
assumption also rules out exogenous movements. That is, I do not take spontaneous
fluctuations in the separation rate as a driving force in the model. A spontaneous burst of
separations raises both unemployment and vacancies and shifts the Beveridge curve
outward. The stability of the Beveridge curve argues against the importance of such a
driving force (see Abraham and Katz [1986]).

C.      Equilibrium with Matching Friction
        The following is derived fairly directly from Pissarides [2000] and Shimer [2003]. I
use discrete time to facilitate computations. I let λ be the value a worker enjoys when
searching (leisure value and unemployment compensation). The price of output is pt .
Other inputs needed to produce the unit of output cost c. And it costs k in recruiting costs
to hold a vacancy open for one period. Workers and firms are risk-neutral and discount the
future at rate β .
        The model is conveniently specified in terms of Bellman value-transition equations.
Let U t be the value a worker associates with being unemployed and searching for a new
job and let Et be the value the worker associates with being in a job, after receiving that
period’s wage payment, wt . Let J t be the value the employer associates with a filled job




                                            7
after making the wage payment. I assume, as is standard in this literature, that employers
expand recruiting effort to the point of zero profit, so the value associated with an unfilled
vacancy is zero.
       The value transition equations are:

                     U t = β φ ( xt )( wt +1 + Et +1 ) + (1 − φ ( xt ) ) (U t +1 + λt +1 )    (3.2)



                           Et = β (1 − s ) ( Et +1 + wt +1 ) + s (U t +1 + λt +1 )            (3.3)



                                 J t = β (1 − s ) ( J t +1 + pt +1 − ct − wt +1 )                 (3.4)



                                0 = βρ ( xt )( J t +1 + pt +1 − ct − wt +1 ) − k                  (3.5)


       Conditional on the wage, wt , and future values of other variables, the first three
equations determine the current values of U t , Et , and J t . Equation (3.5) captures a central

aspect of the model: Given the anticipated payoff from making a match,
J t +1 + pt +1 − ct +1 − wt +1 , firms create vacancies up to the point where the payoff is canceled

by the recruiting cost, k. As they create more vacancies, xt rises, recruiting success, ρ ( xt )

falls, and the point of zero net payoff is achieved. This pins down the key variable, xt , the

vacancy/unemployment ratio.

D.     Wage Determination
       Here I depart from the DMP model, which views wage determination as the
outcome of a Nash bargain. In this model, a worker with a reservation wage
w = U + λ − E is matched with an employer with a reservation wage w = J + p − c . The
symmetric Nash bargain would be the average of the two values. Instead, I characterize




                                                        8
wage determination in terms of a Nash [1953] demand game or auction (see also Chatterjee
and Samuelson [1983] and Myerson and Satterthwaite [1983]). In the auction, worker and
employer know one another’s reservation values. The worker proposes a wage, wL , and

the firm, without knowing the worker’s proposal, makes its own proposal, wH . If

wL ≤ wH , the match is made or continues and the wage is agreed to be

w = κ wL + (1 − κ ) wH with 0 < κ < 1 . The auction has the property that any w in the

bargaining set [ w, w] is a Nash equilibrium. Believing that the worker is bidding wL , the

firm will bid wL as well, provided that wL ≤ w . Similarly, believing that the firm is

bidding wH , the worker will bid wH            as well, provided w ≤ wH . Thus any

w = wL = wH ∈ [ w, w] is a Nash equilibrium. Nash proposed the celebrated equilibrium

selection rule—the Nash bargain—adopted in the DMP model.
       I specify a different equilibrium selection rule to pin down the wage within the
bargaining set. The basic idea is that the previous period’s wage sets the norm for this
period’s wage. Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry [1996] discuss this type of a wage norm and
Bewley [1999] provides evidence about the operation of a modern labor market under such
a norm. Those authors focus on the avoidance of downward wage adjustments, but many
of their ideas point toward the absence of immediate upward wage adjustments as well. My
specification is limited in a way not previously considered in the literature on wage
rigidity—I do not permit the norm to lie outside the bargaining set. The earlier work
implied inefficient outcomes, especially the loss of a job under conditions where both
worker and employer could have been better off with a wage adjustment. The wage norm I
consider interferes neither with the formation of efficient matches once the parties are in
touch with one another nor with the preservation of jobs with positive surplus. Inefficient
separations cannot occur. As a result, the model provides a full answer to Barro’s [1977]
indictment of sticky wage models for invoking unexplained inefficiencies in economic
arrangements.




                                           9
        In the simplest application of the idea, the wage would remain at its previous level
as long as that level remained within the bargaining set. From a starting point where the
wage is in the middle of the bargaining set, and for moderate disturbances that do not move
the boundaries of the bargaining set past that wage, the wage simply remains fixed.
        Strict fixity of the wage is not a reasonable property for a dynamic model. To
formulate a more realistic version with gradual wage adjustment, I introduce heterogeneity
into the model. Suppose that each wage bargain contains an idiosyncratic random shift, η ,

in the boundaries of the bargaining set, so that the set becomes                     [w +η, w +η ] .    The

equilibrium selection rule becomes

                                   wt (η ) = wt + η if wt −1 < wt + η
                                           = wt + η if wt −1 > wt + η                                (3.6)
                                           = wt −1 otherwise


I take the norm to be wt −1 = E ( wt −1 (η ) ) , the previously determined average of wages. The

selection rule moves the wage to the boundary of the bargaining set in cases where either
changes in wt or wt , or the draw of η imply that the norm would lie outside the
bargaining set.1 These adjustments move the norm over time toward the middle of the
interval [ w, w] .

        For newly hired workers, the process works in the following way: A value of η is

drawn. If the norm, wt −1 , is inside the bargaining set [ wt + η , wt + η ] , the worker starts the

job at wage wt −1 ; otherwise, the wage is wt + η , if η is so high that wt −1 is below the


1
  Thomas and Worrall [1988] develop a similar wage-setting rule. In their model, a worker and a firm
generate a potential surplus if the firm can insure the worker against wage fluctuations. But the worker and
firm cannot commit to continue the relationship. Hence the wage is confined to the interval defined by the
current bargaining set. The optimal rule is to change the wage only when it would otherwise fall outside the
bargaining set, in order to shield the worker from wage fluctuations. The paper does not include a resolution
of the initial indeterminacy of the wage—the subject of my work—nor does it include volatility of
unemployment, which does not exist in the model.




                                                   10
lower boundary of the bargaining set, or wt + η , if η is so low that wt −1 is above the upper

boundary of the bargaining set. In subsequent periods, new draws of η occur and the wage
is the current norm wt −1 if it lies inside the bargaining set or is adjusted to the boundary of

the bargaining set.
       I assume that η is normally distributed with mean zero and standard deviation σ .
Let F be its cumulative distribution and f its density and note that

                                      x

                                      ∫ η f (η )dη = σ f ( x ) .
                                                      2
                                                                                         (3.7)
                                     −∞


The average wage evolves according to


                       wt = (1 − F ( wt −1 − wt ) ) wt + σ 2 f ( wt −1 − wt ) +
                       ( F ( wt −1 − wt ) − F ( wt −1 − wt ) ) wt −1              .      (3.8)
                       + F ( wt −1 − wt ) wt − σ 2 f ( wt −1 − wt )


Figure 2 shows the relation of the new wage wt to the earlier wt −1 . I have exaggerated the
standard deviation of the idiosyncratic element and thus overstated the rate of adjustment.
At the calibrated rate of adjustment, the two lines would lie almost atop one another.




                                                   11
                               0.70



                               0.65
                                                                                                         45°
  This period's average wage




                               0.60
                                                                                                     Adjustment
                                                                                                     function
                               0.55



                               0.50



                               0.45



                               0.40
                                   0.40       0.45          0.50            0.55            0.60        0.65        0.70
                                                             Last period's average wage



Figure 2. Wage Adjustment Function


                                 The wage-adjustment function can be expressed in the form

                                                 w′ = (1 − χ ( w, w, w ) ) w + χ ( w, w, w ) w * .                 (3.9)


where χ ( w, w, w ) is the adjustment rate and


                                                                          w+ w
                                                                   w* =                                           (3.10)
                                                                           2

is the symmetric Nash bargain wage rate. In a standard partial-adjustment model, the rate
would be a constant. Here, adjustment is more rapid near the boundaries of the bargaining
set than in the middle and more rapid if the boundaries are closer together.




                                                                       12
E.       Equilibrium
         The model is a difference equation in reverse time. From values of U t +1 , Et +1 , J t +1 ,
wt +1 , and xt , equations (3.2), (3.3), and (3.4) give U t , Et , and J t . These are present

discounted values formed recursively. Then the zero-profit condition for time t, equation
(3.5) can be solved for the new value of the vacancy/unemployment ratio, xt −1 . Finally the
wage adjustment equation, (3.8), can be solved for wt given wt +1 , wt +1 , and wt +1 . The
wage is a state variable that starts at an historical value which I take as the stationary
(symmetric Nash bargain) wage for p = 1 . With an infinite horizon, the values of U t +1 ,
Et +1 , J t +1 , and wt +1 would satisfy a transversality condition. To approximate the infinite-

horizon case over a finite period of 10 years, I find the terminal wage and associated
stationary-state values of UT , ET , and JT that satisfy the initial condition for the wage.

At realistic adjustment rates, this “shooting” problem can be solved easily by trial and
error.
         To find the resulting paths of unemployment, employment, and vacancies, I iterate
forward from the given initial unemployment rate. Suppose that the labor force is
normalized at one. Then the law of motion for employment is:

                                   nt = φ ( xt −1 ) ut −1 + (1 − s ) nt −1                  (3.11)


and unemployment is:

                                              ut = 1 − nt .                                 (3.12)

The vacancy rate is

                                               vt = xt ut .                                 (3.13)




                                                    13
IV.            Parameters

         To estimate the elasticity of the matching function, α , I use the aggregate data
from JOLTS shown in Table 2. I calculate x as the ratio of vacancies to unemployment and
the job-filling rate as the job-finding rate divided by x and estimate the elasticity as the
change in the log of the job-finding rate divided by the change in the log of the
vacancy/unemployment ratio, x. The resulting estimate is 0.765.


                                      December 2000                 December 2002
New hires                               4.070 million                 3.187 million
Unemployed                              5.264 million                 8.209 million
Vacancies                               4.036 million                 2.558 million
Job-finding rate, φ                   0.773 per month               0.388 per month
Job-filling rate, ρ                   1.008 per month               1.246 per month
Unemployment rate, u                     3.6 percent                   5.7 percent
Vacancy rate, v                          2.8 percent                   1.8 percent
                                     0.767 vacancies per           0.312 vacancies per
x
                                     unemployed worker             unemployed worker
α , elasticity of job finding with
                                                           0.765
respect to x

Table 2. Calculations from JOLTS Data


         The model operates at a weekly frequency, to avoid the danger that either the job-
finding rate or the job-filling rate might exceed one. I calibrate to the data shown in Table
3.




                                                14
        Symbol                    Concept                Value                   Source
                                                  0.62 per month =         JOLTS and Household
          φ                  Job-finding rate
                                                    0.14 per week                Survey
          v                     Vacancy rate             0.028                   JOLTS
                                                                            Household Survey
          u                Unemployment rate             0.056
                                                                            historical average

Table 3. Data from U.S. Labor Market




Notice that the value of the vacancy/unemployment ratio, x, is 0.5. I calibrate or estimate
the parameters as shown in Table 4.



Parameter             Interpretation             Value                        Source
   ω          Efficiency of matching             0.212       Calibration
    s         Weekly separation rate            0.00815      Calibration
              Flow value while searching                     Corresponds to a flow value while
    λ         (leisure or unemployment            0.4        searching that is about 75 percent of the
              compensation)                                  flow wage
                                                             Approximate labor share in revenue in
    c         Flow cost of other inputs           0.45
                                                             typical industry
    k         Flow cost of a vacancy             0.255       Calibration
    β         Discount factor                   0.999014     Corresponds to 5 percent annual rate

              Standard deviation of
                                                             Roughly matches persistence of
              idiosyncratic shift of the
   σ                                              0.23       unemployment, assuming a random
              boundaries of the wage
                                                             walk for price
              bargaining set

Table 4. Calibration and Estimation of Parameters


         I normalize the stationary level of the price, p, to one. The calibration solves the 9
equations: (3.1) through (3.5) and (3.10) through (3.13). The solution gives the stationary
values of four endogenous variables: U, E, J, and w and three calibrated parameters:
ω , s, and k (I treat the separation rate, s, as a calibrated parameter even though it can be




                                                    15
found in JOLTS in order to make the stochastic equilibrium condition, equation (3.11)
without time subscripts, hold exactly).
         The values of the variables are shown in Table 5.


 Variable          Interpretation         Value
     U         Value while searching      539.7
             Value of future work while   540.5
     E
                      working
     J      Value of worker to the firm   0.91
     w                 Wage               0.54

Table 5. Stationary Values of Endogenous Variables




V.           Properties of the Model


A.       The Stationary State
         The model keeps wages essentially constant in the short run. Strict constancy of the
wage would result in extreme sensitivity of the stationary-state unemployment and
vacancies to changes in the product price, as shown in Figure 3.




                                                  16
          1.0025

          1.0020

          1.0015

          1.0010

                                                                Job-finding rate
          1.0005
  Price




          1.0000

          0.9995

          0.9990

          0.9985

          0.9980 Vacancy rate
                                        Unemployment rate

          0.9975
                0.00        0.05        0.10        0.15        0.20           0.25      0.30



Figure 3. Stationary-State Relations among Price and Job Finding, Vacancy, and
Unemployment Rates, Fixed Wage


            The relations abstracts from transitory dynamics and from effects from changing
driving forces. At a higher product price in relation to the fixed wage, employers put more
resources into recruiting because they receive a higher fraction of the surplus.
Consequently, the job-finding rate is higher and the unemployment rate is lower.
            The curves in Figure 3 display properties that are central to the view of the labor
market embodied in the model. Although the full model takes account of the aspects of the
labor market not considered in the figure—matching dynamics and the effects of expected
future changes in driving forces—the curves tell the main story of the model. If product
demand is weak, unemployment rises. The rise occurs because the rate of flow out of
unemployment falls.




                                               17
         The high sensitivity of labor-market conditions to the product price when the wage
is fixed arises for the following reason: The gross value that an employer achieves from a
success in recruiting is

                                          V = J + p−c−w                                     (3.14)

Recruiting cost exhausts this value in equilibrium. The response of recruiting effort—and
therefore of conditions in the labor market—depends on the change in V induced by a
change in p. J + p − c is the present value of the profit margin earned by a worker in the
course of the job and, with exogenous separation, does not depend on any other variables
                                       dJ
in the model. In the calibration,         + 1 = 104.92 . With the wage held constant, there is no
                                       dp

                                      dV
offset from a wage change and            = 104.92 , resulting in large changes in recruiting effort.
                                      dp

The elasticity of V with respect to p is well over 50, as the level of V is 0.9. By contrast,
with a symmetric Nash wage bargain, as in the DMP model, almost all of this increased
                                                                                          dw
profit goes into wages, because a higher p raises both w and w , so                          = 0.99
                                                                                          dp

      dV
and      = 1.6 . The price change has little effect on the employer’s gross value and thus
      dp
little effect on recruiting effort.
         The sensitivity of recruiting effort to the product price depends on the distribution
of rents between workers and employers. If every employer makes take-it-or-leave-it offers
to its workers and captures all the rent, workers are indifferent between unemployment and
employment and their wage is the present value of λ for the duration of the job.
Employers have large incentives to recruit workers at all times, but the elasticity of the
gross value is unity and the response of recruiting effort to price changes is not very
elastic. Thus the high amplification of price or productivity shocks that occurs in the model




                                                 18
depends on the assumption that the typical workers shares a significant fraction of the joint
surplus from the employment relationship.

B.     Dynamic Response to Permanent Price Shock
       I calculate the responses to a permanent price shock. The price jumps from 1 to
1+ ∆ in the first period and remains at the new level. I start the calculations at the
stationary distribution of the labor force between employment and unemployment (94.4
percent and 5.6 percent). Figure 4 shows the response of the unemployment and job-
finding rates to a tiny price reduction of 0.1 percent. A standard deviation of the
idiosyncratic element of wage setting of σ = 0.23 reproduces the persistence of U.S.
unemployment, in the sense that unemployment declines to half its maximum level after 30
months. The thin line that tracks unemployment except at the outset is the stochastic
                                     s
equilibrium unemployment rate,           —the unemployment rate that would prevail if the
                                  φt + s
job-finding rate remained constant at its current value and the labor market reached
stochastic equilibrium. The two curves differ materially only for the first few months.
Except for the period just after a shock, it is safe to interpret the labor market as in
stochastic equilibrium.




                                            19
   0.075                                                                        0.15

                                                                                0.15

   0.070                                                                        0.14
                                             Job-finding rate (right scale)
                                                                                0.14

   0.065                                                                        0.13

                                                                                0.13

                                             Unemployment rate (left scale)
   0.060                                                                        0.12

                                                                                0.12

   0.055                                                                        0.11

                                                                                0.11

   0.050                                                                        0.10
           0   12    24     36    48    60        72      84      96      108
                                   Months


Figure 4. Response to Permanent Price Change in the Model with Wage and Matching
Friction


       As soon as the price drops, the labor market slackens—the job-finding rate falls
from its normal level just above 14 percent per week to about 12 percent per week. With a
constant inflow to unemployment and a diminished outflow, unemployment builds rapidly
to a maximum of about 6.7 percent. The wage moves downward from the start, so the job-
finding rate rises continuously. At about 7 months, improved job finding and higher
unemployment combine to equate the outflow from unemployment to the exogenous
inflow and unemployment reaches its maximum. From that point forward, further
improvements in job finding bring the unemployment rate back down to its new stationary
value slightly above the old stationary value of 5.6 percent (because the product price is
permanently 0.1 percent lower). Notice that the overall dynamics of the model are second




                                             20
order and unemployment overshoots later in the adjustment process, though only slightly.
At the 10-year cutoff in the figure, unemployment is still a bit below the old stationary
level of 5.6 percent.

C.     The Adjustment Rate
       When the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic shift of the boundaries of the
bargaining set is 0.23, the weekly adjustment rate χ ( w, w, w ) defined in equation (3.9) is

only 0.00006. The corresponding annual adjustment rate is 0.3 percent. Recessions would
last almost forever if this rate actually controlled the movement of the wage to its new
stationary value after a price or productivity shock. But the effective adjustment rate is fast
enough to generate the response shown in Figure 4. The reason is the extreme sensitivity of
w and w to the difference between the price and the wage paid. A small decrease in the
price lowers the job-finding rate and thus lowers the unemployment value, U, that
determines w . As discussed earlier, the lower price also lowers the value of the worker to
                                                                                   w+w
the firm, J, and thus lowers the firm’s reservation wage w . The derivative of         with
                                                                                    2
respect to p in the stationary state is 255. The response shown in Figure 4 combines a large
initial downward movement of w and w resulting from the price decline and the tiny

adjustment rate χ ( w, w, w ) to generate a realistic movement of the wage and the

unemployment. Each small adjustment in the wage moves w and w closer by a factor of
500 toward their new stationary values.

D.     Comparison to the Same Model with Nash Wage Bargain
       A model in the DMP family can be created by replacing the wage determination
process developed above with a symmetric Nash wage bargain,

                                               wt + wt
                                        wt =                                           (3.15)
                                                  2




                                               21
Figure 5 shows the relations between the product price, p, and the job finding, and
unemployment rates in the stationary state.

          1.08

                 Vacancy rate   Unemployment rate                          Job-finding rate
          1.06



          1.04



          1.02
  Price




          1.00



          0.98



          0.96



          0.94
              0.00     0.02     0.04      0.06        0.08   0.10   0.12          0.14        0.16


Figure 5. Stationary-State Relations among Price and Job Finding, Vacancy, and
Unemployment Rates


            Figure 5 displays the property of the DMP model stressed by Shimer [2003] and
Veracierto [2002]—large movements in the driving forces are needed to explain observed
movements in unemployment. In their models, the driving force is productivity. The
variable p in this model could be interpreted as productivity instead of the product price. In
addition, responses to changes in input prices would be essentially the same as for product
prices. A change of several percent in p is required to change unemployment by one
percentage point. Observed movements in productivity or in price-cost margins are
typically nowhere near that large.




                                                 22
       Figure 6 shows the dynamic responses to a permanent downward price shock of 4
percent. Unemployment rises rapidly to its new permanently higher level. The job-finding
rate drops immediately to its new permanent level. The vacancy rate (not shown) moves in
the same way as the job-finding rate. Except for the transitory dynamics from matching,
the DMP model lacks the dynamics of the wage-friction model—conditions in the labor
market, as measured by the job-finding rate, the job-filling rate, or the vacancy rate, move
immediately to their new stationary levels. In order to generate realistic impulse responses,
resembling those in Figure 4 for the wage-friction model, the DMP model must invoke
persistent but non-permanent movements of the driving force.


   0.075                                                                    0.112
                           Job-finding rate (right scale)


                           Unemployment rate (left scale)                   0.110
   0.070


                                                                            0.108
   0.065

                                                                            0.106

   0.060
                                                                            0.104


   0.055
                                                                            0.102



   0.050                                                                    0.100
           0   12     24     36      48      60        72   84   96   108
                                       Months

Figure 6. Responses in the DMP model to Four-Percent Price Decrease


       Figure 6 confirms that the response functions are unrealistic in an important
respect—a relatively large impulse is needed to account for the movements of the job-




                                                  23
finding and unemployment rates that occur in a typical recession. The reason is that
changes in the product price have modest effects on the match surplus, which is 1.84 at p =
1 and 1.77 at p = 0.96. Employers recruit workers on the expectation of receiving half the
surplus. Their recruiting efforts do not fall very much with p, so the job-finding rate does
not fall much either. Unemployment rises relatively little unless the decline in p is large.



VI.         More Elaborate Wage Norms

       Friedman [1968] and Phelps [1967] launched a rich literature on inertia in wage
and price determination. They pointed out that the wage determination process would
probably adapt to persistent inflation and thereby offset the tightening of the labor market
that a simple model of inertia would predict. Experience in many countries in the ensuing
three decades generally confirmed this proposition. The wage-adjustment process
summarized in equation (3.9) could be augmented with a term that raised the wage norm
by enough each period to incorporate adaptation to persistent inflation.
       This is also an appropriate point to note that the wage-adjustment process is
sensitive to the units in which wages are set. Equation (3.9) implies quite different
outcomes if the wage is measured in money terms rather than in real terms. Both
interpretations are consistent with the underlying idea that wage determination is an
equilibrium selection issue within the bargaining set implied by the matching model.
       One important branch of the literature following Friedman and Phelps—notably
Lucas [1972]—associated the inertial element of wage determination with expectations. In
Lucas’s model, lags in the availability of information resulted in inertia in the sense of
reliance in part on older information to solve a problem of inference about the current state
of the economy. Subsequently many practical economists equated the inertial term with
expected inflation. This view has proven to be something of a straitjacket. The amount of
inertia implies long lags in the formation of expectations, as if participants in wage




                                             24
determination were forced to use truly stale information despite the ready availability of
recent information. The notion that a wage norm adapts gradually to past experience seems
a more promising way to understand inertia.
       The wage norm also may help understand episodes in wage determination that do
not fit the expectation view at all. Episodes of discrete, sudden regime change—such as
those documented by Sargent [1982]—seem to break the connection of wage and price
determination to history. These episodes do not fit econometric models based on
expectation formation. The notion of a wage norm is sufficiently flexible to include rapid
change in times of clear breaks in policy.
       The wage-friction model developed in this paper, based on a wage norm as an
equilibrium selection mechanism, achieves a strict standard of predictive power in one
respect—that the wage never falls outside the bargaining set—but is permissive with
respect to wage-determination mechanisms that keep the wage inside the bargaining set.
Application of the model in practice needs to be guided by evidence about actual wage
determination, because theory is unrestrictive apart from the role of the bargaining set.



VII.        Concluding Remarks

       Strong evidence supports the following view of fluctuations in employment and
unemployment: When the labor market is tight and unemployment is low, employers
devote substantial resources to recruiting workers. Job-finding rates for the unemployed
are high. By contrast, when the market is slack and unemployment is high, employers
recruit less aggressively and job-finding rates are low. Data on help-wanted advertising,
vacancies, and unemployment confirm these relations. Further, transitions from strong
markets with low unemployment and high vacancies to weak markets with high
unemployment and low vacancies seem to occur without large measurable changes in
driving forces. Rather, small shocks stimulate large responses of unemployment.




                                             25
       I have offered a model of fluctuations in the labor market that mimics all of these
properties. In the model, the labor market becomes slack when recent events have lowered
the benefit to the employer from hiring. These events, such as a small decline in
productivity or a small rise in input prices, substantially reduce the payoff to hiring during
the time when wage friction inhibits the offsetting movement of the wage. The friction is
plausible, because it occurs only within the range where the wage does not block efficient
bargains from being struck and maintained. The outcome of the bargain between worker
and employer is fundamentally indeterminate and the wage friction is an equilibrium
selection mechanism. The friction can be interpreted in terms of a wage norm that provides
the equilibrium selection function.




                                            26
References

Abraham, Katharine G., and Katz, Lawrence F. 1986. “Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral
      Shifts or Aggregate Disturbances?” Journal of Political Economy 94(3) Part 1:
      507-522. June.
Akerlof, George A., Dickens, William T., and Perry, George L. 1996. “The
       Macroeconomics of Low Inflation” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
       1996(1): 1-59.
Barro, Robert J. 1977. "Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"
       Journal of Monetary Economics 3(3):305-316. July.
Bewley, Truman. 1999. Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession. Cambridge: Harvard
      University Press.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Diamond, Peter A. 1990. “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross
      Flows of U.S. Workers” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990(2): 85-143.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”
       Journal of Monetary Economics 12(3): 383-398. September.
Chatterjee, Kalyan, and Samuelson, William F. 1983. “Bargaining under Incomplete
       Information” Operations Research 31: 835-851.
Diamond, Peter A. 1982. “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium”
      Journal of Political Economy 90: 881-894. October.
Friedman, Milton. 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy” American Economic Review
      58(1): 1-17. March.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1972. “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” Journal of
       Economic Theory 4(2): 103-124. April.
Mortensen, Dale T. 1982. “Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing, and Related
      Games,” American Economic Review 72: 968-979.
Myerson, Roger B., and Mark A. Satterthwaite. 1983. “Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral
      Trading” Journal of Economic Theory 29: 265-281.
Nash, John. 1953. “Two-Person Cooperative Games” Econometrica 21(1): 128-140.
      January.




                                         27
Phelps, Edmund. 1967. “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation, and Optimal
       Unemployment over Time” Economica 34(135): 254-281. August.
Pissarides, Christopher. 1985. “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,
        Vacancies, and Real Wages,” American Economic Review 75: 676-690.
___________2000. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Cambridge. MIT Press. Second
      edition.
Sargent, Thomas J. 1982. “The Ends of Four Big Inflations” in R. Hall (ed.) Inflation:
       Causes and Effects University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of
       Economic Research. 41-98.
Shimer, Robert. 2003. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment, Vacancies,
      and Wages: Evidence and Theory,” NBER Working Paper 9536. February.
Thomas, Jonathan, and Worrall, Tim. 1988. “Self-Enforcing Wage Contracts” Review of
     Economic Studies 55(4): 541-553. October.
Veracierto, Marcelo. 2002. “On the Cyclical Behavior of Employment, Unemployment
       and Labor Force Participation” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. September,




                                        28
