                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WHAT EFFECT DO UNIONS HAVE ON WAGES NOW AND
                   WOULD ‘WHAT DO UNIONS DO?’ BE SURPRISED?

                                          David Blanchflower
                                             Alex Bryson

                                          Working Paper 9973
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9973


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by David Blanchflower and Alex Bryson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
What Effect do Unions Have on Wages Now and Would ‘What Do Unions Do’ Be Surprised?
David Blanchflower and Alex Bryson
NBER Working Paper No. 9973
September 2003
JEL No. J5

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the various claims made by Freeman and Medoff (FM) in their famous book What do
unions do? about the impact of unions on wages and update them with new and better data. The
main findings are as follows. 1) Private sector union wage premium is lower today than it was in the
1970s. 2) The union wage premium is counter-cyclical. 3) There is evidence of a secular decline in
the private sector union wage premium. 4) There remains big variation in the premium across
workers. 5) There is big variation in industry-level union wage premia. 6) State level union wage
premia vary less than occupation and industry level premia. 7) Union workers remain better able
than non-union workers to resist employer efforts to reduce wages when market conditions are
unfavorable. 8) There has been a decline in the unadjusted wage gap relative to the regression-
adjusted wage gap. 9) Public sector wage effects are large and similar to those in the private sector.

David G. Blanchflower
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
blanchflower@dartmouth.edu

Alex Bryson
Policy Studies Institute
100 Park Village East
London NW1 3SR
a.bryson@psi.org.uk
What Effect Do Unions Have on Wages Now and Would ‘What Do Unions
Do?’ Be Surprised?

David G. Blanchflower
Bruce V. Rauner 1978 Professor of Economics, Dartmouth College and NBER

Alex Bryson
Policy Studies Institute and Centre for Economic Performance, LSE

            “Everyone ‘knows’ that unions raise wages. The questions are how much,
           under what conditions, and with what effects on the overall performance of
           the economy”. What Do Unions Do?, Freeman and Medoff, 1984, p.43

In 1984 Richard Freeman and James Medoff (FM) published their pathbreaking book What Do

Unions Do?. The book has had an enormous impact. According to Orley Ashenfelter, one of the

commentators in a review symposium on the book published in January 1985 in the Industrial

and Labor Relations Review, 38(2), pages 245-258, the response of the popular press to the book

‘has only been short of breathtaking’ (p.245)1. It received rave reviews at the time it was written

and unlike most books has withstood the test of time: it is certainly the most famous book in

labor economics and industrial relations. One of the other reviewers in the symposium, Dan

Mitchell called it ‘a landmark in social science research’ and so it has proved (p.253). We went

to the Social Science Citations Index and typed in ‘What do unions do’ (henceforth WDUD) and

found it had been cited by other academics more than one thousand times2. In what follows we

will show that the vast majority of their commentary written in the early 1980s is still highly

applicable today despite the fact that private sector unionization has been in precipitous decline

since they put pen to paper or maybe it was even fingers to keyboard! An old adage is that a

classic book is one that everyone talks about but nobody reads. This book is not one of those. It

is a classic in the true sense because it continues to be a book that anyone – scholar or layman -

interested in labor unions needs to read!




                                                1
        Central to the thesis propounded by FM there are two faces to unions – the undesirable

monopoly face – which enables unions to raise wages above the competitive level which results

in a loss of economic efficiency. This inefficiency arises because employers adjust to the higher

union wage by hiring too few workers in the union sector. The second more desirable face to be

examined in detail by others in this volume, is the collective voice face which enables unions to

channel worker discontent into improved workplace conditions and productivity. This chapter

concentrates on the monopoly face of unions and its impact on relative wages. We explore the

various claims made by FM about the impact of unions on wages and update them with new and

better data.

        We examine in some detail the role of the public sector, which was largely ignored by

FM. This was a perfectly understandable omission at the time but is less appropriate today given

the importance of public sector unionism in the US.3 In Section One we report FM’s main

findings. In Section Two we discuss the main labor market changes that have occurred since

WDUD was written. Section Three reports our estimates of wage gaps disaggregated by various

characteristics used by FM. We also examine wage gaps that FM did not examine, namely those

in the public sector and for immigrants. Section Four examines time series changes in the union

wage gap. Section Five models the determinants of changes in the union wage premium at the

level of the industry, occupation and state. In Section Six we outline our main findings and

discuss whether FM would have been surprised about these findings when they wrote WDUD.

1. Summary of FM’s findings on union wage effects.

FM reported that early work used aggregate data on different industries, occupations and areas.

Much of this work was summarized in Lewis (1963). The reason that such aggregated data were

used was that ‘data on the wages of unionized versus non-unionized individuals or

establishments was neither available nor, given the state of technology, readily amenable to

                                               2
statistical analysis’ (1984, p.44). These studies found a union wage effect on average of 10-15%.

The more recent studies FM examined, including a number of their own, used micro data at the

level of the establishment but more usually at that of the individual. In Table 3.1 FM showed

that the union differential in the 1970s was 20-30% using cross-section data (the 7 numbers in

the table averaged out at 25.3%). Such estimates may still suffer from bias because differences

due to the skills and abilities of workers are wrongly attributed to unions. FM also considered

‘before and after’ comparisons and argued that, although they represent a way to eliminate

ability bias they also suffer from measurement error problems derived from mismeasurement of

the union status measure (Hirsch, 2003). FM reported 12 estimates using panel data in their

Table 3.2 for the 1970s: these are sizable but smaller than the cross-section estimates they

examined, averaging out at 15.7%4.

       FM used data from the May 1979 Current Population Survey (CPS) to obtain a series of

disaggregated estimates using a sample of non-agricultural private sector blue-collar workers

aged 20-65. They reported that unions raise wages most for the young, the least tenured, whites,

men, the least educated, blue collar workers and in the largely unorganized South and West5.

Further FM found, using data for 62 industries from the 1973-1975 May CPS that there was

considerable variation in the size of the differential6.

       FM argued that the amount of monopoly power held by unions is related to the wage

sensitivity of the demand for organized labor. The smaller response of employment to wages the

greater they argued is the ability of unions to raise wages without significant loss in employment.

Areas where employment is less responsive to wage changes such as air transport they argued

should be where one would expect to find sizable gains.

       FM went on to argue that the differential likely depends on the extent to which the union

is able to organize a big percentage of workers – the higher the percentage the higher the

                                                   3
differential (p51). FM found that for blue collar workers in manufacturing a 10% increase in

organizing generates a 1.5% increase in union wages. In contrast, they argued that the wages of

nonunion workers do not appear to be influenced by the percentage workers organized. In terms

of the characteristics of firms and plants FM obtained the following results.

a) Union differentials depend on the extent to which the firm bargains for an entire sector rather

than for individual plants within a sector.

b) Wage differentials tend to fall with size of firm/plant/workplace.

c) There was no clear empirical evidence on the relationship between product market power and

differentials primarily as it is so difficult to measure power.

       In terms of macro changes in differentials FM found that the 1970s were a period of

increases in the union wage premium. FM conjectured that a possible explanation was the

sluggish labor market conditions prevailing at the time. Wages of union workers, they argued,

tend to be less sensitive to business cycle ups and downs – particularly due to three year

contracts. This implies the union wage premium moves counter-cyclically – high in slumps

when the unemployment rate is high and low in booms when the unemployment is low.

However, FM found that inflation and unemployment explained less than 50% of the rising

union differentials in the 70s. Nor they argued did the rising wage differentials of the 1970s

represent an historical increase in union power. The early 80s according to FM were a period of

‘givebacks’ where unions agreed to wage cuts. Union wage gains, according to FM were NOT a

major cause of inflation.

       FM ended chapter three by estimating the social cost of monopoly power of unions. Loss

of output due to unions they found to be ‘quite modest’: accounting for between 0.2% and 0.4%

of GNP or between $5 billion and $10 billion.

       FM drew six conclusions on the union wage effect.

                                                  4
a) The common sense view that there is a union wage effect is correct.

b) The magnitude of the differential varies among people, markets and time periods.

c) Variation in the union wage gap across people is best understood by union standard rate

policies arising from voice.

d) Variation in the union wage gap across markets is best understood by union monopoly power

and employer product market power.

e) Wage premia of 1970s were substantial but they returned to more ‘normal’ levels in the 1980s.

f) Social loss due to unions is small.

2. Changes in the Labor Market Since WDUD

Union density rates in the US have fallen rapidly from 24% in 1977 to 13% in 2002 (Hirsch and

Macpherson, 2002)7. The decline was most dramatic in the private sector where in 2002 less

than 1 in 10 workers are union members. Density remains higher in manufacturing than in

services. However, Table 1 suggests that union membership has roughly the same disaggregated

pattern in 2001 as it did in 1977 – union density is higher among men than women; for older

versus younger workers; in regions outside the South; and in transportation and communication

and construction. The exceptions are by race, where in 1977 rates were higher among non-

whites but there is little difference by 2001, and by schooling. In 1977 membership rates for

those with below high school education were nearly double those with above high school

education. In 2001 they were approximately the same. So the highly qualified have increased

their share of union employment.

       The number of private sector union members declined over the period 1983-2002

whereas the number of public sector union members actually increased (Table 2). Due to the

growth in total employment in the public sector, however, the proportion of public sector

workers who were union members was exactly the same in 2001 and 1983 (37%)8. By 2002,

                                               5
46% of all union members in the US were to be found in the public sector compared with 32.5%

in 1983.

3. Union wage gaps since WDUD

3.1. What has happened to the union wage differential between 1979 and 2001?

Table 3 presents union wage gaps obtained from estimating a series of equations for each of the

major sub-groups examined by FM who used the 1979 May CPS file on a sample of non-

agricultural private sector blue-collar workers aged 20-65. Their sample was very small, being

limited to around 6,000 observations. Rather than use the estimates reported by FM to ensure

large sample sizes we decided to pool together 6 successive May CPS files from 1974-1979 and

then compare those to wage gaps estimated for the years 1996-2001 using data from the Matched

Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) files of the CPS. Columns 1 and 2 estimate wage gaps for

the private sector for 1996-2001 and 1974-1979 respectively.             Columns 3 and 4 present

equivalent estimates for the sample used by FM of non-agricultural private sector blue-collar

workers aged 20-65.

       Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) show a ‘match bias’ in union wage gap estimates due to

earnings imputations9. This bias arises because workers in the CPS have earnings imputed using

a “cell hot deck” method. This means that wage gap estimates are biased downward when the

attribute being studied (e.g. union status) is not a criterion used in the imputation. By construction,

the individuals with imputed earnings have a union wage gap of close to zero; hence omitting

them raises the size of the union wage gap. They show that standard union wage gap estimates

such as reported in Blanchflower (1999) are understated by about 3 to 5 percentage points as a

result of including individuals who have had their earnings imputed.

       Unfortunately, it is not a simple matter to exclude those individuals with imputed

earnings in a consistent way over time10. Here we follow the procedure suggested by Hirsch and

                                                  6
Schumacher (2002) and that we used in Blanchflower and Bryson (2003).11 All allocated earners

are identified and excluded for the years 1996-2001 in the MORG files. Because the May CPS

sample files available to us do not report allocated earnings in 1979-81, the series are adjusted

upward by the average bias (of .033) found by Hirsch and Schumacher using these May CPS

data for 1979-81. Earnings were not allocated in the years 1973-1978. For the period 1973-1979

total sample size was approximately 184,000 compared with 547,000 for the later period. In

each year from 1996-2001 there are approximately 130,000 observations for the private sector in

the MORG; in the May files, sample sizes are approximately 31,000.

        Comparing FM’s sample and the wider private sector sample for the 1970s (columns 4

and 2 respectively in Table 3), FM’s sample generates a larger wage gap for all, with the

exception of the least educated12. The difference between the two samples is large, with the FM

sample generating a premium for the whole private sector which is a third larger (28% as

opposed to 21%) than in the wider sample. However, patterns in the wage gaps across workers

are similar.

a) By sex, there is little difference in the size of the gap.

b) By age, the union effect is U-shaped in age and largest among the youngest who tend to be

the lowest paid

c) By tenure, the pattern is a similar U-shape.

d) By education, unions raise wages most for the least educated, with the most highly educated

having the lowest premium.

e) By race, unions raise wages by a similar amount for whites and non-whites.

f) By occupation, although not reported in column 4, FM (1984: 49-50) report larger gains for

blue-collar than for white-collar workers. The manual/non-manual gap in column 2 bears this

out.

                                                   7
g) By region, unions had the largest effects in the relatively unorganized South and West, with

more modest effects in the relatively well organized Northeast.

h) By industry, Construction and Services have the highest premia.

What has happened since the 1970s?

i) By sex, the wage gap has declined for women, but remained roughly stable for men so that, by

the late 1990s, the union wage gap was higher for men than for women. The rate of decline in

women’s union premium is underestimated in FM’s restricted sample, but is still apparent.

j) By age, the U-shaped relationship apparent in the 1970s has disappeared because there has

been a precipitous decline in the premium for the youngest workers, while older workers’ wage

gap has remained roughly constant. In the full private sector sample, young workers still benefit

most from union wage bargaining, though this is not apparent in FM’s restricted sample.

k) By tenure, as in the case of age, the U-shaped relationship between tenure and the union

premium apparent in the 1970s has disappeared, because low and high tenured workers have

seen their wage gap fall substantially while middle-tenure workers have experienced a stable

union wage gap. Now, it seems the premium declines with tenure.

l) By education, the lowest educated continue to benefit most from union wage bargaining, but

not to the same degree as in the 1970s. Although the trend is not so apparent in FM’s sample,

the wage gap has fallen most for high-school drop-outs

m)   By race, a three percentage point gap has opened up between the union premium

commanded by non-whites and the lower premium for whites

n) By occupation, the union premium has collapsed for non-manual workers. Despite some

decline in the premium for manuals, their wage gap was 17 percentage points larger than that for

non-manuals by the late 1990s (compared with only 5 percentage points in the 1970s)




                                                8
o) By region, the wage gap remains largest in the West and the South though, in FM’s sample,

there is no difference in the premium in the South and Central regions. The wage gap remains

smallest in the Northeast.

p) By industry, the wage gap remains largest in Construction and smallest in Manufacturing.

The decline in the differential was particularly marked in Services. We return to industry

differentials later

        Two points stand out from these analyses. First, no group of workers in the broader

private sector sample has experienced a substantial increase in their union premium. Indeed,

the only group recording any increase at all is those aged 45-54 who see their premium rise from

13% to 14%. Clearly, unions have found it harder to maintain a wage gap since FM wrote.

Second, with the exception of the manual/non-manual gap, those with the highest premiums in

the 1970s saw the biggest falls, so there has been some convergence in the size of wage gaps.

This finding is apparent whether we compare trends using FM’s sample (columns 3 and 4) or the

broader private sector sample (columns 1 and 2). This trend may be due to an increasingly

competitive US economy, where workers commanding wages well above the market rate are

subject to intense competition from non-union workers. Nevertheless, with the exception of the

most highly educated and non-manual workers, the wage premium remains around 10% or more.

3.2. Public sector

FM said little or nothing on the role of unions in the public sector, although, as noted above,

Freeman has subsequently written voluminously on the issue. Given that the remaining bastion

of unionism in the US is now in the public sector, it is likely if FM were writing today they

would have devoted a considerable amount of space in a twenty-first century edition of WDUD

to the public sector. So we did some of it for them: more evidence on how the role of unions in




                                               9
the public sector since WDUD was written is presented by Morley Gunderson in another chapter

in this volume.

       It is apparent from Table 2 above that the size of the public sector grew (from 15.6

million to 19.1 million or 22.4%) over the period 1983-2001 but as a proportion of total

employment it fell from 18.0% to 16.1%. Union membership in the public sector grew even

more rapidly (from 5.7 million to 7.1 million or by 24.6%). As we noted earlier, by 2001 public

sector unions accounted for 44% of all union members compared with 32.5% in 1983.

       Table 4 is comparable to Table 3 above for the private sector in that it presents

disaggregated union wage gap estimates. Because sample sizes in the public sector are small

using the May CPS files we once again decided to use data from the ORG files of the CPS for

the years 1983-1988 for comparison purposes with the 1996-2001 data. It was not possible to

use data for the years 1979-1982 as no union data are available. A further advantage of using the

1983-1988 data is that information is available on those individuals whose earnings were

allocated who were then excluded from the analysis. The main findings are as follows.

1) The private sector union wage gap has fallen over the two periods (21.5% to 17.0%) whereas

a slight increase was observed in the public sector (13.3% to 14.5% respectively).

2) The majority of the worker groups in Table 4 experienced increases in the size of their union

wage premium over the two periods, but wage gaps declined markedly for those under 25 and

with less than a high school education.

3) There was little change in public sector union wage gaps for men or women. In marked

contrast to the private sector where men had higher differentials than women, wage gaps in both

periods in the public sector were higher for women than for men.

4) Unions benefit workers most in local government and least in the federal government although

the differential for federal workers increased over time.13

                                                 10
5) Just as was found for the private sector, the wage benefits of union membership are greatest

for manual workers, the young and the least educated.

6) There are only small differences in union wage gaps for non-whites compared to whites in

both the public and the private sectors.

7) In contrast to the private sector where wage differentials were greatest in the South and West,

in the public sector exactly the opposite is found. Higher differentials are found in the public

sector in New England and the Central region in both time periods whereas the reverse was the

case in the private sector.

8) Wage gaps increased over time for teachers, lawyers, firefighters and police.

3.3 Immigrants14

FM also said nothing about the extent to which labor unions in the US are able to sign up

immigrants as members and then by how much they are able to raise their wages. Using the data

available in the CPS files since the mid-1990s we calculate wage gaps for the period 1996-

2001.We find little variation in union wage gaps by length of time the immigrant had been in the

US, holding characteristics constant as well as wage gaps for the US born. However, differentials

by source country are large. Differentials for Europeans (11.6% for Western Europe and 12.7%

for Eastern Europe) are well below those of the native born (16.8%). Estimates are also in low

double digits for Asians, Africans and South Americans (13.3%, 11% and 12.2% respectively).

In contrast the wage gap for Mexicans is 28%.

4. Time series changes in the union wage gap.

FM reported that the 1970s was a period of rising differentials for unions, although they did not

separately estimate year by year results themselves. Table 5, which is taken from Blanchflower

and Bryson (2003) and is reproduced by permission15, reports adjusted estimates of the wage gap

using separate log hourly earnings equations for each of the years from 1973 to 1981 using the

                                                11
National Bureau of Economic Research’s (NBER) May Earnings Supplements to the CPS

(CPS)16 and for the years since then using data from the NBER’s (MORG) files of the CPS17.

The MORG data for the years 1983-1995 were previously used in Blanchflower (1999)18. For

both the May and the MORG files a broadly similar, but not identical, list of control variables is

used, including a union status dummy, age and its square, a gender dummy, education, race and

hours controls plus state and industry dummies19.

       The first column of Table 5 reports time-consistent estimates of union wage gaps for the

total sample while the second and third columns report them for the private sector. To solve the

match bias problem discussed above, as we did in Tables 3 and 4 we followed the procedure

suggested by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) and described in the footnote to Table 5. Results

obtained by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) with a somewhat different set of controls are

reported in the final column of the table. For a discussion of the reason for these differences see

Blanchflower and Bryson (2003). The time series properties of all three of the series are

essentially the same.

       The wage gap averages between 17 and 18 per cent over the period, and is similar in size

in the private sector as it is in the economy as a whole. The table confirms FM’s comment (1984:

53) that ‘the late 1970s appear to have been a period of substantial increase in the union wage

premium’. What is notable is the high differential in the early to mid 1980s and a slight decline

thereafter, which gathers pace after 1995, with the series picking up again as the economy started

to turn down in 2000.

       Table 6 presents estimates of both the unadjusted and adjusted union wage gaps for the

private sector. The sample excludes individuals with imputed earnings. In column 1 of the

Table we report the results of estimating a series of wage equations by year that only include a

union dummy as a control. These numbers are consequently different from those reported by

                                                12
Hirsch and Macpherson (2002, Table 2a) who report raw unadjusted wage differences between

the union and non-union sectors but do not exclude individuals with imputed earnings20.

Throughout the unadjusted wage gap is higher than the adjusted wage gap, implying a positive

association between union membership and wage enhancing employee and/or employer

characteristics. However, the unadjusted gap has declined more rapidly than the regression-

adjusted gap since 1983. In 1983 the unadjusted estimate was 128% higher than the adjusted

estimate: in 2002 the difference had fallen to 91.5% higher.

       To establish what is driving this effect, Hirsch, Macpherson and Schumacher (2002)

decompose the unadjusted wage gap into its three components – employment shifts, changes in

worker characteristics, and in the residual union wage premium. Using CPS data for the private

sector only, they find almost half (46%) of the decline in the union-nonunion log wage gap over

the period 1986-2001 is accounted for by a decline in the regression-adjusted wage gap. Sixteen

per cent of the decline is accounted for by changes in worker characteristics and payoffs to those

characteristics, chief among these being the increase in the union relative to nonunion percentage

of female workers. The remaining 38% of the decline in the unadjusted wage gap Hirsch,

Macpherson and Schumacher found was due to sectoral shifts and payoffs to the sectors workers

are located in. The sectoral changes that stand out are the substantial decline in union relative to

nonunion employment in durable manufacturing, and the decline in relative pay (that is, the

industry coefficient) in Transportation, Communications and Utilities, a sector with a large share

of total union employment.

       The results reported in Table 5 are broadly comparable to the estimates obtained by H.

Gregg Lewis (1986) in his Table 9.7, which summarized the findings of 165 studies for the

period 1967-79.     Lewis concluded that during this period the US mean wage gap was

approximately 15 per cent. His results are reported below21:

                                                13
       Year       # studies       mean estimate       Year       # studies       mean estimate
       1967         20              14%               1973           24             15%
       1968           4             15%               1974            7             15%
       1969         20              13%               1975           11             17%
       1970           8             13%               1976            7             16%
       1971         20              14%               1977           10             19%
       1972           7             14%               1978            7             17%
                                                      1979            3             13%

The left panel contains estimates for the six years prior to our starting point in Table 5. It does

appear that the unweighted average for this first period, 1967-72, of 14 per cent is slightly below

the 16% for the second interval, 1973-79. The estimates for the later period are very similar to

those we obtained in Table 5 – which also averaged 16 per cent – and have the same time-series

pattern. In part, the low number Lewis obtained for 1979 is explained by the fact that the 1979

May CPS file included allocated earners and hence the estimates were not adjusted for the

downward bias caused by the imputation of the earnings data22.

       Figure 1 plots the point estimates of the union wage premium for the US, taken from the

first column of Table 5, against unemployment for 1973-2002. The premium moves counter-

cyclically.   There are three main factors likely influencing the degree of counter-cyclical

movement in the wage gap. The first, cited by FM (1984: 52-53) as the reason for the widening

wage gap during the Depression of the 1920s and 1930s, is the greater capacity for unionized

workers to ‘fight employer efforts to reduce wages’ when market conditions are unfavorable.

Conversely, when demand for labor is strong, employees are less reliant on unions to bargain for

better wages because market rates rise anyway. The second factor is the fact that union contracts

are more long-term than non-union ones and, as such, less responsive to the economic cycle.

This means that union wages respond to economic conditions with a lag.

       When inflation is higher than expected, this can result in a greater contraction in the

premium because non-union wages are more responsive to higher inflation. However, the third

factor, which should reduce the cyclical sensitivity of the union wage premium, is the cost-of-
                                                14
living-adjustment (COLA) clauses in union contracts that increase union wages in response to

changes in the consumer price level. According to FM (1984: 54) the percentage of union

workers covered by these agreements rose dramatically in the 1970s, from 25% at the beginning

of the decade to 60% at the end of the decade. However, FM’s estimates for manufacturing

suggest that COLA provisions ‘contributed only a modest amount to the rising union advantage’

in the 1970s. Bratsberg and Ragan (2002) revisit this issue and find the increased sensitivity of

the premium to the cycle is due in part to reduced COLA coverage from the late 1980s, but we

find no such evidence (see below).

       Commenting on the growth of the union wage premium during the 1970s, FM (1984: 54)

suggested that “at least in several major sectors the union/nonunion differential reached levels

inconsistent with the survival of many union jobs”. They were right. In the 1970s and early

1980s, the wage gap in the private sector rose while union density fell, as predicted in the

standard textbook model of the way that employment responds to wages where the union has

monopoly power over labor supply. In the classic monopoly model, demand for labor is given,

so a rise in the union premium will result in a decline in union membership since the premium

hits employment. The fact that unions pushed for, and got, an increasing wage premium over

this period, implies that they were willing to sustain membership losses to maintain real wages,

or that unions were simply unaware of the consequences of their actions.

       From the mid-1990s, the continued decline in union density was accompanied by a

falling union wage premium. This occurred because demand for union labor fell as a result of

two pressures. The first was increasing competitiveness throughout the US economy: increasing

price competition in markets generally meant employers were less able to pass the costs of the

premium onto the consumer, so that pressures for wages to conform to the market rate grew.

Secondly, unionized companies faced greater nonunion competition. Declining union density, by

                                               15
increasing employers’ opportunities to substitute non-union products for union products, fuelled

this process.      So too did rising import penetration: if imports are non-union goods, then

regardless of union density in the US, they increase the opportunity for non-union substitution.

These same pressures also increased the employment price of any union wage gap (what

economists call the elasticity of demand for unionized labor).

5. Industry, occupation and state-level wage premia

So far, we have focused primarily on union wage effects at the level of the individual and the

whole economy. However, the literature on the origins of the union wage premium focuses

largely on firms and industries. This is because the conventional assumption is that unions can

procure a wage premium by capturing quasi-rents from the employer (see Blanchflower, Oswald

and Sanfey, 1996 for more on this). If this is so, there must be rents available to the firm arising

from their position in the market place, and unions must have the ability to capture some of these

rents through their ability to monopolize the supply of labor to the firm. Individual-level data

can tell us little about these processes. Instead, the literature has concentrated on industry-level

wage gaps. In this section we model the change in the union wage premium at three different

units of observation - industry, state and occupation.

5.1. Industries.

As we noted above FM reported wage gap estimates by the extent of industry unionism. They

(1984: 50) comment on substantial variation in the union wage effect by industry, with gaps

ranging between 5% and 35% in the CPS data for 1973-75. FM’s results are reported in the first

column below. We used our data to estimate separate results by two digit industry for 1983-

1988 and 1996-2001. We chose these years as it was possible to define industries identically

using the 1980 industry classification. Using these data we also found considerable variation by

the size of the wage gap by industry.

                                                16
       Estimates by industry    FM 1973-5       1983-88     1996-‘01
       <5%                           13           11          10
       5-15%                         17           15          19
       15-35%                        24           12          12
       >=35%                          8            6           3
       # industries                  62           44          44

There is less variation in the wage gap by industry in the later period than in the earlier period

with only 3 industries, construction (41%), transport (36%) and repair services (37%) having a

differential of over 35%, compared with 6 in the earlier period which includes the same three -

construction (52%); transport (44%); repair services (37%) – plus agricultural services (41%);

other agriculture (56%) and entertainment (47%).23

       Where is the union wage premium rising, and where is it falling? The details are

presented in Table 7. It shows the regression-adjusted wage gaps in 44 industries during the

1980s (1983-1988) and then in the late 1990s (1996-2001). In contrast to the analysis by worker

characteristics, which reveal near universal decline in the premium – at least in the private sector

– it shows the wage gap rose in 17 industries and declined in 27. The gap rose by more than ten

percentage points in autos (+12%) and leather (+19%).          It declined by more than twenty

percentage points in other agriculture (-33%) retail trade (-20%) and private households (-29%).

Table 7 also shows that many of the industries experiencing a rise in the union premium between

1983 and 2001 would have been subject to intensifying international trade (Machinery, Electrical

Equipment, Paper, Rubber and Plastics, Leather) but this is equally true for those experiencing

declining premiums (such as Textiles, Apparel and Furniture). Horn (1998) found that increases

in import competition led to increases in union density and decreases in the wage premium

within manufacturing industries. This occurred because union density fell slower than overall

employment when faced with import competition. Horn also found that imports from OECD

countries decreased union density, while imports from non-OECD countries tended to raise

union density within an industry.
                                                17
       There is a negative correlation between change in union density and change in the

premium (correlation coefficient –0.39). Some of the biggest declines in the premium have been

concentrated in the sectors where the bulk of private sector union members are concentrated, as

the table below indicates. It shows the only three industries with more than a 10% share in

private sector union membership in 2002. In Construction and Transport, which both make up

an increasing proportion of all private sector union members, the premium fell by around 10

percentage points. In Retail Trade, where the share of private sector union membership has

remained roughly constant at 10%, the premium fell 20 percentage points.

                             Share of              Share of                   Change in
                        membership, 1983         membership, 2002          Premium, 1983-2001
       Construction             9.3                     13.5                     -10.7
       Retail trade            10.2                     10.5                     -20.3
       Transport                9.7                     12.3                      -8.0

The decline in the wage gap for the whole economy, presented earlier, is due to the fact that the

industries experiencing a decline in their wage gap make up a higher percentage of all employees

than those experiencing a widening gap. The results are similar to those presented by Bratsberg

and Ragan (2002). They find that, over the period 1971-1999, the regression-adjusted wage gap

closed in 16 industries and increased in 16 others. Their analysis is not directly comparable to

ours, but where industry-level changes are presented in both studies, they tend to trend in the

same direction. Only in one industry (Transport Equipment) do Bratsberg and Ragan report a

significant increase in the wage gap where we find a decline in the wage gap.

       These changes in the union wage premium by industry over time are worth detailed

investigation, even though FM did not present such analyses. Our first step was to estimate 855

separate first-stage regressions, one for each of our 45 industries in each year from 1983-2001

with the dependent variable the log hourly wage along with controls for union membership, age,

age squared, male, 4 race dummies, the log of hours and 50 state dummies. The sample was

                                               18
restricted to the private sector and excluded all individuals with allocated earnings. Three sectors

with very small sample sizes (toys, tobacco and forestry and fisheries) were deleted. We

extracted the coefficient on the union variable, giving us 19 years * 42 industries or 798

observations in all. The adjustments discussed earlier were made to deal with imputed earnings.

The coefficient on the union variable was then turned into a wage gap taking anti-logs, deducting

1 and multiplying by 100 to turn it into a percentage. We used the ORG files to estimate the

proportion of workers in the industry who were union members both in the private sector and

overall and mapped that onto the file. Unemployment rates at the level of the economy are used

as industry specific rates are not meaningful: workers move a great deal between industries and

considerably more than they do between states.          (A table providing information on the

classification of industries used and the average number of observations each year is available on

request from the authors). Regression results, reported in Table 8, columns 1 and 2, estimate the

impact of the lagged premium, lagged unemployment and a time trend on the level of the

industry-level wage premium. The number of observations is 756 as we lose 42 observations in

generating the lag on the wage premium and the union density variables.

       In the unweighted equation in column (1) we find the lagged premium is positively and

significantly associated with the level of the premium the following year indicating regression to

the mean. Unemployment and the time trend are not significant. However, once the regression

is weighted by the number of observations in the industry in the first stage regression, (column

(2)) lagged unemployment is positive and significant, indicating counter-cyclical movement in

the premium, while the negative time trend indicates secular decline in the premium.

       Bratsberg and Ragan (2002) reported that the industry-level premium was influenced by a

number of other variables.24 In particular they found that COLA clauses reduced the cyclicality

of the union premium and that increases in import penetration were strongly associated with

                                                19
rising union premiums25. They also found some evidence that industry deregulation had mixed

effects. Their main equations (their Table 2) did not include a lagged dependent variable. Table

9 reports results using their data for the years 1973-1999 using their method and computer

programs that they kindly provided to us. Column 1 of the Table reports the results they reported

in column 2 of their Table 2. Column 2 reports our attempt to replicate their findings. We are

unable to do so exactly – the problem appears to arise from the use of the xtgls routine in

STATA which gives different results on our two machines26. There are several similarities – we

find import penetration both in durables and non-durables, COLA clauses, deregulations in

communications and the unemployment rate all have positive and significant effects. We also

found as they did that deregulation in Finance lowered the premium. In contrast to Bratsberg

and Ragan, however, the inflation rate and the two interaction terms with the unemployment rate

were insignificant. The model is rerun in column 3, but without the insignificant interaction

term. A linear time trend is added in column 4: this is negative and significant, and eliminates

the COLA effect and the negative effect of deregulation in the finance sector. Column 5 adds the

lagged union wage premium, which is positive and significant. Its introduction makes inflation

positive and significant. In columns (6) to (8) models are run without the four insignificant

deregulation dummies. Column (6) indicates that, using an unweighted regression, the size of

the lagged premium effect drops markedly and the time trend and inflation lose significance,

showing these results are sensitive to the weighting of the regression. The smaller coefficient on

the lagged dependent variable is unsurprising given that there is much less likely to be variation

in the union wage gap estimates in industries with large sample sizes that have higher weights in

the former case. We are able to confirm Bratsberg and Ragan’s finding that the unemployment

rate, deregulation in Communications and import penetration in both durables and non-durables




                                               20
have positive impacts on the premium but not the findings on COLA, inflation or any of the

other deregulations identified.

       The fact that we find import penetration in durable and non-durable goods sectors

increases the premium suggests that union wages are more resilient than non-union wages to

foreign competition. Import penetration is likely correlated with unmeasured industry

characteristics that depress the premium inducing a negative bias that is removed once industry

characteristics are controlled for. Import penetration has likely reduced demand for union and

non-union labor, with union wages holding up better than non-union wages, but at the expense of

reduced union employment. There are theoretical and empirical reasons as to why this might

occur. For instance, since union wages tend to be less responsive to market conditions generally,

it may be that union wages are sluggish in responding to increased competition from imports.

Alternatively, industries characterized by ‘end-game’ bargaining may witness perverse union

responses to shifts in product demand as the union tries to extract maximum rents in declining

industries (Lawrence and Lawrence, 1985).        Another possibility is that increased import

penetration reduces the share of union employment in labor intensive firms, increasing it in

capital intensive firms. Greater capital intensity reduces elasticity of demand for union labor,

allowing rent maximising unions to raise the premium (Staiger, 1988).

       It isn’t obvious that weights should be used if we regard each industry as a separate

observation. In cross-country comparisons which, say compared outcomes for Switzerland, the

UK and the US it wouldn’t make a lot of sense to weight by population and thereby make the

observation from the US 4.67 times more important than that of the UK and 39.3 times more

important than Switzerland27. Columns (1) to (6) are GLS estimates accounting for potential

correlation in error terms. Column (7) switches to a weighted OLS and shows results are not

sensitive to the switch. The unweighted OLS in column (8) gives broadly the same results as the

                                               21
unweighted GLS in column (6). Taking off the weights has a much bigger impact than switching

from GLS to OLS.

       Further, the industries defined by Bratsberg and Ragan are very different in size. Some

industries are very broadly defined – for example industry 32 Services covers SIC codes 721-900

while Tobacco, for example covers one SIC code #130.               Retail Trade averaged 19,075

observations. Column 9 of Table 9 illustrates the sensitivity of the results to industry exclusions.

It is exactly equivalent in all respects to column 5 of the Table except that it drops the 32

observations from Retail Trade. The lagged dependent variable falls dramatically from .60 to

.32. The COLA variable is now significantly positive while the inflation variable moves from

being significantly positive to insignificant. The unweighted results (not reported) are little

changed. Bratsberg and Ragan’s results appear to be sensitive to both the use of weights and the

sample of industries used.

5.2. States

In the US unions are geographically concentrated by town, county, district and state. Often

towns next to each other differ – one is a union town, the other is non-union. Waddoups (2000)

used this interesting juxtaposition of union and non-union zones to estimate the impact of unions

on wages in Nevada’s hotel-casino industry.28 Although they share many features, and are

subject to broadly similar business cycles, most of the 51 states in the US are comparable in size

and economic significance to many countries. They also differ markedly in their industrial

structures and unionization rates. Assuming union density proxies union bargaining power, this

implies different premiums across states.      However, as noted earlier, FM found the union

premium at regional level was inversely correlated with union density, with the premium highest

in the relatively unorganized South and West. To explore this issue further, and to assess

changes over time, we estimated separate wage gaps for two time periods at the level of the 50

                                                22
states plus Washington DC. Results at the level of the state are reported in Table 10, and are

summarized in the table below. The data used are from the Outgoing Rotation Group files of the

CPS. It was not possible to identify each state separately in the May CPS so FM did not report

such results. Hence, we compared results from a merged sample of the 1983-1988 with those

obtained from our 1996-2001 files. The penultimate column in the table presents changes in

union density in the each state.29 The correlation between changes in state density and state

premia is negative but small (-0.10).

       Estimates by state           1983-8     1996-01
       <5%                             0          0
       5-15%                           6         21
       15-35%                         43         30
       >=35%                           2          0
       # states (+DC)                 51         51

The first thing we notice is that the variation in the union wage premium is much less by state

than it is by industry. Only two states in the earlier period had gaps of at least 35% - North

Dakota (35%) and Nebraska (37%) and none in the later period. There has been a downward

shift in the premium generally, as indicated by the movement from the 15-35% category to the 5-

15% category. The mean state union wage gap was 23.4% between 1983 and 1988, falling by

6.2 percentage points to 17.2% in 1996-2001. The premium fell in all but five states, with South

Dakota recording the biggest decline (16.8 percentage points). In four of the five states where

the premium rose, it only increased by a percentage point or two (Vermont, Massachusetts,

Wyoming, Hawaii). The premium only rose markedly in Maine, where it increased 9 percentage

points (from 7% to 16.1%). Since the early 1980s, union density fell by an average of 5.7

percentage points, with Pennsylvania (-10.6%) and West Virginia experiencing the biggest

decline (-11 percentage points). The premium appears to have declined more in smaller states

than it has in bigger states.      It is apparent from Table 10 that the five biggest states of

California, Texas, Florida, New York and Illinois had small changes in their wage gaps (-1.4%; -
                                               23
6.7%;    -10.1%; –0.6% and –4.5% respectively).        The five smallest states measured by

employment tended to have big declines in the differentials: New Mexico (-14.10%); Alabama (-

14.20%); Nebraska (-15.00%); Arkansas (-15.20%); South Dakota (-16.80%).30.

        We then ran 969 separate first-stage regressions, one for each state in each year from

1983-2001 with the dependent variable the log hourly wage along with controls for union

membership, age, age squared, male, 4 race dummies, the log of hours and 44 industry dummies.

The sample was restricted to the private sector and allocated earnings were dealt with as

described earlier. We extracted the coefficient on the union variable, giving us 19 years * 51

states (including D.C.) or 969 observations in all.       We then mapped to that file the

unemployment rate in the state year cell31. Once again we ran a series of second-stage

regressions where the dependent variable is the one year change in the premium (obtained by

taking anti-logs of the union coefficient and deducting one) on a series of RHS variables

including the lagged premium and lagged unemployment and union density rates32. Results are

reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8. The number of observations is 918 as we lose 51

observations in generating the lag on the wage premium and the union density variables. Both

unweighted and weighted results are presented where the weights are total employment in the

state by year. Controlling for state fixed effects with 50 state dummies we find that, with an

unweighted regression (column (3)) the lagged premium is positive and significant, as it was at

industry-level. Again, as in the case of industry-level analysis, the effect is apparent when

weighting the regression (column (4)). The positive, significant effect of lagged state-level

unemployment confirms the counter-cyclical nature of the premium: the effect is apparent

whether the regression is weighted or not. There is also evidence of a secular decline in the

state-level premium, but only where the regression is unweighted.




                                              24
       State fixed effects account for state-level variance in union density where the effect is

fixed over time. However, Farber (2003) argues that there remain potential unobserved variables

which simultaneously determine density and wages, but which are time-varying, and thus not

picked up in fixed effects, which might bias our results.

5.3. Occupations

Finally, we moved on to estimate wage gaps at the level of the occupation. Results are reported

in Table 11 using the same samples used as we did above – pooling six years of data 1983-1988

and 1996-2001 files from the Outgoing Rotation Group files of the CPS. As we found with our

estimates by industry there is considerable variation by occupation both in the first period and

the second: the variation is greater than was found when the analysis was conducted at the level

of states. In the first period 11 occupations had wage gaps over 35% - primarily manual

occupations. In the second 7 of these occupations still had gaps of over 35%.

       Estimates by occupation                  1983-8      1996-01
       <5%                                        10          10
       5-15%                                       9           9
       15-35%                                     14          17
       >=35%                                      11           8
       # occupations                              44          44

Out of the 44 groups 13 showed increases in the size of the differential over time while the

remainder had decreases. We used the same method described above for industries and states,

with occupations defined in a comparable way through time.       Columns (5) and (6) of Table 8

show that, whether the occupation-level analysis is weighted or not, there is clear evidence of

regression to the mean, with the lagged premium positive and significant, as well as evidence of

a secular decline in the premium. A significant counter-cyclical effect is evident when the

regression is weighted, but not in the unweighted regression.

       In all three units of observation we have used – industry, state and occupation – there is

evidence that the private sector premium moves counter-cyclically and that it has been declining
                                                25
over time. In all three cases the lagged level of the premium entered significantly positively and

was larger when the weights were used than when they were not. The size of the lag was

greatest when industries were used as the unit of observation and least when occupations were

used. Translating the results from levels into changes – that is by deducting t-1 from both sides –

leaves all of the other coefficients unchanged. Using the weighted results in Table 7 the results

reported below imply mean convergence.

          State level      ∆Premium t - t-1   =        -.7949Premiumt-1
          Industry level   ∆Premium t - t-1   =        -.6457Premiumt-1
          Occupation level ∆Premium t - t-1   =        -.8254Premiumt-1

The higher the level of the premium in the previous period the lower the change in the next

period.

6. What have we learned and would FM have been surprised about these results when they
wrote WDUD?

6.1. The private sector wage premium is lower today than it was in the 1970s.

This would not have surprised FM. Indeed, they predicted that the premiums of the 1970s were

unsustainable due to their impact on union density (FM 1984: 54). Perhaps it is surprising that

the premium remains as high as it does? One possibility is that, even though union bargaining

power has declined, union density continues to decline, implying that there is some employment

spillover into the non-union sector. If wage setting in the non-union sector is more flexible than

it used to be, this additional supply of labor to the non-union sector may depress non-union

wages more so than in the past, keeping the premium higher than anticipated.

6.2. The union wage premium is counter-cyclical.

The decline in the premium in good times is what seems to explain much of the decline in the

premium since the mid-1990s. Far from being a surprise to FM, they identified the counter-

cyclical nature of the premium.        We show the premium is counter-cyclical at the state,

occupation and industry levels. FM said COLA’s could dampen counter-cyclical movements in
                                                  26
the premium, but thought their significance had been overplayed. This is confirmed: we find no

COLA effect, though this finding is contested by others.

6.3. There is evidence of a secular decline in the private sector union wage premium.

There is evidence at state, industry and occupation level of a downward trend in the private

sector union wage premium accompanying the marked decline in union presence in the private

sector. The effect is sensitive to weighting in the case of the state-level and industry-level

premia, but not in the case of the occupational premia. Interestingly the wage gap appears to

have declined most in the smallest states (e.g. New Mexico, Alabama, Nebraska, Arkansas,

South Dakota) and declined least in the bigger states (e.g. California, Texas, New York; Illinois).

It would not have been a surprise to FM that there had been some reduction in the ability of

unions over time to raise wages as the proportion of the workforce they bargain for has declined.

6.4. There remains big variation in the premium across workers.

Patterns in the premium across worker types resemble those found by FM. The FM sub-sample

generally overstated the size of the premium in the population as a whole but we suspect this

would not have surprised FM. A decline in the premium over time seems to have occurred

across all demographic characteristics in the private sector, but there is regression to the mean,

the biggest losers being among the most vulnerable and certainly the lowest paid workers (the

young, women, high school dropouts). But perhaps the real surprise is just how large the

premium still is for some of these workers (26% for high school dropouts, 19% for under 25s).

One puzzle is the remarkable rise in the share of union employment taken by the highly

qualified, yet they continue to receive the lowest union premium. Why? Do they look for

something else from their unions, eg. professional indemnity insurance or voice, or are their

unions less effective? In contrast to the private sector, the public sector has experienced a small

increase in the premium, an increase apparent for most public sector employees. It is a sector

                                                27
where industry-level bargaining remains the norm, maintaining union bargaining power. So,

perhaps FM would not have been surprised by this result. We look at one group of workers that

FM did not consider: immigrants. The premium varies little by year of entry to the US, but does

depend on the country of birth, with Mexicans benefiting from the highest premium. Whether

this reflects the human capital, occupational mix, or costs of immigration faced by different

groups is a matter for further research, but we suspect the results would not have surprised FM.

6.5. There is big variation in industry-level union wage premia.

FM also found wide variation in industry-level premiums, and might have expected this to

persist because unions’ ability to push for a premium, and employers’ ability to pay, is

determined by industry-specific factors (such as union organization and the availability of non-

union labor, regulatory regimes, bargaining, product market rents).          However, we find

convergence in industry-level premiums since FM wrote, that is, a falling premium where it was

once large, and a rising premium where it was once small. (Overall decline at the economy level

is due to the fact that the former constitute a larger share of employment than the latter). FM

may well have been surprised by this regression to the mean because in 40% of the industries we

examined there was a rise in the premium.

6.6. State level union wage premia vary less than occupation and industry level premia.

FM did not explicitly compare variations in the premia at the state and industry levels. Richard

Freeman expressed the view to us that it made sense to him that there would be more variation at

the occupation and industry levels as they are more closely approximated to markets. No

surprise here.

6.7. Union workers remain better able than non-union workers to resist employer efforts to

reduce wages when market conditions are unfavorable.




                                               28
Import penetration is a good proxy for competition in the traded goods sector. Although the

impact of imports on the US wage distribution is often overstated (Blanchflower, 2000a), it may

be expected to play a role where imports permit substitution of union products for non-union

products. If imports reduce demand for domestic output and, in turn, demand for labor, this

should reduce union and non-union wages (assuming the supply of non-union labor is not

perfectly elastic). Whether the premium rises or falls with increased import penetration depends

on the relative responsiveness of union and non-union wages to demand shifts resulting from

foreign competition. Unions’ ability to resist employer efforts to reduce wages when market

conditions are unfavorable was cited as one reason for the counter-cyclical premium by FM

(1984: 52-53).

6.8. There has been a decline in the unadjusted wage gap relative to the regression-adjusted

wage gap.

Union members do have wage-enhancing advantages over non-members, but these have

diminished in recent years, implying changes in the selection of employees into membership. It

is unlikely that FM would have predicted this.

7. The policy implications

In spite of – or perhaps because of – the inexorable decline in union membership since FM

wrote, and despite some evidence of a recent secular decline in the premium, the union wage

premium in the US remains substantial, and is substantial by international standards

(Blanchflower and Bryson, 2003).        How should US policy analysts treat this piece of

information: should policy support unions or make life more difficult for them?

       From a standard economic perspective a substantial union premium has to be bad news:

in bargaining on their members’ behalf unions distort market wage setting, resulting in a loss of

economic efficiency.    This may have consequences for jobs and investment for the firms

                                                 29
involved, and potential impacts for the economy as a whole in terms of inflation and output.

However, it is not obvious that markets do operate in the textbook competitive fashion, so there

may indeed be rents available that employers are at liberty to share with workers. Furthermore,

there is evidence – confirmed in this paper – that unions are particularly good at protecting the

wages of the most vulnerable workers. If the most vulnerable are receiving less than their

marginal product – and, perhaps, even if they are receiving it – there may be moral and ethical

grounds for supporting unions. Finally, whether analysts like it or not there is substantial unmet

demand for union representation in the US33. People aren’t getting what they want, raising the

question of whether policy should be deployed to assist unions to organize.

       FM found the union premium effect on output was modest, and inflation effects were

negligible. There is no reason to alter this judgment. However, the size of the social costs of

unionization requires an answer to a fundamental, unanswered question, namely: where does the

premium originate? FM assume that it necessarily originates in the monopoly rents of employers

in privileged market positions, although there are at least three possibilities:

1) unions increase the size of the pie because unionized workers are more productive than like

workers in a non-unionized environment,

2) unions operate in firms with excess profits arising from a privileged market position (this may

arise either because unions only seek to organize where there are excess profits available, or

because these sorts of employers have something particular to gain in contracting with unions),

3) the premium is simply a tax on normal profits.

It really matters which of these three options it is. If 1) is true then there’s no implication for

workplace survival or union density, indeed, if this were the case, one might expect a growth in

unionization as firms recognize the advantages in unionizing. If it’s 2) then there is limited

damage, but with 3) there are real problems for firms, with potential knock-on effects for

                                                  30
investment, jobs and prices. Of course, different employers may be in different positions at any

point in time and the weight attached to the three options may differ over time with the business

cycle, structural change in the economy and so on. What evidence is there on the above? Barry

Hirsch, in his chapter for this volume, covers these issues in some detail. Here we focus on some

key points.

i) FM (1984: 54) speculate that, at least in some areas, the wage gap has ‘reached levels

inconsistent with the survival of many union jobs’. Blanchflower and Freeman (1992) take this

issue further and argue that the levels of the union wage differential were so high this gave

incentives to employers to remove the union – the benefits of removing the unions appeared to

outweigh the costs. Well, what has happened to union jobs? There is a growing body of

evidence that employment growth rates are lower in the unionized sector, suggesting 2) and or

3). The evidence is for the U.S. (Leonard, 1992), Canada (Long, 1993), Australia (Wooden and

Hawke, 2000) and Britain (Blanchflower, Millward and Oswald, 1991; Bryson, 2001). However,

Freeman and Kleiner (1999) and DiNardo and Lee (2001) find no clear link between

unionization and closure. Indeed, FM record instances in which union workers accepted cuts in

normal wages (‘givebacks’), sometimes to keep employers in business.

ii) Unionization is more common where employers operate in monopolistic or oligopolistic

product markets, suggesting that unions do try to extract surplus rents.

iii) The premium falls when one accounts for workplace heterogeneity. The implication is that

some of the premium usually attached to membership is, in fact, due to unionized workplaces

paying higher wages than non-unionized workplaces. If this is so, why? Perhaps unions target

organization efforts on workplaces that have rents to share, as noted above, they would be

foolish not to.   Or employers use unions as agents to deliver lower quit rates to recoup

investment in human capital (which makes them more productive/profitable). Abowd, Kramarz

                                                31
and Margolis (1999) say higher paying firms are more profitable and/or more productive than

other firms. If this is so for unionized firms, they are operating at a higher level of performance

than other firms. It makes sense that unions are located in higher performing workplaces since,

despite higher wages and a negative union effect on performance, they continue to survive, albeit

with slower employment growth rates. A central thesis of WDUD was that unions were more

productive so this would not be a surprise to FM.

iv) The evidence that unions have a substantial negative impact on employment growth suggests

that the social cost of unions may be larger than FM calculated. If the premium reduces the

competitiveness of unionized firms, they’ll lose employees and, as a consequence, union

organizing will get tougher for unions. This is exactly what has happened. On the other hand, if

unions do not command a premium, they lose their best selling point for prospective customers.

It’s Catch 22.

           From a public policy perspective, it is not obvious from this evidence that unions, taken

as a whole, operate to the detriment of the economy or, if they do, that the magnitude of the

problem is really that great. Even the evidence on slower employment growth rates is open to

the criticism that the link is not causal but arises because unions are often located in declining

sectors. What is lacking from the discussion above is a realization that unions and their effects

are heterogeneous: taking wages alone, they appear to operate very differently across individuals,

states, and industries.      Before we can make any clear policy prescriptions about what

governments should do to, or for, unions we need to know more about the nature of this

heterogeneity to establish under what conditions employers and unions can increase the size of

the pie.

           And then finally we asked Richard Freeman whether he was surprised by any of these

findings. He kindly read the paper and told us,

                                                  32
1) he was most surprised by the fact that the public sector wage effects are so large and so

similar to those in the private sector,

2) that we know little about the social costs of unions in the twenty first century. Consequently

he was unsure about the magnitude of the social costs, but would like to see empirical work on

the issue although he said would be ‘stunned’ if there were large effects, but as any good

empiricist he would let the data speak,

3) he was not surprised by any of our other findings.

So there you have it!




                                               33
Table 1. Disaggregated union membership rates, 1977 & 2001

                                  1977       2001

All                                 24        14
Private sector                      22         9
Public sector                       33        37

Private sector employees
Men                                 27        12
Women                               11         6

Whites                              20            9
Non-white                           27           10

Ages 16-24                          12         4
Ages 25-44                          23         9
Ages 45-54                          27        13
Ages >=55                           22        10

< high school                       23            7
High school                         25           12
> high school                       13            8

North East                          24        12
Central                             25        12
South                               13         5
West                                22         9

Agriculture, forestry &
 Fisheries                           3         2
Mining                              47        12
Construction                        36        19
Manufacturing                       34        15
Transportation, communication,
 And other public utilities         48           24
Wholesale & retail trade            10            4
FIRE                                 4            3
Services                             7            6


Source: 1977 “What Do Unions Do’. 2001 own calculations from the ORG file of the CPS.




                                            34
Table 2. Union Membership and Employment by Sector (‘000’s).

                 Union membership        Total employment
a) 1983
Private sector         11,933             71,224

Public sector           5,737             15,633
Federal Government        469              2,417
Post Office               523                705
State Government        1,071              3,800
Local Government        3,673              8,711

% union members in         32.5%
the public sector

b) 2002
Private sector          8,652           100,581

Public sector           7,327             19,379
Federal Government        443              2,382
Post Office               615                874
State Government        1,756              5,654
Local Government        4,514             10,488

% union members in         45.9%
the public sector

Source: Based on data from Table 1c of Union Membership and Earnings Data Book:
Compilations from the CPS by B.T. Hirsch and D.T. Macpherson, 2003.




                                           35
Table 3. Private sector union/non-union log hourly wage differentials, 1974-1979 & 1996-2001
                              Private sector               Freeman/Medoff’s sample
                         1974-1979           1996-2001    1974-1979           1996-2001
Men                        19%                  17%          27%                 28%
Women                      22%                  13%          27%                 24%

Ages 16-24                      32%                     19%              35%                    23%
Ages 25-44                      17%                     16%              26%                    28%
Ages 45-54                      13%                     14%              22%                    27%
Ages >=55                       19%                     16%              29%                    28%

Northeast                       14%                     11%              21%                    22%
Central                         20%                     15%              27%                    27%
South                           24%                     19%              29%                    26%
West                            23%                     22%              31%                    34%

< High school                   33%                     26%              31%                    29%
High school                     19%                     21%              25%                    28%
College 1-3 years               17%                     15%              28%                    28%
College >=4 years                4%                      3%              17%                    14%

Whites                          21%                     16%              28%                    27%
Non-white                       22%                     19%              28%                    30%

Tenure 0-3 years                20%                     20%              28%                    n/a
Tenure 4-10                     16%                     15%              19%                    n/a
Tenure 11-15                    10%                     11%              12%                    n/a
Tenure 16+                      17%                      8%              28%                    n/a

Manual                          30%                     21%              n/a                    n/a
Non-manual                      15%                      4%              n/a                    n/a

Manufacturing                   16%                     10%              19%                    19%
Construction                    49%                     39%              55%                    45%
Services (excl construc.)       34%                     16%              43%                    29%
Private sector                  21%                     17%              28%                    28%

Notes: 1996-2001 data files exclude individuals with imputed hourly earnings. Controls for 1996-2001 are 50 state
dummies, 46 industry dummies, gender, 15 highest qualification dummies, private non-profit dummy, age, age
squared, log of weekly hours, 4 race dummies, 4 marital status, year dummies + union membership dummy
(n=546,823). Estimates for 1974-1979 are adjusted upwards by the average bias found during 1979-81 of .033.
Controls for 1974-1979 are 9 census division dummies, 46 industry dummies, years of education, age, age squared,
log of weekly hours, 4 race dummies, 4 marital status dummies, 5 year dummies + union membership dummy
(n=183,881). Tenure estimates for 1974-1979 obtained from the May 1979 CPS and for 1996-2002 files and
February 1996 and 1998 Displaced Worker and Employee Tenure Supplements and January 2002 and February
2000: Displaced Workers, Employee Tenure, and Occupational Mobility Supplements. Freeman/Medoff’s sample
consists of non-agricultural private sector blue-collar workers aged 20-65 (n=64,034 for 1974-1979 and 142,024 for
1996-2001).



                                                       36
Table 4. Union wage differentials in the public sector
                                           1983-1988                  1996-2001
                                       Wage gap Sample             Wage gap Sample
                                                       Size                   Size
Private                                   22%      (754,056)        17%     (567,627)
Public                                    13%      (165,276)        15%     (110,833)
Federal                                    2%       (33,633)         8% (20,938)
State                                      9%       (42,942)        10%      (34,919)
Local                                     16%       (88,642)        20%      (60,981)

Male                                      8%         (77,528)         10%      (48,298)
Female                                   17%         (87,748)         16%      (62,534)

Age <25                                  28%         (15,603)         23%       (7,771)
Age 25-44                                13%         (93,676)         15%      (53,798)
Age 45-54                                 8%         (32,127)         11%      (33,830)
Age >=55                                 13%         (23,870)         14%      (15,433)

New England                              17%         (33,540)         17%      (20,148)
Central                                  16%         (38,863)         16%      (25,930)
South                                    10%         (51,785)         12%      (33,522)
West                                     10%         (41,088)         13%      (31,232)

<High school                             26%         (13,217)         18%      (29,775)
High school                              15%         (48,037)         13%      (21,536)
College 1-3                              13%         (35,097)         11%       (9,672)
College >= 4 years                        8%         (68,925)         11%      (50,029)

Whites                                   13%        (131,676)         14%      (85,893)
Non-whites                               15%         (33,600)         16%      (24,939)

Manual                                   18%         (17,874)         18%       (9,679)
Non-manual                               13%        (147,402)         14%     (101,150)

Registered nurses (95)                    5%          (2,945)          6%      (1,854)
Teachers (156-8)                         15%         (25,147)         21%      (19,484)
Social workers (174)                     12%          (2,870)         12%      (2,716)
Lawyers (178)                             5%          (1,014)         17%      (1,184)
Firefighters (416-7)                     15%          (1,866)         19%      (1,227)
Police, sheriffs, bailiffs& correction   16%          (6,068)         18%      (5,503)
 officers (418-424)

Sample excludes individuals with allocated earnings. Controls as in Table 3. Source: Outgoing
Rotation Group files of the CPS. Numbers in parentheses towards the bottom of the first column
are 1980 Occupational Classification codes




                                               37
Table 5. Union Wage Gap Estimates for the United States, 1973-2002 (%)(excludes workers
with imputed earnings)

                     All sectors                             Private sector                  Private sector
Year              Blanchflower/Bryson                       Blanchflower/Bryson           Hirsch/Schumacher
1973                   14.1%                                      12.7%                            17.5%
1974                   14.6%                                      13.8%                            17.5%
1975                   15.1%                                      14.3%                            19.2%
1976                   15.5%                                      14.6%                            20.4%
1977                   19.0%                                      18.3%                            23.9%
1978                   18.8%                                      18.6%                            22.8%
1979                   16.6%                                      16.3%                            19.7%
1980                   17.7%                                      17.0%                            21.3%
1981                   16.1%                                      16.3%                            20.4%
1983                   19.5%                                      21.2%                            25.5%
1984                   20.4%                                      22.4%                            26.2%
1985                   19.2%                                      21.0%                            26.0%
1986                   18.8%                                      20.1%                            23.9%
1987                   18.5%                                      20.0%                            24.0%
1988                   18.4%                                      19.1%                            22.6%
1989                   17.8%                                      19.2%                            24.5%
1990                   17.1%                                      17.6%                            22.5%
1991                   16.1%                                      16.6%                            22.0%
1992                   17.9%                                      19.2%                            22.5%
1993                   18.5%                                      19.6%                            23.5%
1994                   18.5%                                      18.2%                            25.2%
1995                   17.4%                                      18.0%                            24.5%
1996                   17.4%                                      18.4%                            23.5%
1997                   17.4%                                      17.7%                            23.2%
1998                   15.8%                                      16.1%                            22.4%
1999                   16.0%                                      16.9%                            22.0%
2000                   13.4%                                      14.3%                            20.4%
2001                   14.1%                                      15.1%                            20.0%
2002                   16.5%                                      18.6%
1973-2001 average      17.1%                                      17.6%                               22.4%

Notes: Wage gap estimates calculated taking anti-logs and deducting 1. Columns 1 and 2 are taken from Table 3 of
Blanchflower and Bryson (2003). Column 3 is taken from column 5 of Table 4 of Hirsch and Schumacher (2002).
Data for 1973-81 are from the May CPS Earnings Supplements. a) 1973-1981 May CPS, n=38,000 for all sectors,
and n=31,000 for the private sector. Controls comprise age, age2, male, union, years of education, 2 race dummies,
28 state dummies, usual hours, private sector and 50 industry dummies. For 1980 and 1981 sample sizes fall to
approx. 16,000 because from 1980 only respondents in months 4 and 8 in the outgoing rotation groups report a
wage. Since the May CPS sample files available to us do not include allocated earnings in 1979-81, the series in
columns 2 and 4 are adjusted upward by the average bias of 0.033 found by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) using
these May CPS data for 1979-81. The data for 1973-1978 do not include individuals with allocated earnings and
hence no adjustment is made in those years. b) Data for 1983-2002 are taken from the MORG files of the CPS.
Controls comprise usual hours, age, age2, four race dummies, 15 highest qualifications dummies, male, union, 46
industry dummies, four organizational status dummies, and 50 state dummies. Sample is employed private sector
nonagricultural wage and salary workers aged 16 years and above with positive weekly earnings and non-missing


                                                       38
data for control variables (few observations are lost). All allocated earners were identified and excluded for the years
1983-88 and 1996-2001 from the MORG files. For 1989-95, allocation flags are either unreliable (in 1989-93) or not
available (1994 through August 1995). For 1989-93, the gaps are adjusted upward by the average imputation bias
during 1983-88. For 1994-95, the gap is adjusted upward by the bias during 1996-98. In each year there are
approximately 160,000 observations for the US economy and 130,000 for the private sector in the MORG; in the
May files, sample sizes are approximately 38,000 and 31,000 respectively until 1980 and 1981 when sample sizes
fall to approximately 16,000 and 13,000, respectively, as from that date on only respondents in months four and
eight in the outgoing rotation groups report a wage.

The Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) wage gap reported in column 3 is the coefficient on a dummy variable for union
membership in a regression where the log of hourly earnings is the dependent variable. The control variables
included are years of schooling, experience and its square (allowed to vary by gender), and dummy variables for
gender, race and ethnicity (3), marital status (2), part-time status, region (8), large metropolitan area, industry (8),
and occupation (12).




                                                          39
Table 6. The Ratio between Unadjusted and Adjusted Union Wage Gap Estimates for the United
States, 1983-2002 (%) - Excludes Workers with Imputed earnings.

                 Unadjusted            Adjusted        Unadjusted/adjusted
1983              48.3%                 21.2%                2.28
1984              48.3%                 22.4%                2.16
1985              47.0%                 21.0%                2.24
1986              44.8%                 20.1%                2.23
1987              45.2%                 20.0%                2.26
1988              44.6%                 19.1%                2.34
1989              38.0%                 19.2%                1.98
1990              34.3%                 17.6%                1.95
1991              32.8%                 16.6%                1.98
1992              32.5%                 19.2%                1.69
1993              34.0%                 19.6%                1.74
1995              34.6%                 18.0%                1.92
1996              35.8%                 18.4%                1.95
1997              36.1%                 17.7%                2.04
1998              33.2%                 16.1%                2.07
1999              32.5%                 16.9%                1.92
2000              29.4%                 14.3%                2.06
2001              29.8%                 15.1%                1.98
2002              35.6%                 18.6%                1.91

Notes: column 1 obtained from a series of private sector log hourly wage equations that only
contained a union membership dummy and a constant. Reported here is the antilog of the
coefficient minus 1. Column 2 is from Table 5. Column 3 is column 1/column 2.

Sample is employed private sector nonagricultural wage and salary workers aged 16 years and
above with positive weekly earnings and non-missing data for control variables (few
observations are lost)

Source: ORG files of the CPS, 1983-2001.




                                            40
Table 7. Wage gap estimates by private sector industry

                                     1983-1988                            1996-2001
                                 density      wage gap      N       density   wage gap     N    ∆density   ∆wage gap
Agricultural services             1.8%         41.2%      1,852    2.2%      32.6%     4,115     0.4%        -8.6%
Other agriculture                 2.5%         55.9%     12,451    1.8%      23.0%     4,828    -0.7%       -32.9%
Mining                           18.3%         15.8%      9,311   12.8%       9.4%     4,142    -5.5%        -6.4%
Construction                     22.7%         51.6%     44,026   18.8%      40.9%    31,878    -3.9%       -10.7%
Lumber                           15.1%         15.7%      6,662    9.9%      14.0%     4,251    -5.2%        -1.7%
Furniture                        16.8%         11.3%      5,449    7.8%       2.7%     3,288    -9.0%        -8.6%
Stone, clay & glass              30.6%         14.5%      5,143   21.6%      12.6%     3,149    -9.0%        -1.9%
Primary metals                   48.1%          5.8%      7,021   36.0%       8.0%     3,852   -12.1%         2.2%
Fabricated metals                28.1%         12.5%     11,117   16.5%      13.7%     7,033   -11.6%         1.2%
Machinery excluding electrical   17.5%          3.9%     22,343   11.0%       8.2%    13,061    -6.5%         4.3%
Electrical equipment             19.6%          6.4%     19,162   10.6%      10.1%    10,387    -9.0%         3.7%
Autos                            56.6%         10.0%     10,365   38.8%      21.7%     6,749   -17.8%        11.7%
Aircraft                         34.6%          0.4%      4,929   27.8%       5.7%     2,347    -6.8%         5.3%
Other transport equipment        23.9%          4.8%      5,517   16.3%       9.2%     2,933    -7.6%         4.4%
Photographic                     10.0%         -0.9%      6,104    5.1%      -3.1%     4,069    -4.9%        -2.2%
Toys                             16.3%          2.2%      1,094    6.4%       1.5%       828    -9.9%        -0.7%
Miscellaneous manufacturing      13.8%          7.6%      3,344    8.4%      22.0%     2,416    -5.4%        14.4%
Food                             31.1%         16.9%     16,396   22.5%      13.0%     9,627    -8.6%        -3.9%
Tobacco                          33.0%         26.0%        553   22.4%      17.4%       248   -10.6%        -8.6%
Textiles                         10.0%          4.0%      7,076    5.6%      -1.4%     2,681    -4.4%        -5.4%
Apparel                          20.8%          5.1%     10,666    8.1%       2.7%     4,144   -12.7%        -2.4%
Paper                            44.6%          7.6%      6,544   29.9%       9.7%     3,479   -14.7%         2.1%
Printing                         13.4%         24.4%     14,983    8.2%      18.3%     9,331    -5.2%        -6.1%
Chemicals                        17.2%          0.8%     10,953   11.0%       4.7%     6,908    -6.2%         3.9%
Petroleum                        32.7%          2.3%      1,678   21.9%      -0.1%       940   -10.8%        -2.4%
Rubber & plastics                23.3%         11.4%      6,732   15.2%       9.2%     4,716    -8.1%        -2.2%
Leather & nes                    20.7%          1.4%      1,953   17.5%      20.4%       633    -3.2%        19.0%
Transport                        35.8%         44.2%     29,626   25.9%      36.2%    22,091    -9.9%        -8.0%
Communications                   39.4%          6.0%     14,075   22.3%      10.2%     9,884   -17.1%         4.2%



                                                             41
Utilities & sanitary                35.1%        5.4%      9,731          29.6%      15.0%      6,085   -5.5%     9.6%
Wholesale trade                      8.1%       15.7%     35,107           5.7%       9.3%     24,987   -2.4%    -6.4%
Retail trade                         7.3%       34.2%    155,875           5.1%      13.9%    110,741   -2.2%   -20.3%
Banking                              1.6%        1.4%     28,151           2.0%      -3.2%     20,459    0.4%    -4.6%
Insurance & real estate              3.6%        4.8%     28,075           2.9%       6.5%     20,034   -0.7%     1.7%
Private households                   0.3%       29.2%     10,567           1.0%       0.2%      3,723    0.7%   -29.0%
Business services                    5.1%       15.3%     31,916           3.0%       6.9%     30,867   -2.1%    -8.4%
Repair services                      5.8%       36.6%      8,259           3.3%      37.0%      6,504   -2.5%     0.4%
Personal services excl households    8.4%       11.1%     22,431           6.8%      12.1%     15,731   -1.6%     1.0%
Entertainment                       11.7%       46.8%      8,863           6.8%      29.3%      9,949   -4.9%   -17.5%
Hospitals                           11.8%        7.4%     32,573           8.1%      10.2%     25,514   -3.7%     2.8%
Health excl hosp                     5.1%        5.4%     28,681           4.6%       3.0%     31,345   -0.5%    -2.4%
Educational                          9.7%       21.2%     16,421          12.8%      18.6%     15,522    3.1%    -2.6%
Social services                      3.0%       24.0%     10,338           2.9%      16.6%     13,478   -0.1%    -7.4%
Other professional                   3.5%       29.3%     28,175           2.4%      15.0%     27,600   -1.1%   -14.3%

Notes: see Tables 3 and 5. Union estimates are obtained from the ORG data files (weighted).




                                                                42
Table 8. Industry, state and occupation level analysis of the private sector union wage premium, 1984-2001

                                      (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)      (5)      (6)
Level of analysis                   Industry Industry     State         State Occupation Occupation
Premiumt-1                           .2584*    .3453*     .2051*        .2366*   .0907*   .1746*
                                    (.0367)   (.0350)    (.0337)       (.0333)  (.0379)  (.0374)
Unemployment ratet-1                 .6333     .5866*     .4373*        .5366*   .3799    .5823*
                                    (.4035)   (.2821)    (.1449)       (.1175)  (.5084)  (.2900)
Time                                -.0463    -.2344*-.1547*           -.0651   -.3419* -.2416*
                                    (.1056)   (.0762)    (.0468)       (.0379)  (.1343)  (.0788)

State/industry/occupation dummies    50         50         41           41       41         41
Weighted by # obs at 1st stage       No        Yes         No          Yes       No        Yes

R2                                  .6187      .7749      .5071        .5861     .7345     .8453
N                                   756        756        918          918       756       756

Source: Outgoing Rotation Groups of the CPS, 1984-2001. Samples exclude individuals with imputed earnings.




                                                                  43
Table 9. Industry level analysis of the level of the union wage premium in the private sector 1973-1999.
                                       (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)         (9)
Premiumt-1                                                                                .6030*       .2759*      .6001*        .2468*       .3196*
                                                                                         (.0274)      (.0350)     (.0284)       (.0361)      (.0333)
Time                                                                       -.0019*       -.0012*       .0002      -.0011*       -.0001       -.0009*
                                                                           (.0004)       (.0003)      (.0004)     (.0003)       (.0004)      (.0003)
Unemployment rate                    .0187*         .0131*      .0108*      .0083*        .0064*       .0064*      .0061*        .0070*       .0052*
                                    (.0017)        (.0017)     (.0011)     (.0014)       (.0010)      (.0021)     (.0011)       (.0022)      (.0010)
COLA                                 .0763*         .0767*      .0403*      .0155        -.0065        .0139       .0041         .0156        .0141*
                                    (.0313)        (.0303)     (.0126)     (.0134)       (.0090)      (.0140)     (.0108)       (.0144)      (.0096)
Inflation                           -.0182*        -.0077       .0012       .0006         .0024*       .0026       .0020*        .0032        .0002
                                    (.0065)        (.0069)     (.0008)     (.0008)       (.0007)      (.0015)     (.0008)       (.0016)      (.0008)
Unemployment rate*COLA              -.0092*        -.0047
                                    (.0038)        (.0036)
Unemployment rate*Inflation          .0026*         .0012
                                    (.0009)        (.0009)
Import penetration                   .2048*         .2201*      .2362*      .3090*        .1688*       .1234*      .1738*        .1668*       .1811*
 Durables                           (.0427)        (.0414)     (.0441)     (.0424)       (.0326)      (.0416)     (.0461)       (.0549)      (.0302)
Import penetration                   .1655*         .1459*      .1491*      .1698*        .0939*       .0880*      .0914*        .0945*       .1043*
 Non-durables                       (.0513)        (.0525)     (.0509)     (.0488)       (.0302)      (.0208)     (.0419)       (.0265)      (.0314)
Deregulation Communications          .0752*         .0609*      .0589*      .0612*        .0451*       .0625*      .0506*        .0734*       .0532*
                                    (.0316)        (.0244)     (.0246)     (.0248)       (.0200)      (.0307)     (.0234)       (.0261)      (.0193)
Deregulation Rail                    .0329          .0400       .0394       .0580         .0200                                               .0333
                                    (.0905)        (.0844)     (.0855)     (.0839)       (.0616)                                             (.0606)
Deregulation Trucking               -.0716         -.0617      -.0630      -.0394        -.0139                                              -.0332
                                    (.0560)        (.0570)     (.0565)     (.0518)       (.0429)                                             (.0398)
Deregulation Air                     .0554          .0684       .0661       .0815         .0087                                               .0214
                                    (.1262)        (.1217)     (.1190)     (.1161)       (.0852)                                             (.0804)
Deregulation Finance                -.0614*        -.0599*     -.0587*     -.0329         .0179                                              -.0174
                                    (.0191)        (.0188)     (.0195)     (.0203)       (.0160)                                             (.0150)
Weighted                              .Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          No          Yes           No         Yes
Method                                GLS            GLS         GLS         GLS           GLS          GLS         OLS          OLS         GLS

Wald Chi2                        2325.01        2781.32     2686.37     3190.74      10961.71        1220.21                               6189.4
R2                                                                                                                 .8973          .6516
N                                  832           832         832          832          832             832          832            832         806

All equations also include a full set of 31 industry dummies. Data are taken from Bratsberg and Ragan 2002. GLS regression estimated with industry specific
AR(1) process in error term. Where indicated ach observation in the GLS regressions is weighted by the industry observation count of the first step following
Berntsberg and Ragan (2002). Column 9 excludes Retail Trade. Standard errors in parentheses.



                                                                                44
Table 10. Wage gaps and union density by state

                              1983 - 1988                             1996 - 2001
State           Density           N              Wage gap   Density       N         Wage gap   Change in   Change in
                 (1983)                                      (2000)                             density    wage gap
Alabama*          16.9%          8,908           27.3%         9.6%     7,463         13.1%      -7.3%       -14.2%
Alaska            24.9%          9,407           22.9%        21.9%     5,280         15.5%      -3.0%        -7.4%
Arizona*          11.4%          8,291           32.3%         6.4%     8,858         21.7%      -5.0%       -10.7%
Arkansas*         11.0%          9,037           31.3%         5.8%     7,317         16.1%      -5.2%       -15.2%
California        21.9%         59,161           23.5%        16.0%    44,410         22.1%      -5.9%        -1.4%
Colorado          13.6%         10,384           26.4%         9.0%     9,923         13.5%      -4.6%       -12.8%
Connecticut       22.7%          9,671           12.2%        16.3%     6,249          8.3%      -6.4%        -3.9%
Delaware          20.1%          8,451           22.9%        13.3%     5,759         14.1%      -6.8%        -8.8%
Dist of Columbia 19.5%           5,758           17.8%        14.7%     4,211         11.1%      -4.8%        -6.8%
Florida*          10.2%         30,682           26.9%         6.8%    24,244         16.8%      -3.4%       -10.1%
Georgia*          11.9%         11,547           21.9%         6.3%     8,904         20.7%      -5.6%        -1.2%
Hawaii            29.2%          7,634           18.8%        24.8%     5,202         20.8%      -4.4%         2.0%
Idaho*            12.5%          9,042           31.0%         7.6%     8,143         26.6%      -4.9%        -4.4%
Illinois          24.2%         30,071           18.5%        18.6%    23,510         14.0%      -5.6%        -4.5%
Indiana           24.9%         13,139           22.0%        15.6%     8,554         17.6%      -9.3%        -4.4%
Iowa*             17.2%          9,874           24.9%        13.6%     8,474         20.0%      -3.6%        -4.9%
Kansas*           13.7%          9,456           25.4%         9.0%     8,254         18.6%      -4.7%        -6.7%
Kentucky          17.9%          8,884           22.9%        12.0%     6,545         18.9%      -5.9%        -4.0%
Louisiana*        13.8%          7,867           24.9%         7.1%     5,922         20.9%      -6.7%        -3.9%
Maine             21.0%          8,730            7.0%        14.0%     6,662         16.1%      -7.0%         9.0%
Maryland          18.5%         11,169           22.6%        14.6%     6,322         10.8%      -3.9%       -11.8%
Massachusetts     23.7%         28,695           12.0%        14.3%    11,895         13.5%      -9.4%         1.6%
Michigan          30.4%         29,789           16.9%        20.8%    20,047         12.7%      -9.6%        -4.1%
Minnesota         23.2%         12,061           26.5%        18.2%    10,194         16.5%      -5.0%       -10.0%
Mississippi*       9.9%          8,941           25.0%         6.0%     5,909         14.3%      -3.9%       -10.6%
Missouri          20.8%         11,983           31.3%        13.2%     7,386         21.9%      -7.6%        -9.4%
Montana           18.3%          8,605           31.1%        13.9%     7,444         21.7%      -4.4%        -9.5%
Nebraska*         13.6%          9,523           37.3%         8.4%     9,067         22.3%      -5.2%       -15.0%



                                                              45
Nevada*            22.4%          8,446         25.9%          17.1%          8,555         18.5%         -5.3%          -7.3%
New Hampshire      11.5%          8,228         21.4%          10.4%          6,901         19.6%         -1.1%          -1.8%
New Jersey         26.9%         29,018          9.0%          20.8%         15,060          7.9%         -6.1%          -1.1%
New Mexico         11.8%          7,345         34.6%           8.1%          6,909         20.4%         -3.7%         -14.1%
New York           32.5%         44,351         11.7%          25.5%         27,394         11.2%         -7.0%          -0.6%
North Carolina*     7.6%         27,599         27.8%           3.6%         13,458         25.7%         -4.0%          -2.0%
North Dakota*      13.2%          8,915         35.0%           6.5%          7,817         28.0%         -6.7%          -7.0%
Ohio               25.1%         33,118         17.7%          17.3%         21,484         11.6%         -7.8%          -6.1%
Oklahoma*          11.5%          9,339         23.5%           6.8%          7,614         23.4%         -4.7%          -0.1%
Oregon             22.3%          8,243         20.3%          16.1%          7,371         17.5%         -6.2%          -2.9%
Pennsylvania       27.5%         32,228         15.6%          16.9%         23,276         10.8%        -10.6%          -4.8%
Rhode Island       21.5%          8,325         15.8%          18.2%          6,117         11.3%         -3.3%          -4.5%
South Carolina*     5.9%          9,960         23.9%           4.0%          6,195         13.3%         -1.9%         -10.5%
South Dakota*      11.5%          9,981         28.9%           5.5%          8,351         12.1%         -6.0%         -16.8%
Tennessee*         15.1%          9,922         25.9%           8.9%          6,883         14.2%         -6.2%         -11.6%
Texas*              9.7%         37,316         25.7%           5.8%         27,668         19.0%         -3.9%          -6.7%
Utah*              15.2%          9,308         29.3%           7.3%          8,741         18.6%         -7.9%         -10.7%
Vermont            12.6%          7,968          7.0%          10.3%          6,330          8.4%         -2.3%           1.4%
Virginia*          11.7%         12,777         28.5%           5.6%          8,587         24.0%         -6.1%          -4.5%
Washington         27.1%          8,685         22.6%          18.2%          7,947         14.3%         -8.9%          -8.3%
West Virginia      25.3%          7,257         27.1%          14.3%          6,633         21.3%        -11.0%          -5.8%
Wisconsin          23.8%         12,288         20.2%          17.6%         10,188         12.9%         -6.2%          -7.3%
Wyoming*           13.9%          6,259         32.0%           8.3%          7,336         33.1%         -5.6%           1.1%

Source: Outgoing Rotation Group files of the CPS. Union density obtained from Statistical Abstract of the United States 2001, Table
639. Notes: * implies right-to-work state.




                                                                46
Table 11. Private sector union density and wage gaps by occupation, 1983-2001.

                                                             1983-1989                  1996-01
                                                      Union Wage       N         Union      Wage     N      ∆ density ∆Wage
                                                      density gap                density     gap                        gap
Other Executive, Administrators & Managers            3.1%     6.3% 51,252        2.3%      5.7%   54,524    -0.8%     -0.6%
Management Related Occupations                         3.1%    3.1% 21,736        2.3%      4.5%   19,742    -0.8%      1.4%
Engineers                                             5.9% -3.7% 12,231           3.9%     -1.7%    9,637    -2.0%      2.0%
Mathematical & Computer Scientists                    3.1% -12.5% 4,154           1.8%     -7.6%    8,004    -1.3%      4.9%
Natural Scientists                                     4.1%    4.3% 2,076         2.7%     11.4%    2,077    -1.4%      7.1%
Health Diagnosing Occupations                         3.3%     6.3% 1,731         3.9%     -8.3%    2,422     0.6% -14.6%
Health Assessment & Treating Occupations             11.1%     3.8% 15,157       11.1%     10.4%   14,388     0.0%      6.6%
Teachers, College & University                        8.8% 10.7% 2,013            8.3%      5.5%    2,155    -0.5%     -5.2%
Teachers, Except College and University              10.0% 38.5% 7,399           12.2%     35.7%    8,528     2.2%     -2.8%
Lawyers                                               1.7% -1.9% 2,231            2.0% -11.0%       2,293     0.3%     -9.1%
Other Professional Specialty Occupations              6.3% 28.1% 18,832           4.9%     27.8%   16,683    -1.4%     -0.3%
Health Technologists & Technicians                     7.8%    4.6% 9,263         7.4%      3.8%    8,775    -0.4%     -0.8%
Engineering and Science Technicians                  12.3%     7.9% 8,328         9.5%     15.6%    5,914    -2.8%      7.7%
Technicians, Except Health Engineering & Science       9.5% 16.2% 7,465           8.1%     25.1%    5,903    -1.4%      8.9%
Supervisors – Administrative Support                  5.8% 21.9% 19,664           3.7%      8.0%   19,200    -2.1%    -13.9%
Sales Representatives, Finance & Business Service      3.2% 12.9% 12,624          2.7%      5.0%    9,948    -0.5%     -7.9%
Sales Representatives, Commodities Except Retail      2.0%     4.8% 11,450        1.8%     -9.5%    7,315    -0.2%    -14.3%
Sales Workers, Retail & Personal Services             7.5% 36.6% 51,351           4.6%     17.1%   34,567    -2.9%    -19.5%
Sales Related Occupations                              4.6% 50.2%       385       3.5%     26.4%      417    -1.1%    -23.8%
Supervisors-Administrative Support                    5.1% -2.9% 4,550            4.3%      2.6%    2,873    -0.8%      5.5%
Computer Equipment Operators                          8.6% 10.7% 5,986            6.4%     10.2%    1,586    -2.2%     -0.5%
Secretaries, Stenographers & Typists                   3.9% 14.1% 34,703          3.3%     12.7%   14,449    -0.6%     -1.4%
Financial Records, Processing Occupations             4.7% 20.1% 19,406           3.4%     17.6%   10,300    -1.3%     -2.5%
Mail and Message Distributing                        12.3% 40.9% 2,605            7.6%     33.1%    1,516    -4.7%     -7.8%
Other Administrative Support Occupations             11.8% 19.7% 57,618           7.1%     18.1%   48,916    -4.7%     -1.6%
Private Household Service Occupations                 0.2%     9.3% 8,368         0.8%      1.8%    3,259     0.6%     -7.5%
Protective Service Occupations                       12.9% 23.1% 5,672            7.7%     20.7%    3,856    -5.2%     -2.4%
Food Service Occupations                               4.6% 21.0% 47,173          3.7%     16.5%   31,218    -0.9%     -4.5%



                                                               47
Health Service Occupations                            9.7%     8.1%    14,636       9.0%      8.8%    11,894     -0.7%       0.7%
Cleaning & Building Service Occupations              15.9%    30.9%    20,720      11.3%     26.9%    13,646     -4.6%      -4.0%
Personal Service Occupations                          8.7%    35.8%    10,623       7.9%     36.6%     9,117     -0.8%       0.8%
Mechanics & Repairers                                28.9%    20.3%    33,537      20.5%     21.8%    21,893     -8.4%       1.5%
Construction Trades                                  30.6%    48.6%    31,417      24.6%     41.1%    21,594     -6.0%      -7.5%
Other Precision Production Occupations               24.9%    14.1%    34,107      18.0%     16.9%    20,229     -6.9%       2.8%
Machine Operators & Tenders, Except Precision        32.1%    26.4%    49,011      20.9%     25.5%    25,357    -11.2%      -0.9%
Fabricators, Assemblers & Inspectors & Samplers      35.8%    27.5%    24,007      21.3%     29.8%    14,662    -14.5%       2.3%
Motor Vehicle Operators                              26.0%    45.4%    24,638      18.3%     41.6%    17,115     -7.7%      -3.8%
Other Transportation Occupations & Material Moving   47.3%    33.6%    10,539      33.3%     33.5%     6,293    -14.0%      -0.1%
Construction Laborer                                 24.0%    59.5%     5,103      18.1%     53.7%     3,571     -5.9%      -5.8%
Freight, Stock & Material Handlers                   29.0%    37.2%    14,893      20.2%     24.2%    10,383     -8.8%     -13.0%
Other Handlers, Equipment Cleaners & Laborers        23.3%    47.8%    19,305      14.2%     36.6%    11,519     -9.1%     -11.2%
Farm Operators & Managers                             1.8%    31.3%       649       0.9%     56.2%       444     -0.9%      24.9%
Farm Workers & Related Occupations                    3.1%    53.0%    14,047       2.9%     39.4%     8,194     -0.2%     -13.6%
Forestry & Fishing Occupations                        7.7%    20.3%       846       8.0%     -6.9%       349      0.3%     -27.2%

Notes: individuals with allocated earnings excluded. Private sector. Controls are age, age squared, male 15 schooling dummies, 4
race dummies, log of hours, 46 industry dummies, 50 state dummies and five year dummies. Union density estimates for the private
sector weighted and averaged over the two six year periods.




                                                               48
                    Figure 1. Movements in the US Private Sector Wage Premium
                                            1973-2002

25.0

23.0

21.0

19.0

17.0

15.0

13.0

11.0

 9.0

 7.0

 5.0

 3.0
      3      5      7      9      1      3      5      7           9      1      3      5      7      9      1
   197    197    197    197    198    198    198    198         198    199    199    199    199    199    200

                                             Unemployment          Union Wage Premium




                                                           49
                                         References

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz and David Margolis. “High Wage Workers and High Wage
     Firms.” Econometrica 672, (March 1999): 251-333.

Blanchflower, David G. “The Role and Influence of Trade Unions in the OECD”, Report to the
      Bureau of International Labor Affairs, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor,
      August, 1996. Downloadable at www.dartmouth.edu/~blnchflr/Projects.html.

____________________. “Changes Over Time In Union Relative Wage Effects in Great Britain
      and the United States”, in Sami Daniel, Philip Arestis, and John Grahl eds., The History
      and Practice of Economics: Essays in Honour of Bernard Corry and Maurice Peston,
      Volume. 2, Northampton, Mass.: Edward Elgar, 1999: 3-32.

_____________________. “Globalization and the Labor Market”, Report to The Trade Deficit
      Review Commission, downloadable at http://www.ustdrc.gov, 2000a.

_____________________. “Self-employment in OECD Countries”, Labour Economics, 7,
      (September 2000b): 471-505.

_____________________ and Alex Bryson. “Changes Over Time in Union Relative Wage
      Effects in the UK and the US Revisited” in International Handbook of Trade Unions
      edited by John T. Addison and C. Schnabel. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, 2003.

_____________________ and Richard B. Freeman. “Unionism in the U.S. and Other Advanced
      OECD Countries”, Industrial Relations, 31(1) 1992: 156-179; reprinted in Michael
      Bognanno and Morris M. Kleiner eds., Labor Market Institutions and the Future Role of
      Unions, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 56-79.

______________________Neil Millward and Andrew J. Oswald. “Unionism and Employment
      Behaviour”, Economic Journal, 101, (July 1991): 815-834.

Bratsberg, Bernt, and James F. Ragan. “Changes in the Union Wage Premium by Industry – Data
       and Analysis”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56 (October 2002): 65-83.

Bryson, Alex. “Employee Voice, Workplace Closure and Employment Growth”, Policy Studies
      Institute Research Discussion Paper No. 6, 2001.

Card, David. “The Effect of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis”,
      Econometrica, 64 (July 1996): 957-979.

Farber, Henry S. “Notes on the Economics of Labor Unions”, Working Paper 452, Princeton
       University Industrial Relations Section, 2001.

_______________. “Nonunion Wage Rates and the Threat of Unionization”, Working Paper
      472, Princeton University Industrial Relations Section, 2003.



                                             50
Freeman, Richard B. “Longitudinal Analyses of the Effects of Trade Unions”, Journal of Labor
      Economics, 2 (January 1984): 1-26.

_______________. “Unionism Comes to the Public Sector” Journal of Economic Literature, 24
      (March 1986): 41-86.

_______________. “Contraction and Expansion: The Divergence of Private Sector and Public
      Sector Unionism in the United States”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2 (Spring
      1988): 63-88.

_______________. “How Much Has De-unionization Contributed to the Rise in Male Earnings
      Inequality?” in Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality in America edited by Sheldon Danziger
      and Peter Gottschalk, Russell Sage Foundation, New York, 1993: pp..

_______________. “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
      (Summer 1995): 15-32.

_______________. “The New Inequality in the United States” in Growing Apart: the Causes
      and Consequences of Global Wage Inequality edited by Albert Fishlow and Karen
      Parker, Council on Foreign Relations Press, New York., 1999: pp..

Freeman Richard B. and Casey Ichniowski. When Public Sector Workers Unionize, NBER and
      University of Chicago Press, 1988.

___________________________________.and Harrison Lauer. “Collective Bargaining Laws,
      Threat Effects and the Determination of Police Compensation”, Journal of Labor
      Economics, 72 (April 1989): 191-209.

Freeman Richard B. and Larry F. Katz. Differences and Changes in Wage Structures and
      published by University of Chicago Press and NBER, Chicago, 1995.

Freeman Richard B. and Morris M. Kleiner. “Do Unions Make Enterprises Insolvent?”,
      Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52 (July 1999): 510-527.

Freeman Richard B. and James L. Medoff. What Do Unions Do?, Basic Books, New York, 1984.

__________________________________. “Reply”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
      382 (January 1985): 259-263.

Freeman, Richard B. and Karen Needels. “Skill Differentials in Canada in an Era of Rising
      Labor Market Inequality”, in Small Differences that Matter edited by David Card and
      Richard B. Freeman, University of Chicago Press and NBER, 1993: pp. 45-67.




                                            51
Freeman, Richard B. and Anna Revenga. “How Much Has LDC Trade Affected Western Job
      Markets?”, in Trade and Jobs in Europe: Much Ado About Nothing? Edited by Mathias
      Dewatripont, Andre Sapir and Khalid Sekket, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1999: pp. .

Hirsch, Barry T. “Reconsidering Union Wage Effects: Surveying New Evidence On An Old
       Topic”, mimeo, 2003.

Hirsch, Barry T. and David A. Macpherson. “Earnings and Employment in Trucking:
       Deregulating a Naturally Competitive Industry” in James Peoples ed. Regulatory Reform
       and Labor Markets, Kluwer Academic Publishing, 1998: pp. 61-112.

_____________________________________. “Earnings, Rents and Competition in the Airline
      Labor Market”, Journal of Labor Economics, 18 (January 2000): 125-55.

____________________________________. Union Membership and Earnings Data Book:
      Compilations from the Current Population Survey 2002 Edition. Washington: Bureau of
      National Affairs, 2002.

_____________________________________. Union Membership and Earnings Data Book:
      Compilations from the Current Population Survey 2002 Edition. Washington: Bureau of
      National Affairs, 2003a.

___________________________________. “Union Membership and Coverage Database from
      the Current Population Survey: Note,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56
      (January 2002): 349-54.

Hirsch, Barry T. , David A. Macpherson and Edward J. Schumacher. “Measuring Union and
       Non-Union Wage Growth: Puzzles in Search of Solutions”, paper presented at the 23rd
       Middlebury Economics Conference on the Changing Role of Unions, Middlebury,
       Vermont, April 2002.

Hirsch, Barry T. and David A. Macpherson and Wayne G. Vroman. “Estimates of Union
       Density by State”, Monthly Labor Review, 124 (July 2001): 51-55.

Hirsch, Barry T., and Edward J. Schumacher. “Unions, Wages, and Skills”, Journal of Human
       Resources, 33 (Winter 1998): 201-219.

_____________________________. “Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates Due To Earnings
      Imputation”, Mimeograph, Trinity University, available at www.trinity.edu/bhirsch/ or
      www.ssrn.com, 2002.

Horn, John T “Unions, Firms and Competition: The Effects of Foreign Competition on
      Unionization and the Impact of Unions on Firm Investment”, Ph.D. thesis, Department of
      Economics, Harvard University, 1998.




                                            52
Lawrence, Colin and Robert Z. Lawrence. “Manufacturing Wage Dispersion: An End Game
      Interpretation”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 0 (1) 1985: 47-116.

Leonard, Jonathan S. “Unions and Employment Growth”, Industrial Relations, 31 (Winter
      1992), pp. 80-94.

Lewis, H. Gregg. Unionism And Relative Wages In The United States, University of Chicago
       Press, Chicago, 1963.

_______________. Union Relative Wage Effects; A Survey, University of Chicago Press,
      Chicago, 1986.

Long, Richard J. “The Impact of Unionization on Employment Growth of Canadian
       Companies”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48 (July 1993): 691-703.

Mellow, Wesley, and Hal Sider. “Accuracy Of Response In Labor Market Surveys: Evidence
      And Implications”, Journal of Labor Economics, 1 (October 1983): 331-344.

Staiger, Robert W. “Organized Labor and the Scope of International Specialization”, Journal of
        Political Economy, 96 (October 1988): 1022-1047.

Waddoups, C. Jeffrey “Unions and Wages in Nevada”s Hotel-Casino Industry”, Journal of
     Labor Research, 212, (Spring 2000): 345-361.

Wooden, Mark and Hawke, Anne “Unions and Employment Growth: Panel Data Evidence”,
     Industrial Relations, 39 (January 2000): 88-107.




                                              53
                                                        Notes

We thank Bernt Bratsberg, Bernard Corry, Henry Farber, Richard Freeman, Barry Hirsch, Andrew Oswald, Jim
Ragan and participants at NBER Labor Studies for their comments. We also thank the UK Economic and Social
Research Council (grant R000223958) for funding.
1
 The symposium included an introduction by the editor John Burton along with reviews by Orley Ashenfelter,
Barry Hirsch, David Lipsky, Dan Mitchell and Mel Reder plus a reply by Richard Freeman and Jim Medoff.
2
  It has been cited an astonishing 1024 times over its near twenty year life (is it really that long?). In 2002 alone it
had 34 cites. It is clear that the book continues to be relevant.
3
  Richard Freeman has devoted a lot of his subsequent writings to an examination of unionism in the public sector
including Freeman (1986, 1988), four chapters written with co-authors in Freeman and Ichniowski (1988), and a co-
authored paper on union wage gaps for police (Freeman, Ichniowski and Lauer, 1989). Freeman’s other post-FM
work on union wage effects includes an international comparative paper with one of the authors (Blanchflower and
Freeman, 1992), and the impact of union decline on rising wage inequality in the United States – see for example
Freeman, (1993, 1995, 1999); Freeman and Katz (1995); Freeman and Needels (1993) and Freeman and Revenga
(1998). For a discussion of the issues involved see Blanchflower (2000a).
4
    For further discussions on these issues see Lewis (1986), Freeman (1984) and Blanchflower and Bryson (2003).
5
  In contrast Lewis (1986), who did not restrict his analysis to non-agricultural private sector blue-collar workers
aged 20-65 as FM did, found no differences by either gender or color although he confirmed FM’s other
disaggregated results. Lewis reported a number of additional disaggregated results that were not examined by FM.
Lewis found the wage gap was greater for married workers; U-shaped in age/experience; U-shaped in
tenure/seniority minimizing at 22-24 years of seniority; was higher the higher is the unemployment rate. He found
mixed results regarding any relationship with the industry concentration ratio.
6
  Sample sizes in many cases were likely very small as is made clear from their footnote 11 which says that they
limited their sample of industries to ones containing at least five union and non-union members. The rule resulted in
only four industries being dropped.
7
    FM use 1977 union density rates in table 2.1.
8
  These estimates are obtained from the ORG files. Although numbers for the public and private sectors as a whole
are available since 1973, the breakdown by federal, state and local employee only begins in 1983.
9
   We do not deal here with a further problem identified by Card (1996) of misclassification of self-reported union
status in the CPS, first identified by Mellow and Sider (1983). Card concludes that about 2.7% are false positives
and 2.7% are false negatives. Given that there are more non-union workers than union workers, this means the
union density rate is biased upwards. See Farber (2001) for a discussion and a procedure to adjust the union density
rate for error. In 1998, the observed private sector rate of 9.7% translates to an adjusted rate of 7.4% (the figures for
1973 were 25.9% and 24.5% respectively).
10
   The number of wage observations followed by the percentage imputed in parentheses (hourly + non-hourly paid)
in the NBER MORG are given below. Note in 1995 allocation information is only available on one-third of the
wage observations, hence the small sample.

1979       171,745 (16.5%)     1986   179,147 (10.7%)     1993   174,595 (4.6%) 2000         161,126 (29.8%)
1980       199,469 (15.8%)     1987   180,434 (13.5%)     1994   170,865 (0%)    2001        171,533 (30.9%)
1981       186,923 (15.2%)     1988   173,118 (14.4%)     1995    55,967 (23.3%) 2002        184,137 (30.4%)
1982       175,797 (13.7%)     1989   176,411 (3.7%)      1996   152,190 (22.2%)
1983       173,932 (13.8%)     1990   185,030 (3.9%)      1997   154,955 (22.2%)




                                                          54
1984       177,248 (14.7%)      1991 179,560 (4.4%)         1998 156,990 (23.6%)
1985       180,232 (14.3%)      1992 176,848 (4.2%)         1999 159,362 (27.6%)
11
  A revised version of their paper, due for publication in the Journal of Labor Economics in 2004, exploits the
unedited earnings data for those years.
12
   Although there are some differences in the levels of the wage differences reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 3
the majority of these results are consistent with the findings reported by FM in their Figure 3.1. Major exceptions
are FM’s finding that wage gaps were higher for men than women and for non-whites compared with whites. We
suspect such differences arise because of the small sample size in the May 1979 CPS of 6,018 used by FM.
13
  Nearly all federal workers have wages set by civil service pay schedules, but these are not set by collective
bargaining in any meaningful sense. Even with workers in the exact same federal job, one will say she is a unin
member and the other will say she is not. Thus the low union premium for federal workers may not be very
meaningful. For state and local workers (and some groups of federal workers like postal workers) the union status
variable provides meaningful information. We thank Barry Hirsch for this point.
14
     Tables for the analyses presented in this section are available from the authors.
15
      We have added data for 2002 as the 2002 ORG has recently become available.
16
   The May extracts of the CPS extracts in Stata format from 1969-1987 are available from the NBER at
http://www.nber.org/data/cps_may.html.
17
  Hirsch, Macpherson, and Schumacher (2002) have compared union wage gap estimates obtained from the BLS
quarterly Employment Cost Index (ECI) constructed from establishment surveys and from the annual Employer
Costs for Employee Compensation (ECEC) with those obtained using the CPS. They find that union/non-union
wage trends in the three series ‘are consistent neither with each other nor with the CPS’, and ultimately conclude
that ‘we find ourselves relying most heavily on results drawn from the CPS’ (Hirsch, Macpherson, and Schumacher,
2002, p.23).
18
     There was no CPS survey with wages and union status in 1982.
19
   Following Mincer, it is more usual to include a term in potential experience rather than a direct measure of age.
We use education, however, for reasons of comparability as the CPS Outgoing Rotation Group files from 1993
report qualifications rather than years of schooling.
20
  Similarly in the 2003 edition of Hirsch and Macpherson’s Union Membership and Earnings Data Book, recently
received.
21
  There is a dissonance between the estimates Lewis offers by way of summary in his introductory chapter and
those given in his Table 9.7 which are produced here (Lewis, 1986, p. 9).
22
   Lewis (1986) had 35 studies using the CPS, 1970-1979; 16 studies using the 1967 Survey of Economic
Opportunity; 25 studies using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1967-78; 15 studies using Michigan Survey
Research Center survey data other than the PSID, including the 1972-73 Quality of Employment Survey; 22 studies
using the National Longitudinal Surveys of 1969-72; and 8 studies exploiting other sources.
23
     FM’s smaller sample sizes by industry could account for some of the greater variation in their estimates.
24
    Bratsberg and Ragan (2002) also use CPS data. But their analysis differs in several ways. First, they assess
trends over the period 1971-1999 whereas we present trends over the period 1983-2001. Second, we adjust for wage
imputation as recommended by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) whereas Bratsberg and Ragan do not. Third,




                                                             55
specifications producing the regression-adjusted estimates differ somewhat. Fourth, the samples differ. In
particular, Bratsberg and Ragan exclude government workers and they present results for some different industries.
Fifth, their wage premium relates to weekly wages whereas all of our estimates are derived from (log) hourly wages.
25
   The import penetration variables are calculated as the ratio of imports to industry shipments. Bratsberg and
Ragan (2002) in their footnote 19 report that they tabulated shipments through 1994 from Feenstra (1996) and
thereafter from the U.S. Bureau of the Census, U.S. Merchandise Trade, series FT900 (December) and
Manufactures’ Shipments, Inventories and Orders (http://www.census.gov)
26
  When the equations are run on the two machines using OLS they are identical. The problem appears to arise from
the different tolerances used across computers and not from differences in the STATA programs.
27
  According to the 2002 Human Development Report Table 5 (http://hdr.undp.org/) the population of the US in
2000 was 283.2 million compared with 60.6 million in the UK and 7.2 million in Switzerland.
28
  He finds wages of highly unionized occupations in Las Vegas’s hotel and gaming industry are significantly higher
than wages of identical occupations in less unionized Reno.
29
    The source of the data is the Union Membership and Coverage Database which is an Internet data resource
providing private and public sector union membership, coverage, and density estimates compiled from the Current
Population Survey (CPS) using BLS methods. Economy-wide estimates are provided beginning in 1973; estimates
by state, detailed industry, and detailed occupation begin in 1983; and estimates by metropolitan area begin in 1986.
The Database, constructed by Barry Hirsch (Trinity University) and David Macpherson (Florida State University),
is updated annually. The Database can be accessed at http://www.unionstats.com.

30
  The main exceptions are Maine, Hawaii and Vermont which are small and which had increases in the wage gap.
Florida is the fourth largest state after California, Texas and New York but its differential declined by 10 percentage
points.
31
     Source: http://data.bls.gov/labjava/outside.jsp?survey=la
32
     We experimented with both the level of the unemployment rate and the log and the latter always worked best.

33
  According to Peter Hart Associates, the percentage of non-members saying they would vote to form a union hit
50% in 2002, the highest percentage since their figures began in 1984 (when the figure was only 30%). See
http://www.aflcio.org/mediacenter/resources/upload/LaborDay2002Poll.ppt.




                                                           56
