NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LESSONS FROM PATENTS: USING PATENTS TO MEASURE
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN ENVIRONMENTAL MODELS
David Popp
Working Paper 9978
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9978
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003

The author thanks Robert Stavins and Ian Sue Wing for comments on an earlier draft. Remaining errors are
the responsibility of the author. At various stages of this research, Brant Brown, Yixin Dai, Neelakshi Medhi,
and Janna Matlack provided valuable research assistance. Financial support for the works cited within
provided by DOE grant 593A3140217 and National Science Foundation grant SES-0001679. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in
Environmental Models
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 9978
September 2003
JEL No. Q33, Q30, Q40
ABSTRACT
When studying solutions to long-term environmental problems such as climate change, it is
important to consider the role that technological change may play. Nonetheless, to date few
economic models of climate change explicitly model the link between policy and technological
change. There is a growing body of evidence that the incentives offered by prices and environmental
regulations have a strong influence on both the creation and adoption of new technologies. In several
recent papers, I have used patent data to examine the links between environmental policy and
technological change. In addition, I have used the results of this research to calibrate the ENTICE
model (for ENdogenous Technological change) of climate change, which links energy-related R&D
to changes in the price of carbon. Drawing on my experiences from empirical studies on innovation
and from modeling the climate change problem, in this paper I review some of the key lessons from
recent empirical work using patents to study environmental innovation and diffusion, and discuss
its implications for modeling climate change policy. I conclude by offering suggestions for future
research.

David Popp
Department of Public Administration
The Maxwell School
Syracuse University
400 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

Debates about the sustainability of environmental policy (or the lack thereof) often revolve
around the potential effects that technological change may have. Nonetheless, most economic models of
long-term environmental policies such as climate change treat technology as exogenous. Since these
policies are likely to have a large impact on the pace and direction of technological change, such models
miss the important link between policy and innovation. One reason for this omission is that, until recently,
few empirical studies of innovation and environmental policy existed.1
My own research has focused on filling this gap. In several recent papers (Popp 2001, 2002,
2003a), I use patent data to examine the links between environmental policy and technological change.
Patent data offer several advantages when studying environmentally-friendly technological change.
Detailed patent classification systems make identifying advances in narrowly-defined technological fields
straightforward. Furthermore, since inventors can apply for patents in multiple countries, patents can also
be used to track the diffusion of technologies across countries. I have used the results of this research to
calibrate the ENTICE model (for ENdogenous Technological change) of climate change. The ENTICE
model is a variant of the well-known DICE model of climate change (Nordhaus 1994) that links energyrelated R&D to changes in the price of carbon. Drawing on my experiences from empirical studies on
innovation and from modeling the climate change problem, in this paper I review some of the key lessons
from recent empirical work using patents to study environmental innovation. Using the ENTICE model
as a an application of these lessons, I discuss the implications for modeling long-run environmental
problems, and how ignoring the lessons learned from empirical work helps explain differences found in
various papers. I conclude by offering suggestions for future research.

I. Theoretical Background
The process of technological change proceeds in stages (Schumpeter 1942). First, an idea must
be born. This stage is known as invention. New ideas are then developed into commercially viable

1

Although recent models, such as those presented in this special issue, help to fill this gap in the research, the wide
range of results presented in these models suggest there is still much work to be done.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

2

products. This stage is innovation. Typically, these two stages of technological change are studied
together. Finally, to have an effect on the economy, individuals must choose to make use of the new
innovation. This adoption process is known as diffusion. At each stage, incentives, either in the form of
prices or regulations, will affect the development and adoption of new technologies. This section reviews
the theoretical literature linking economic incentives to the process of technological change.

A. Induced Innovation
The idea that the creation of ideas through invention and innovation will be influenced by
economic incentives is not new. The concept of induced innovation was first introduced by John Hicks
(1932), who noted that changes in factor prices would lead to innovation to economize on usage of the
more expensive factor.

Theoretical papers by Ahmad (1966), Kamien and Schwartz (1968), and

Binswanger (1974, 1978a, 1978b) formalized Hicks’ notion and established the theory of induced
innovation. Binswanger notes that not only will an increase in the cost of a factor of production lead to an
increase in R&D focused on reducing use of that factor, but also that changes in the productivity of such
R&D will affect inducement. This suggests the importance of considering the marginal productivity of
research. As I will discuss later, there is evidence that, within a given field, the productivity of research
declines over time. As a result, an increase in energy prices should lead to an immediate increase in R&D
on energy conservation, but this increase need not be long-lived.
In the environmental literature, the relationship between innovation and policy has been explored
under two broad themes.2 Papers such as Magat (1978), Milliman and Prince (1989), and Fisher et al.
(1998) use theoretical models to compare the effects of various environmental policy mechanisms (e.g.
command and control regulation, emissions taxes, or tradable permits) on environmentally-friendly
innovation. In general, these papers predict that market-based policies, such as a tax or tradable permit,
will induce more environmentally-friendly innovation than a command and control policy.
2

A comprehensive survey of the literature on technological change and the environment may be found in Jaffe,
Newell, and Stavins (2003). Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (1999) discuss the implications of energy-efficiency
technologies on climate policy.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

3

Although economists readily recognized the potential importance of linking technological change
to climate policy, modeling such links was made difficult by the lack of empirical studies on the
magnitude of such induced innovation effects. Recently, as measures of innovative activity such as
patents have become more readily available, empirical economists have begun to estimate the effects that
prices and environmental policies have on environmentally-friendly innovation. Using international
patent data, Lanjouw and Mody (1996) find a correlation across nations between patenting in
environmental fields and pollution abatement expenditures. Jaffe and Palmer (1997) look at the same
relationship across US industries. Comparing pollution abatement data and innovation data across these
industries, they estimate a positive elasticity of pollution control R&D with respect to pollution control
expenditures of 0.15. However, they do not find evidence of a relationship between patenting and
pollution abatement expenditures.
In each of these studies, pollution abatement expenditures serve as a proxy for the stringency of
environmental regulation. Other papers use energy prices and related regulations as the mechanism that
induces innovation. Although the observed price changes might not be policy-related, the results can also
be applied to situations where policy affects prices, such as a carbon tax. Newell et al. (1999) use an
approach closely related to hedonic techniques to study the effect of both energy prices and energy
efficiency regulations on technological advances in energy efficiency for air conditioners and natural gas
water heaters. They find that energy prices have the largest inducement effect, although they do not
estimate a price elasticity. In a series of studies (Popp 2001, 2002), I use patent data to estimate both the
relationship between energy prices and innovative activity and the effect that this induced knowledge has
on energy consumption. The results of these papers are discussed in greater detail in the subsequent
sections.

B. Diffusion
Of course, induced invention and innovation is only half the story. Technological advances are of
little use unless society makes use of the innovation. Thus, diffusion is also important. Diffusion is likely

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

4

to play a particularly important role for problems dealing with long-term consequences, such as climate
change. Most innovation takes place in highly industrialized countries. In 1998, 85 percent of all R&D
done in the OECD countries was done in just 7 countries. In fact, roughly 44 percent of all OECD R&D
was done in the United States alone. (National Science Board, 2002) For example, as policymakers pay
increased attention to potential increases in fossil fuel consumption for fast-growing countries such as
China, it is important to not only pay attention to how policy will help induce the development of new
technologies, but how policy can help encourage the adoption of these technologies in developing
countries.
Studies of the diffusion of individual technologies consistently find that diffusion is a gradual
process. Typically, the rate of diffusion can be represented by a sigmoid, or “S-shaped” curve over time:
the rate of adoption rises slowly at first, speeds up, and then levels off as market saturation approaches.
Figure 1 illustrates such a curve, with market penetration plotted on the y-axis, and the passage of time
plotted on the x-axis.
Traditionally, researchers have used one of two approaches to modeling diffusion of a new
technology. The epidemic model of diffusion proposes that information is the primary factor limiting
diffusion. Adoption is slow at first, as few people (or firms) know about the technology. However, as
more people adopt the technology, knowledge of the technology spreads quickly, leading to a period of
rapid adoption. Economists often use the analogy of a contagious disease to describe this period of
adoption – the more people “infected” by the technology, the more likely that others will also be
“infected”. Eventually, few potential adopters remain, as nearly everyone has adopted the technology, so
that the rate of adoption levels off again. Using this framework, Griliches (1957) noted that the rate of
diffusion is at least partially determined by economic factors, such as the expected rate of return for
adoption. Other work using the epidemic model, such as Mansfield (1968), Davies (1979), and Oster
(1982), typically focus on firm characteristics, such as firm size, to explain variations in the rate of
diffusion. In this framework, environmental policy enters as one of the economic factors affecting
adoption.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

5

The second approach to studying diffusion focuses is the probit model (David 1969). The probit
model focuses on heterogeneity among firms. In this model, firm heterogeneity leads to a distribution of
expected return from adopting the new technology. Since adoption is costly, only firms above a threshold
great enough to justify the costs of adoption will choose to adopt the technology at any given time. Over
time, the technology gets cheaper, and its quality improves, so that more firms cross the adoption
threshold.3 In this framework, environmental policy enters by increasing the expected returns from
adopting environmentally-friendly technology, and thus increasing the likelihood that firms will cross the
threshold.
Although there is a broad economics literature on diffusion, both at the national and international
level, few articles link diffusion and environmental policy. Rose and Joskow (1990) find that the
adoption of fuel-saving technology by U.S. electric utilities is positively correlated with fuel prices. Jaffe
and Stavins (1995) find that higher energy prices lead to greater use of insulation in new home
construction, but that the costs of installation are a more important consideration. Both Gray and
Shadbegian (1998) and Kerr and Newell (2001) show that environmental regulations increase the
probability of adopting environmentally-friendly technologies, and that the response varies by firm
characteristics.
Similarly, at the international level, there is a large body of research on technological diffusion in
general (surveyed by Keller 2001), but little work focusing specifically on environmental technologies.
One exception is Lanjouw and Mody (1996). Using patent data from the US, Japan, Germany, and 14
low-and middle-income countries, they find that environmentally-friendly innovation increases as
pollution abatement cost expenditures in the country increase. For the US, Japan, and Germany, the
majority of these patents are typically domestic patents. For the developing countries, the majority of
these patents come from foreign countries, highlighting the importance of diffusion. Given the importance

3

Note that the two models suggest different interpretations of the gradual rate of diffusion. The epidemic model
suggests that adoption generates positive externalities, and is thus slower than would be optimal. Conversely, the
probit model suggests that gradual diffusion is optimal, as differences in adoption decisions simply result from
profit-maximizing decisions by heterogeneous firms.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

6

of diffusion for bringing new environmental technologies to developing countries, understanding the
general lessons from empirical work on international diffusion is important. These lessons are discussed
in Section V.

II. Using Patent Data to Study Environmental Technological Change
Several possible data sources exist for studying technological change and the environment. R&D
data offer a straightforward measure of innovative activity. Diffusion studies often make use of adoption
data for specific technologies. In comparison, patent data are not as straightforward. Patent counts
should be expected to increase as R&D activity increases, but the correlation need not be exact.
Furthermore, the existence of a patent does not mean that the technology has been adopted. Indeed,
studies of the economic value of patents find that most patents have little commercial value, suggesting
that adoption of most patented inventions is not widespread (see, for example, Lanjouw et al. 1998).
Nonetheless, patent data offer several advantages when studying technological change and its effect on
the environment.
Unlike more aggregate data such as R&D expenditures, patents provide a detailed record of each
invention. From the bibliographic data on a patent, the researcher can learn the identity and home country
of the inventor, read a description of the invention, and see references to earlier patents. Using this data,
it is possible for researchers to collect data in highly disaggregated forms. Whereas R&D data are
typically available only for specific industries or general applications,4 patent classifications can be used
to distinguish between different types of R&D at great detail, such as air pollution control devices
designed to reduce NOX emissions versus devices designed to control SO2 emissions.5 In addition,
economists have found that patents, sorted by their date of application, provide a good indicator of R&D

4

For example, in the US, R&D data is available from 1972-1994 for air pollution control, but it is not broken down
by pollutant.
5
For example, US patent classes 423/235-423/239 pertain to control of “nitrogen or (a) nitrogenous component”,
and patent classes 423/242 – 423/244 and 423/569 – 423/570 pertain to control of sulfur compounds. Using patent
databases, it is possible to download all patents in these classes.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

7

activity (see, for example, Griliches 1990). As a result, patent counts not only serve as a measure of
innovative output, but are indicative of the level of innovative activity itself.
Furthermore, patent data are available from many different countries.

Sources such as the

European Patent Office make available data from virtually every country.6 Of course, such data can be
used to examine levels of innovative activity across countries. In addition, unlike R&D data, international
patent data can be used to track patterns of diffusion. The legal protections granted by a patent only apply
in the country in which the patent has been granted. Thus, inventors who intend to market a product in
several countries may choose to patent in each potential market. Economists have used patent families –
sets of patents related to the same invention that have been filed in various countries – to track diffusion
of knowledge across countries (e.g. Lanjouw and Mody 1996).
Finally, when a patent is granted, it contains citations to earlier patents that are related to the
current invention. The citations are placed in the patent after consultations among the applicant, his or
her patent attorney, and the patent examiner. It is the applicant’s responsibility to list any related previous
patents of which he or she is aware. In addition, the examiner, who specializes in just a few patent
classifications, will add other patents to the citations, as well as subtracting any irrelevant patents cited by
the inventor. Patent citations narrow the reach of the new patent by placing the patents cited outside the
realm of the current patent, so it is important that all relevant patents be included in the citations.7 For the
same reason, inventors have an incentive to make sure that no unnecessary patents are cited. As a result,
the previous patents cited by a new patent should be a good indicator of previous knowledge that was
utilized by the inventor.8

6

Details about the data available through the esp@cnet, the European Patent Office’s interface for world patent
data, can be found at http://ep.espacenet.com/.
7
“Outside the realm” means that the patent holder cannot file an infringement suit against someone whose
invention infringes on qualities of the patented invention that were also included in patents cited by the patent
holder.
8
The key assumption here is that a citation made to a previous patent indicates a flow of knowledge from the cited
patent to the citing patent, so that patents cited more frequently are considered more valuable to future inventors.
Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks (1998) investigate the validity of this assumption, using evidence from citations made to
NASA patents. They conclude that, although there is noise in the citation process, aggregate citation patterns
represent knowledge spillovers, although the spillover may be indirect.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

8

In recent years, several economists have used patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows.
Papers using citation data to capture the flows of knowledge across inventors (such as across institutions
or across nations) include Jaffe, Fogarty, and Banks (1998), Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996), Caballero and
Jaffe (1993), Jaffe, Henderson, and Trajtenberg (1993), and Johnson and Popp (2003). Similarly, Popp
(2002) uses patent citation data to proxy for knowledge flows across time, by using citation-weighted
patent counts as a measure of knowledge available for future inventors to build upon.
Nonetheless, when working with patent data, it is important to be aware of its limitations. The
existing literature on the benefits and drawbacks of using patent data is quite large.9 Most importantly,
the quality of individual patents varies widely. Some inventions are extremely valuable, whereas others
are of almost no commercial value. This is partly a result of the random nature of the inventive process.
Accordingly, the results of studies using patent data are best interpreted as the effect of an “average”
patent, rather than any specific invention.
In addition, although the decision to file a patent obviously follows from the decision to perform
R&D, not all successful research results are patented. In return for receiving the monopoly rights inferred
by a patent, the inventor is required to publicly disclose the invention. Rather than make this disclosure,
inventors may prefer to keep an invention secret. Surveys of inventors indicate that the rate at which new
innovations are patented varies across industry (Levin et al. 1987). As such, this propensity must be
controlled for.10

9

Griliches (1990) provides a useful survey.
For example, in Popp (2002), which studies advances in energy technologies, I control for changes in the
propensity to patent by using the percentage of all successful domestic patent applications per year in each
technology field as the measure of innovative activity. Policy changes that affect patenting in all patent
classifications would lead to a change in both the total number of patent applications and the number of pollution
control patent applications in a given year. For example, a change in patent law that increases the propensity to
patent by five percent would increase both the numerator and the denominator of my measure of innovation by five
percent. Although this still requires that the propensity to patent did not vary independently within the pollution
control industry, such an assumption is not nearly as strong as assuming the overall propensity to patent has
remained constant.

10

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

9

III. Key Lessons from Empirical Studies of Innovation
Much of my research has focused on using patent data to study the links between policy and
environmentally-friendly innovation. In my empirical work, I aim both to better understand how policy
affects the evolution of technology, as well as to develop estimates of the magnitudes of these effects. I
use these estimates to calibrate a simulation of climate change policy with induced technological change.
In this section I offer several key lessons from this research. Section IV follows with the implications of
this work for climate policy.

Lesson #1: Innovation responds quickly to incentives
Perhaps the most striking finding in my empirical work is the speed at which innovative activity
responds to incentives. Consider, for example, Figure 2, taken from Popp (2002), which shows how
patenting activity for various energy technologies responded to changes in energy prices. As is typical in
the economics of innovation literature, the patents in this figure are sorted by their application date. As
noted earlier, patents sorted by application date are a good indicator of R&D activity. Technologies such
as solar energy experienced large jumps in patenting activity immediately following the first energy
crisis. For example, in 1972 there were just 10 solar energy patents. This figure jumps to 36 in 1973, 104
in 1974, and 218 by 1975.
Using a distributed lag model, Popp (2002) estimates the elasticity of energy patenting activity
with respect to energy prices for 11 different technologies. The distributed lag model is consistent with
an adaptive expectations model of prices, in which expected future prices depend on a weighted average
of past prices, so that
(1)

PE*,t = PE ,t + λPE ,t −1 + λ 2 PE ,t − 2 L + λt −1 PE ,1 ,

where P*E,t is the expected price at time t, and PE,t represents actual energy prices in year t. The
adjustment coefficient, λ, represents the weights placed on past observations. Popp (2002) finds a longrun energy R&D elasticity of 0.354, and an adjustment coefficient of 0.829. As such, the mean lag occurs

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

10

in 3.71 years, and the median lag in 4.86 years. The interpretation here is that over one-half of the full
effect of an energy price increase on R&D will have been experienced after just five years. Thus, prices
(or other regulations that increase the cost of using fossil fuels) can be expected to stimulate new research
quickly.

Lesson #2: Innovation in a given field experiences diminishing returns over time
Referring again to Figure 2, note that not only does energy R&D respond quickly to energy
prices, but it also drops off more quickly than energy prices. Energy prices do not reach a peak until
1981. Nonetheless, patenting activity in most technologies peaks in the late 1970s. Had the returns to
energy R&D remained constant over time, we would expect patenting activities in these fields to remain
high until prices began to fall. These results suggest that the possibility of diminishing returns to research
should be explored.
Popp (2002) shows that the returns to R&D are an important determinant of the level of
innovative activity. Inventors “stand on the shoulders” of their predecessors. As a result, the quality of
the existing knowledge on which an inventor can build is an important, positive contributor to the level of
innovative activity in a given year. I use patent citations as evidence of the existing state of technology
when an invention was completed. Citations to an earlier patent suggest that the previous patent provided
technological knowledge upon which the current inventor could build. Frequent citations to a patent
provide evidence that the knowledge embodied in that invention has been particularly useful to other
inventors. To verify the importance of the existing knowledge stock on innovative activity, I use citation
data to create stocks of patented knowledge, where patents in the stock are weighted by their propensity to
be cited. I find that the stocks have a significant positive effect on energy R&D activity.
Furthermore, patterns of citation suggest that diminishing returns are important. I find the
likelihood of citations to new energy patents falls over time, suggesting that the quality of knowledge

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

11

available for inventors to build upon also falls.11 The intuition here is that, as more and more discoveries
are made, it gets harder to develop a new innovation that improves upon the existing technology. Since
the quality of the knowledge stock is an important determinant of the level of innovative activity,
decreasing quality of the knowledge stock over time means that diminishing returns to R&D investment
will result in lower levels of induced R&D over time.
In addition, although diminishing returns are important, such returns should not vary
monotonically. Rather, as it is prior research that affects the potential success of future inventors, the
returns to research should vary along with the quality of the existing pool of research. To verify the value
of using patent citation data to measure the returns to research, Popp (2002) also includes regressions in
which the stock of knowledge is replaced by a time trend. If diminishing returns proceed monotonically
over time, a negative time trend should work as well as the weighted knowledge stocks. That, however, is
not the case. These regressions prove unreliable. In fact, the elasticity of energy R&D to energy prices
appears negative when a time trend is used in place of the knowledge stocks. Since diminishing returns
are a bigger problem when the level of energy R&D is highest, not controlling for them counteracts the
positive effect of prices on energy R&D.
Finally, it is important to note that the notion of diminishing returns within a given field is not
inconsistent with the general notion that there are increasing returns to research. Here, diminishing
returns refers to the expected returns on the inputs of the R&D process – the likelihood of success from
additional R&D dollars spent in the energy field falls as more dollars are spent. When economists refer to
increasing returns to research, they are referring to the returns on the output of research. These increasing
returns result from the public goods nature of knowledge – once an invention is created, it can benefit
everyone, and thus any individual inventor is likely to capture only a subset of the social value of his or
her invention. Furthermore, as the expected returns to research in any one field decrease, we would
expect researchers to shift more resources to more promising fields. Thus, diminishing returns over time

11

Note that since the probability of a patent being cited depends not only on the quality of the patent, but also on the
number of patents that follow, it is important to look at probability of citation, rather than raw citation counts.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

12

within a field need not result in diminishing returns for all research over time. However, when focusing
on innovation in a single field, such as energy-saving research in a climate change model, including
diminishing returns is important.

Lesson #3 – A Time Trend is Not a Substitute for Technological Change
Typically, papers that attempt to assess the impact of technological change have done so using a
time trend to control for technological advances. Unfortunately, such results may be misleading when
translated into climate models incorporating induced innovation. The very notion of induced innovation
suggests that changes such as new policies or price shocks should change the nature of R&D. Using a
time trend to proxy for technological change does not allow for such a reaction. In addition, using a time
trend only captures the overall effect of technological change. For example, low energy prices make it
likely that energy use per unit output will increase, making technological change appear energy-using.
That does not mean, however, that no energy saving technologies are created and adopted during periods
of low energy prices.
Examples of the problem of interpreting time trends can be found by comparing empirical studies
from different eras. In a study of U.S. industrial energy consumption from 1958 to 1974, Jorgenson and
Fraumeni (1981) found that technological change was energy-using – energy use per unit output increased
over time.

Of course, the time period of their data would not include any of the energy saving

innovations developed after the energy crises of the 1970s. Indeed, more recent work using a time trend
to capture technological change finds that technology is energy saving. Examples include Berndt et al.
(1993), Mountain et al. (1989) and Sterner (1990). Similarly, two empirical studies on the effect of new
flue gas desulfurization (FGD) technologies use time trends to reach different conclusions on
technological change. Looking at scrubbers installed by 1992, Bellas (1998) finds no significant evidence
of technological change in abatement technology. In contrast, Carlson et al. (2000) find that about 20%,
or $50, of the change in marginal abatement costs that have occurred from 1985 to 1995 can be attributed
to technological change. Such a change would be predicted by economic theory predicting market based

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

13

policies induce more technological change, as Bellas’ data includes few scrubbers installed after passage
of the 1990 CAA, and none installed after trading in SO2 permits began. As shown in Popp (2003a), one
reason for this change is that the nature of R&D shifted after permit trading began.
To illustrate the use of patents to estimate the effect of technological change, Popp (2001) uses
energy patents to estimate the effect of new technology on energy consumption. In that paper, I use patent
data to create stocks of knowledge. First, I match energy patents with the industries that use the
inventions. Then, I create stocks of energy knowledge, which are used as an explanatory variable in a
system of cost functions for 13 energy intensive industries. The knowledge stocks are defined as:
∞

(2)

K i ,t = ∑ e − β1 ( s ) (1 − e − β 2 ( s +1) ) PATi , s ,
s =0

where Ki,t represents the knowledge stock in industry i at time t, s represents an index of years up to and
including year t, PATi,s represents the number of energy patents used by industry i in year s, β1 represents
a rate of decay, and β2 is a rate of diffusion. The stocks allow me to estimate the effect of a new patent on
energy consumption. By combining these results with the induced innovation results discussed above, I
calculate the effect of induced innovation as the combined effect of all new patents induced by a price
change. I find that induced innovation accounts for approximately one-third of the change in energy
consumption that occurs after a price change. Furthermore, the estimated elasticities of energy use with
respect to price found in that paper are lower than typically found, as they include only the effect of factor
substitution. By comparison, when the regressions from Popp (2001) are run using only a time trend to
represent technological change, the resulting energy price elasticities are consistent with those found in
other studies, and are comparable to the combined induced innovation elasticity and energy price
elasticity estimated using knowledge stocks. Table 1, taken from Popp (2001), illustrates these results for
selected technologies.
The table shows the short-run breakdown in the effects on energy consumption from a change in
energy prices. The elasticity of energy use with respect to induced innovation is the percent change in
energy consumption resulting from the new technologies induced by a one percent change in energy

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

14

prices. The elasticity of energy use with respect to price is the change in energy consumption resulting
from factor substitution. Column three shows the total effect of a change in energy prices. It is the sum
of the elasticities in columns one and two. Column 4 presents the percentage of the total elasticity that is
due to induced innovation. Finally, column 5 gives the elasticity of energy with respect to price from a
regression that excludes the knowledge stocks, so that only a time trend is used to capture technological
change. Note that these elasticities are comparable to the combined elasticities presented in column 3.
One implication here is that even models calibrated on typical estimates of energy price elasticity include
some effects of technological change in them. Incorporating endogenous technological change into these
models reveals the marginal effect of additional innovation induced by policy, but not the total effect of
all technological innovations.

Lesson #4 – The Social Returns to Environmental Research are High
This lesson is not unique to environmental research. Consistently, economists studying the
returns to research have found that the social returns are higher than the private returns to R&D. The
reason for this is that the knowledge created by such research is a public good. Once new knowledge is
publicly available, it can be applied repeatedly without decay. Moreover, without public policy, such as
intellectual property rights, others cannot be excluded from making use of the new knowledge. As such,
firms are unable to capture the entire social value of their research investment, and thus underinvest in
research. Examples of such studies include Mansfield (1977, 1996), Pakes (1985), Jaffe (1986), and Hall
(1995).
My research of environmental and energy technologies confirms that the social returns to
research in these fields are comparable to that in other fields. As such, it provides a useful guide for
calibrating the returns to R&D in climate policy models. In Popp (2001), I examine the effect of new
knowledge, measure by patents, on energy consumption in 13 energy-intensive industries. The median
patent leads to $14.5 million dollars in long-run energy savings. In comparison, these industries spend an
average of $2.25 million of R&D per patent. Using similar techniques, Popp (2003a) examines the effect

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

15

of flue gas desulfurization (FGD) unit innovation on coal-fired electric power plants. Included in that
paper is an estimate of the cost-savings that result from innovation. A single patent provides a present
value of $6 million in total cost savings across the industry. On average, about $1.5 million of R&D are
spent per patent granted.12

Lesson #5 – The type of policy used affects the nature of new innovations
Theoretical papers concerning the innovation incentives offered by various environmental
policies consistently find that market mechanisms, such as emissions fees or tradable permits, offer
greater incentives for innovation. Although most empirical work verifies these predictions, it is important
to note that the superiority of market mechanisms for encouraging innovation depend not only on the level
of innovation induced, but also on the quality of innovation induced.
As an example of this, Popp (2003a) finds that the level of innovation for FGD units was actually
higher before tradable sulfur dioxide (SO2) permits were introduced by the 1990 Clean Air Act (CAA).
However, the nature of innovation changed after passage of the Act. Before the 1990 Clean Air Act, most
new coal-fired electric utilities were required to install FGD units with a removal efficiency of 90%.13
Since installation of FGD units was mandatory, innovation focused on reducing the operating costs of
these units. However, since there were no incentives for firms to exceed the 90% limit, innovation had no
effect on the removal efficiency of FGD units.
In contrast, by offering fewer permits, the 1990 CAA required greater SO2 emissions reductions,
but did not specify how those reductions be met. While some firms chose to use more efficient FGD

12

Two caveats are important. First, these studies focused on energy-intensive industries, where the likelihood of
significant savings was high. Care should be taken in generalizing the results to other, less energy-intensive sectors.
At the macro level, this implies that the rate of return may be lower if significant energy R&D efforts are directed at
less promising research areas. Furthermore, this lesson should not be read as implying that public R&D dollars
should be non-discriminately directed towards energy research, because past successes do not guarantee future high
rates of return. Private rates of return are high because firms tend to direct research towards more promising
projects.
13
Specifically, plants needed to either achieve emission rates less than 1.2 lbs SO2/million Btu heat input and reduce
90 percent of their potential SO2 emissions (a 90% removal efficiency) or achieve emission rates less than 0.6 lbs
SO2/million Btu heat input and achieve 70% removal efficiency. Potential SO2 emissions are calculated based on
the sulfur content of the fuel burned.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

16

units, others were able to achieve reductions using alternative techniques, such as low-sulfur coal
(Ellerman et al. 1997). While the overall level of FGD innovation was lower after passage of the 1990
CAA, the post-1990 innovations had a more positive environmental effect. During the 1990 CAA
regime, the knowledge created each year increased the removal efficiency of FGD units by 1.71%.
Indeed, in 1995 (the first year of trading in the SO2 permit program), 11 new FGD units with a removal
efficiency of 95% or higher were installed.
One possibility for the lower level of innovation is that fewer firms need to innovate in the post90 regime. Regulations requiring a specific technology gave every affected firm incentive to innovate in
ways that lowered the costs of compliance. However, the greater flexibility of permit trading offers firms
several ways to comply. Some firms could lower pollution by switching to cleaner coal. Other firms, if
necessary, could simply purchase permits from firms with lower marginal abatement costs. Only a subset
of firms found that installing more efficient scrubbers to be the best method for meeting new pollution
reduction targets.
Nonetheless, because of the public goods nature of new knowledge, having fewer innovating
firms, but more promising innovations developed, is more beneficial to society. Once the know-how to
produce 95% efficient scrubbers exists, it can be adopted by other firms.14 As an analogy, consider
research to develop more fuel efficient cars. Society would benefit more from one firm that develops the
ability to reduce emissions completely by developing a cost-effective solar-powered car, as opposed to
several firms developing cars with slightly greater fuel efficiency.

Given this, it is important for

policymakers to be cognizant of not only the level of research induced by policy, but how different
policies may shape the outcome of this research.

14

This assumes that there is a regulatory incentive to do so. Compared to emissions fees, this is a weakness of
tradable permits, as the total emissions level remains fixed even after a more promising technology is found, as
adopters of the new technology are able to sell unused permits to other firms.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

17

IV. Implications for Climate Change
Despite the growing evidence that environmental policy influences the direction of technological
change, few climate change models directly incorporate links between policy and technology.15 Those
that do typically model innovation in one of two ways. Bottom-up models include a detailed specification
of energy systems.

These models typically do not include detailed modeling of the overall

macroeconomy, and typically model induced technological change in a learning-by-doing framework, in
which the costs of various technologies decrease with experience. Examples include Gerlagh and van der
Zwaan (2003), Manne and Richels (2002), Grübler and Messner (1998), and Messner (1997). Top-down
models focus on the links between environmental policy and macroeconomic performance. Endogenous
technological change in these models typically comes through accumulated investment in research and
development (R&D). Recent models of this nature include Goulder and Schneider (1999), Nordhaus
(2002), and Buonanno et al. (2003).
However, none of the existing models make use of empirical estimates on the nature of
technological change to calibrate the model. In recent work, I have begun to use the results of these
empirical studies to explore the effect of induced technological change (ITC) in models of climate
change. I use the estimates obtained in previous work to guide the development and calibration of a topdown model of endogenous technological change that is supported by empirical evidence. My work
builds on the well-known DICE model of climate change (1994). The DICE model is a dynamic growth
model of the global economy that includes links between economic activity, carbon emissions, and the
climate. Because it includes both costs and benefits of climate change, it allows the modeler to simulate
optimal paths for control of carbon emissions. I modify the basic DICE model to include a fossil fuel

15

The results of Chakravorty, Roumasset, and Tse (1997) show why considering the link between policy and
technological change is important. They present a simulation showing that the development of alternative fuels
lowers the projected temperature increases caused by global warming from 3-6 degrees centigrade to just 1-2
degrees centigrade. Unfortunately, they do not model the development of such technologies, but rather assume that
they continue to develop at historical rates. Since much of the development of alternatives such as solar energy
occurred during the period of high energy prices during the late 1970s, assuming that historical rate of technological
progress will continue without policy stimulation is unrealistic, and may lead to overly optimistic results.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models
sector and an energy research sector.16

18

The modified model is called ENTICE, for ENdogenous

Technological change.
Although the DICE model is a greatly simplified macroeconomic representation of the global
economy and the environment, the relative transparency of the model makes sensitivity analysis
straightforward.

Existing models of technological change and the environment include differing

assumptions about features such as imperfect research markets, the potential crowding out effects of
energy R&D, and key elasticities. The ENTICE framework allows detailed sensitivity analysis of these
assumptions, helping to rectify the differences found in various models. To illustrate the importance of
the lessons presented earlier, in this section I highlight key results from this still ongoing work.

Implication #1: The Long-Run Effects of Technological Change are Important
To compare welfare with and without induced technological change, I calculate the net economic
impact for an optimal climate change policy with and without ITC. The net economic impact of a policy
is the present value of consumption under the policy minus the present value of consumption in the base
case, in which carbon emissions are uncontrolled. Because the DICE model and its variants incorporate
environmental damages into the model, it is possible to calculate an optimal carbon policy, in which the
marginal costs of carbon abatement equal the marginal benefits of lower emissions.

Typically,

simulations involving these models find that the optimal policy is to go slow. Since carbon emissions
remain in the atmosphere for several hundred years, the marginal damages resulting from any new
emissions are modest. Thus, gradually phasing in carbon reduction lowers the opportunity cost of
reducing emissions without having much impact on the global climate.
In the base case of the ENTICE model, ITC increases net economic welfare by 8.3% over a
model with exogenous technological change. However, environmental benefits are negligible. Even after
100 years, there is practically no change (less than 1%) in average global temperature when ITC is added

16

The fossil fuel sector is similar to that used in the RICE model, which is the regional version of DICE. Details
can be found in Popp (2003b).

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

19

to the model. Nor is there much change in the optimal level of the carbon tax. Rather, welfare benefits
come from cost savings, in that emissions goals can be reached more cheaply.
Also notable is that the cumulative effect of R&D is important. Figure 3 compares net welfare
with endogenous and exogenous technological change. The figure shows the cumulative welfare gains
over time for simulations without a backstop technology. Note that, in the years immediately after the
implementation of the carbon tax, the welfare gains are actually lower when ITC is included in the model.
Although R&D responds quickly to the carbon tax, in these early years, the opportunity costs of
performing additional R&D outweigh the potential benefits of more efficient energy technology.
However, since the benefits of R&D are cumulative, future research builds on these early successes, and
by 2125, the welfare gains from the model with ITC surpass those in the exogenous technology
simulations. As noted in Lesson #2 above, the productivity of future research depends on the productivity
of the knowledge on which they can build. Thus, research done today not only offers the benefit of
potential energy savings, but also serves to make future research more productive.
Finally, note that the difference between the exogenous and ITC case soon stabilizes. Here we
see the importance of diminishing returns over time. Over time, finding new research successes in the
energy savings field becomes more and more difficult, so that the welfare gains from ITC cannot grow
continuously.

Implication #2 – The opportunity cost of R&D is important
Recall from Lesson #4 that the social returns of R&D are typically higher than the private returns.
This offers an important limitation to the effect of ITC. To the extent that energy R&D crowds out other
forms of research, similarly productive research in other areas is reduced.
Based on the results from lesson #4 above, in the ENTICE model, I assume energy R&D
spending has a social rate of return four times greater than its private rate of return. Fifty percent
crowding out is assumed – that is, half of new energy R&D spending displaces other R&D spending,
which also has a social rate of return four times greater than its private rate of return. The rate of

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

20

crowding out is based on changes in U.S. private sector R&D that occurred between 1972-1998.
Sensitivity analysis shows that the opportunity cost is an important limitation on the potential benefits of
ITC.

When crowding out is removed from the ENTICE model, welfare gains from ITC increase to as

much as 43.6%, compared to 8.3% in the base case with partial crowding out. Similarly, with complete
crowding out, the welfare gain from ITC falls to as little as 2.1%.

17

Such results help to explain the

differences between models. For example, Nordhaus (2002), who finds little impact for ITC, assumes a
fixed supply of R&D labor, so that complete crowding out of other R&D occurs as energy R&D
increases. In comparision, Buonanno et al. (2003) assume that environmental R&D and other R&D are
complements, rather than substitutes. Not surprisingly, they find a much larger potential impact for ITC.
In addition, these results explain why top-down models assuming a learning curve, but not including
policy-induced innovation, tend to find larger benefits from technological change than bottom-down
models. Although learning by doing models do include an opportunity cost from increasing investment in
alternative energy sources, this cost is simply the loss of one dollar of potential investment elsewhere, as
opposed to the loss of more productive R&D dollars from elsewhere in the economy. As a result,
learning-by-doing models will overstate the potential gains from technological improvements.
An important policy implication of crowding out is that it limits the potential of ITC under more
restrictive climate policies. Since more restrictive policies induce more energy R&D than the optimal
policy derived in ENTICE, the opportunity cost of lost R&D in other sectors becomes greater. To see this,
consider the results of a simulation restricting global carbon emissions at 1995 levels, taken from Popp
(2003b). Whereas including ITC improved welfare by 8.3% in the optimal policy simulation, welfare
only improves by 5.6% in this simulation when ITC is included. The importance of crowding out for this
result can be seen by eliminating crowding out from the simulation. Doing so increases the net welfare

17

In Popp (2003b), I present upper and lower bounds of the influence of opportunity cost in the ENTICE model.
The upper bound estimates assume that R&D levels change as the opportunity costs change. The lower bound
estimates change the opportunity cost, but constrain R&D to remain at the base case levels. The later can be
interpreted as the gains from removing the assumption of partial crowding out. They are not the gains that would
result if the government intervened to remedy the problem of partial crowding out.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

21

gain by 46%. A similar experiment in the optimal policy scenario only increases the welfare gain by just
14%.18

Implication #3 – Market failures for knowledge are important
As noted in lesson #4, the high rates of return that make the opportunity cost of R&D important
are the result of market failures in markets for knowledge. The public goods nature of knowledge causes
firms to underinvest in R&D. To model these imperfections, the base ENTICE model constrains the
social rate of return on R&D to be four times greater than that of the return on other investment. The
problem of underinvestment could be addressed by subsidies to energy R&D, if government investments
in R&D are set so that all social returns are captured. Models that do not include market failures, such as
Buonanno et al. (2003) implicitly assume that government R&D subsidies sufficient to correct all market
failures are in place.
Simulations removing the constraint on returns to R&D suggest that the returns on such subsidies
could be quite significant. The gain from ETC for the optimal policy improves to 14.0% when energy
subsidies are considered. Similarly, adding R&D subsidies to the endogenous R&D case increases the net
welfare gain to seven percent in the more restrictive policy case.

V. Future Research – Whither Diffusion?
The simulation results presented above, while preliminary, not only suggest important policy
implications, but also fruitful avenues for future research. In particular, one area of great importance is
the diffusion of new energy technologies, particularly across countries. In nearly all of the models
discussed above, diffusion is not an issue.19 For example, both R&DICE and ENTICE are global models.
As such, once a technology is available, it can be used worldwide. Similarly, Goulder and Schneider’s
model focuses only on the United States. Assuming quick diffusion of technologies within a country is
18

These results use the lower bound of the opportunity costs simulations. This holds R&D the same in both the high
and low opportunity cost case, to isolate the opportunity cost of the induced research in the base case.
19
Buonanno et al. (2003) is an exception.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

22

reasonable, and supported by empirical evidence (see, for example, Popp 2001). However, there is no
reason to expect that diffusion between countries should occur at the same rate. For example, research at
the domestic level might be needed to adopt foreign knowledge to domestic conditions. Just as the
empirical literature on knowledge spillovers finds that spillovers are greatest among similar industries, we
would also expect adoption of technologies to be quickest in similar countries.20
At the international level, there is a large body of research on technological diffusion in general
(surveyed by Keller 2001), but little work focusing specifically on environmental technologies. As noted
earlier, the one exception is Lanjouw and Mody (1996). Suggesting the importance of diffusion, they find
that the majority of environmental technology patents in developing countries come from foreign
countries. Moreover, they find that policies in one nation may affect innovation of technologies in a
second nation. Looking at motor vehicles, they note that the majority of vehicle air emissions patents
granted in the U.S. are from foreign nations, even though the US was the first country to adopt strict
emissions standards.
Given the importance of diffusion for bringing new environmental technologies to developing
countries, understanding the general lessons from empirical work on international diffusion is important.
There are two potential avenues through which foreign knowledge can have an influence in the domestic
economy. First, foreign inventions may be adopted directly by domestic firms. Second, rather than being
directly adopted by domestic users, foreign knowledge may affect the productivity of domestic R&D.
The “blueprints” represented by foreign patents may serve to inspire additional innovation by domestic
inventors. Such productivity increases are knowledge spillovers, as the knowledge represented by the
foreign patent creates a positive externality – knowledge from abroad that is borrowed by the domestic
inventor (Griliches 1979).

20

At the industry level, Cohen and Levinthal (1989) show that firm R&D increases the ability of firms to absorb
knowledge spillovers. If such R&D is needed for spillovers to occur, the opportunity cost of this R&D must be
considered. Although such considerations are not included in a global model such as ENTICE, they are important
for sector-specific computable general equilibrium (CGE) models.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

23

Since most R&D takes place in just a few countries, both types of diffusion are important. For
direct adoption, many of the same lessons from diffusion studies within a country apply here as well. In
particular, local conditions are an important determinant of the rate of diffusion across countries.
Regarding knowledge spillovers, researchers have followed several strategies. At a macro level, several
papers, most notably Coe and Helpman (1995), have estimated the effects of domestic and foreign R&D
stocks on total factor productivity (TFP) growth. Typically, the foreign R&D stocks are weighted by
international trade flows, so that these papers attempt to measure the effect of international trade on
knowledge flows. Such papers typically find a positive effect for foreign R&D, although this effect may
vary by country. In general, the relative contribution of foreign knowledge is inversely related to
economic size and level of development (Keller 2001). At a more micro level, studies looking at the
effect of foreign direct investment (FDI) and foreign knowledge spillovers find mixed results. Whether
the effect of FDI on growth is positive or negative depends on individual industry and country
characteristics, with inward FDI being more successful for developed countries (Keller 2001).
Such results suggest that diffusion may limit the success of induced innovation as developing
countries begin to make greater use of fossil fuels. Since nearly all R&D is performed in the world’s
richest nations, diffusion of newly developed environmental technologies will be necessary if technology
is to play a role in mitigating future carbon emissions from the developing world. Research on both the
factors that affect the flows of environmentally-friendly technologies across countries, as well as research
on the speed at which such knowledge diffuses, will greatly improve our ability to model the potential
effects of technology on the climate change problem. Patents are likely to be a useful tool for such
research. Since patents are filed in multiple countries, patent data makes it possible to track the usage of
inventions across countries. Such data should be an invaluable source as studies of diffusion progress.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

24

References
Ahmad, Syed (1966), “On the Theory of Induced Innovation,” Economic Journal, 76(302), 344-57.
Bellas, Allen S. (1998), “Empirical evidence of advances in scrubber technology,” Resource and Energy
Economics, 20(4), 327-343.
Berndt, Ernst, Charles Kolstad, and Jong-Kun Lee (1993), “Measuring the Energy Efficiency and
Productivity Impacts of Embodied Technical Change,” The Energy Journal, 14, 33-55.
Binswanger, Hans P. (1978a), “The Microeconomics of Induced Technical Change,” in by Hans P.
Binswanger and Vernon W. Ruttan, eds., Induced Innovation: Technology, Institutions, and
Development, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 91-127
Binswanger, Hans P. (1978b), “Issues in Modeling Induced Technical Change,” in by Hans P.
Binswanger and Vernon W. Ruttan, eds., Induced Innovation: Technology, Institutions, and
Development, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press, 128-63.
Binswanger, Hans P. (1974), “A Microeconomic Approach to Innovation,” Economic Journal, 84(336),
940-58.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Adam B. Jaffe (1993), “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An Empirical
Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth,”
in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 15-74.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen Palmer (2000), “Sulfur Dioxide Control by
Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?” Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 12921326.
Coe, David T. and Elhanan Helpman, (1995), “International R&D Spillovers,” European Economic
Review, 39, 859-887.
Cohen, Wesley M. and Daniel A. Levinthal (1989), “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of R&D,”
The Economic Journal, 99, 569-596.
David, Paul A. (1969), Contribution to the Theory of Diffusion, Stanford Center for Research in
Economic Growth, Memorandum #71, Stanford University.
Davies, Stephen W. (1979), The Diffusion of Process Innovations, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U.K.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Richard Schmalensee, Paul L. Joskow, Juan Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth M.
Bailey (1997), Emissions Trading Under the U.S. Acid Rain Program: Evaluation of the
Compliace Costs and Allowance Market Performance, MIT Center for Energy and
Environmental Policy Research, Cambridge, MA.
Evenson, Robert E. and Yoav Kislev (1975), Agricultural Research and Productivity, Yale University
Press, New Haven, CT.
Fisher, Carolyn, Ian W. H. Parry, William A. Pizer (1998), “Instrument Choice for Environmental
Protection When Environmental Protection is Endogenous,” Resources for the Future Discussion
Paper 99-04.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Stephen H. Schneider (1999), “Induced Technological Change and the
Attractivenes of CO2 Emissions Abatement,” Resource and Energy Economics, 21, 211-253.
Gray, Wayne B. and Ronald J. Shadbegian (1998), “Environmental Regulation, Investment Timing, and
Technology Choice,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2), 235-256.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

25

Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent Statistics As Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 28(4), 1661-707.
Griliches, Zvi (1979), “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to Productivity
Growth,” Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 92-116.
Griliches, Zvi (1957), “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration of the Economics of Technological Change,”
Econometrica, 25, 501-522.
Hall, Bronwyn (1995), “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development,” in Technology,
R&D, and the Economy, Bruce Smith and Claude Barfield, eds., Brookings, 140-183.
Hicks, John R. (1932), The Theory of Wages, London: Macmillan.
Jaffe, Adam B. (1986), “Technological Opportunity and Spillover of R&D: Evidence from Firms’
Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 76, 984-1001.
Jaffe, Adam B., Michael S. Fogarty, and Bruce A. Banks (1998), “Evidence from Patents and Patent
Citations on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial Innovation,” Journal of
Industrial Economics, 46, 183-205.
Jaffe, Adam B., Rebecca Henderson, and Manuel Trajtenberg (1993), “Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
108(3), 577-98.

Jaffe, B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins (2003), “Technological change and the
environment,” in K.G.Mäler & J. Vincent (Eds.), Handbook of Environmental
Economics, (pp. 461-516). Amsterdam: North Holland.
Jaffe, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins (1999), “Energy-Efficient Technologies and
Climate Change Policies: Issues and Evidence,” Climate Issue Brief No. 19. Washington, D.C.:
Resources for the Future. Reprinted in Toman, Michael A., ed. (2001), Climate Change
Economics and Policy, pp. 171-181, Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Karen Palmer (1997), “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A Panel Data
Study,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79(4), 610-19.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Robert N. Stavins (1995), “Dynamic Incentives of Environmental Regulation: The
Effects of Alternative Policy Instruments on Technology Diffusion,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 29, S43-S63.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Maneul Trajtenberg (1996), “Flows of Knowledge From Universities and Federal
Labs: Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations Over Time and Across Institutional and Geographic
Boundaries,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93, 12671-77.
Johnson, Daniel K.N. and David Popp (2003), “Forced Out of the Closet: The Impact of the American
Inventors Protection Act on the Timing of Patent Disclosure,” RAND Journal of Economics,
34(1), 96-112.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Barbara M. Fraumeni (1981), “Relative Prices on Technical Change,” in
Modeling and Measuring Natural Resource Substitution, Ernst R. Berndt & Barry C. Field eds.,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 17-47.
Keller, Wolfgang (2001), “International Technology Diffusion,” NBER Working Paper #8573.
Kerr, Suzi and Richard Newell (2001), “Policy-Induced Technology Adoption: Evidence from the U.S.
Lead Phasedown,” Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 01-14, forthcoming in Journal of
Industrial Economics.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

26

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549-571.
Lanjouw, Jean O., Ariel Pakes and Jonathan Putnam (1998), “How to Count Patents and Value
Intellectual Property: Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data,” The Journal of Industrial
Economics, 46(4), 405-433.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Shankerman (1999), “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with
Multiple Indicators,” NBER Working Paper #7345.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter (1987), “Appropriating
the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 3, 783-820.
Kamien, Morton I. and Schwartz, Nancy L. (1968), “Optimal Induced Technical Change,” Econometrica,
36(1), 1-17.
Magat, Wesley A. (1978), “Pollution Control and Technological Advance: A Dynamic Model of the
Firm,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 5, 1-25.
Mansfield, Edwin (1996), “Microeconomic Policy and Technological Change,” in Technology and
Growth: Conference Proceedings, Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Jane Sneddon Little, eds., Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, 183-200.
Mansfield, Edwin (1977), “Social and Private Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 91, 221-240.
Mansfield, Edwin (1968), Industrial Research and Technological Innovation, W.W. Norton, New York.
Milliman, Scott R. and Raymond Prince (1989), “Firm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in
Pollution Control,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 17, 247-165.
Mountain, Dean C., Bill P. Stipdonk, and Cathy J. Warren (1989), “Technological Innovation and a
Changing Energy Mix -- A Parametric and Flexible Approach to Modeling Ontario
Manufacturing,” The Energy Journal, 10, 139-158.
National Science Board (2002), Science and Engineering Indicators – 2002, National Science Foundation,
Arlington, VA (NSB-02-1).
Newell, Richard G., Adam B. Jaffe, and Robert N. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis
and Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 941-975.
Nordhaus, William (2002), “Modeling Induced Innovation in Climate-Change Policy,” in Technological
Change and the Environment, Arnulf Grübler, Nebojsa Nakicenovic, and William D. Nordhaus
eds., Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.
Nordhaus, William (1994), Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of the Greenhouse Effect,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Oster, Sharon (1982), “The Diffusion of Innovation Among Steel Firms: The Basic Oxygen Furnace,”
The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1), 45-56.
Pakes, Ariel (1985), “On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return,” Journal of Political
Economy, 93, 390-409.
Popp, David (2003a), “Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 22(4), 641-660.
Popp, David (2003b), “ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global
Warming,” NBER Working Paper #9762.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

27

Popp, David (2002), “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American Economic Review, 92(1), 160180.
Popp, David (2001) “The Effect of New Technology on Energy Consumption,” Resource and Energy
Economics, 23, 215-239.
Rose, Nancy L. and Paul L. Joskow (1990), “The Diffusion of New Technologies: Evidence From the
Electric Utility Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics, 21(3), 354-373.
Schumpeter, Joseph (1942), Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Harper, New York.
Sterner, Thomas (1990), “Energy Efficiency and Capital Embodied Technical Change: The Case of
Mexican Cement Manufacturing,” The Energy Journal, 11, 155-167.

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models
Figure 1 – The S-shaped diffusion curve

Market
Penetration
(%)

100%

Time

28

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models

Figure 2 – Induced Innovation and Energy Prices
200
180

Index: 1981 = 100

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1970

1972

1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

Year of Application
Energy Prices
Solar Batteries

Source: Popp (2002)

Heat Exchange -- General
Fuel Cells

Solar Energy
Waste Heat

29

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models
Figure 3 – Welfare gains over time in the ENTICE model

2
1.8

Trillions 1990 US dollar

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
Endogenous R&D

Exogenous R&D

Source: Popp (2003b)
The figure shows the cumulative gains in welfare from an optimal carbon tax. Note that
welfare in the induced innovation is initially lower than exogenous R&D, but that
induced innovation leads to larger long run improvements than in a simulation with
exogenous technological change.

30

Lessons From Patents: Using Patents To Measure Technological Change in Environmental Models
Table 1 – Induced Innovation and the Elasticity of Energy Consumption
(1)
Industry

Chemicals
Copper
Electrometallurgical
Pulp & Paper

elasticity
of energy
use with
respect to
induced
innovation
-0.319
-0.018
-1.827
-0.037

(2)

(3)

elasticity
total
of energy elasticity
use with of energy
respect to use with
price
respect to
price
-1.378
-0.235
-1.596
-0.250

-1.697
-0.253
-3.423
-0.287

(4)

(5)

% of
elasticity
due to
induced
innovation

price
elasticity
without
knowledge
stocks

19%
7%
53%
13%

-1.652
-0.220
-1.478
-0.307

Source: Popp (2001)
The table shows the short-run breakdown in the effects on energy consumption from a
change in energy prices. The elasticity of energy use with respect to induced innovation
is the percent change in energy consumption resulting from the new technologies induced
by a one percent change in energy prices. The elasticity of energy use with respect to
price is the change in energy consumption resulting from factor substitution. Column
three shows the total effect of a change in energy prices. It is the sum of the elasticities in
columns one and two. Column 4 presents the percentage of the total elasticity that is due
to induced innovation. Finally, column 5 gives the elasticity of energy with respect to
price from a regression that excludes the knowledge stocks, so that only a time trend is
used to capture technological change. Note that these elasticities are comparable to the
combined elasticities presented in column 3.

31

