                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOW DID LOCATION AFFECT ADOPTION
                      OF THE COMMERCIAL INTERNET?
         GLOBAL VILLAGE, URBAN DENSITY, AND INDUSTRY COMPOSITION

                                             Chris Forman
                                              Avi Goldfarb
                                            Shane Greenstein

                                          Working Paper 9979
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9979


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




We thank Tim Bresnahan, Karen Clay, Gilles Duranton, Steve Klepper, Roger Noll, Alicia Shems, Manuel
Trajtenberg, seminar participants at the Center for Economic Studies and the ZEW Conference on
Information and Communication Technologies, and especially Scott Stern for comments. We also thank Harte
Hanks Market Intelligence for supplying data. We received funding from the Kellogg School of Management
and the GM Strategy Center and seed funding from the National Science Foundation and Bureau of Economic
Analysis. All opinions and errors are ours alone. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Chris Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How did Location Affect Adoption of the Commercial Internet? Global Village, Urban Density
and Industry Composition
Chris Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 9979
September 2003
JEL No. L63, L86, R0

                                            ABSTRACT

The authors test opposing theories on how urban locations influenced the diffusion of Internet
technology. They find evidence that, controlling for industry, participation in the Internet is more
likely in rural areas than in urban areas. Nevertheless, talk of the dissolution of cities is premature.
Frontier Internet technologies appear more often at establishments in urban areas, even with industry
controls. Major urban areas also contain many establishments from information technology-intensive
industries, whose presence could reinforce the concentration of frontier Internet technologies in
these areas. However, information technology-intensive industries are numerous and widespread.
Hence, so is the use of frontier technology.

Chris Forman                                           Avi Goldfarb
Carnegie Mellon University                             University of Toronto
5000 Forbes Avenue                                     105 St George Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                   Toronto ON Canada M5S 3E6
cforman@andrew.cmu.edu                                 avi.goldfarb@rotman.utoronto.edu

Shane Greenstein
J. L. Kellogg School of Management
Leverone Hall
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
and NBER
greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu
    Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                      Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                             1. Introduction
          While information technology (IT) spending grew rapidly from 1990 to 1995, the timing and
form of the Internet’s commercialization caught all but a small number of technical cognoscenti by
surprise. The vast majority of business establishments were then faced with a new and unexpected
technology. They had to decide how to react to the availability of new capabilities.
          American businesses reacted with the largest growth rates in investment in IT in the history of
the United States. Stocks of information technology capital grew at a 20% annual growth rate from the
end of 1995 to the end of 2000.1 By 2000, computer hardware and software stocks had reached $622.2
billion.2 The majority of this investment was affiliated with enabling business applications. In 2000, for
example, total business investment in IT goods and services was almost triple the level for personal
consumption of similar goods.3
          The level of these investment flows is immense and so is the variance across locations.4 In some
locations, the Internet has been adopted across all facets of economic activity, while in other locations
adoption is not widespread. Two competing theories for explaining this variance have received the most
attention. First, "global village" theory predicts that firms in small cities and rural areas adopted the
Internet more quickly than urban firms because the marginal returns to the use of the communications
capabilities of the Internet are higher in remote locations or in locations lacking economies of density.
In contrast, the "urban density" theory predicts adoption will be most extensive in big cities because
such locations allow for the pooling of resources, which lowers the costs of adoption.
          Despite policy interest and much speculation about the pattern of diffusion, little empirical
research confirms or refutes the competing hypotheses. This paper is the first to adjudicate this debate
with hard data. Specifically, our study concentrates on a single, major, well-defined, and reasonably
well-recorded development—adoption of business applications of the Internet—to test between
competing theories about the geographic diffusion of Internet technology. In contrast to previous
research on use of the Internet by workers, we focus on adoption by an establishment. This is more
appropriate for comparing the marginal contribution of location, industry, and application complexity.
          Our estimates examine decision-making among the largest investors in IT in the U.S. economy:
Approximately two-thirds of the United States work force is employed in the type of establishments
studied. Specifically, we analyze Internet adoption at 86,879 establishments with over one hundred
employees; this sample comprises roughly half of U.S. establishments of such size. The data come from


1
  This includes computer hardware, computer software, and communications hardware and instruments. See Price
and McKittrick (2002) or Henry and Dalton (2002). The growth rates are even higher if communications hardware
and instruments are excluded.
2
  These are constant (1996) dollars. See Henry and Dalton (2002).
3
  For 2000, estimated personal consumption of IT goods and services was $165 billion. For business it was $466
billion. See Henry and Dalton (2002).
4
  For an extensive description of this variance, see our previous paper, Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein (2002).

                                                                                                               1
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                       Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

a survey updated to the end of 2000. Harte Hanks Market Intelligence (hereafter HH), a commercial
market research firm that tracks use of Internet technology in business, undertook the survey. We
separate these data into two categories of adoption— participation, which refers to adoption of simple
applications, and enhancement, which refers to adoption of complex applications requiring technical
support and third-party servicing.
        Our earlier work (Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein 2002) establishes that the variance in
geographical patterns of participation and enhancement differ substantially from the variance uncovered
in any existing research on Internet adoption by households or infrastructure deployment. While we
have already shown that there is variance in adoption rates, here we focus on decomposing the factors
underlying aggregate variance and explicitly test hypotheses relating to these underlying factors. On the
basis of our results we provide input on the debate concerning patterns of Internet diffusion. Our
research supports three central findings:
1.      Urban density theory is not supported when the Internet is adopted for participation purposes.
In other words, adoption does not increase with the size and density of a city. In fact, there is some
evidence that the opposite holds. Adoption of participation is closer to the more utopian global village
theory that is associated with the promise of the Internet.
2.      We reach the opposite conclusion for enhancement: In this case, global village theory is not
supported and urban density theory is, because the probability that an establishment will adopt
enhancement applications increases with the population and density of location.
3.      Finally, the type of industry found in major cities plays a key role in explaining the variance of
adoption rates between cities: We label this industry composition theory. More IT-intensive industries
tend to cluster in urban areas. Urban density theory and industry composition theory interact in a
complementary way for enhancement applications. This interaction could exacerbate agglomeration in
use. However, because IT-intensive industries are numerous and geographically dispersed, frontier
technology use is also widespread. We find little evidence of agglomeration among participation
applications.
        Our study is pertinent to previous studies, yet it provides a new dimension to and novel data on
the way adoption processes and business location interact. In addition to bringing hard data to bear on
the geographic variance of Internet use, our investigation contributes novel findings to the debate about
whether IT acts as a substitute or complement to the agglomeration of economic activity (e.g., Gaspar
and Glaeser 1998). Unlike some studies in this vein, we do not consider the determinants of long-run
equilibrium, that is, where firms relocate after technology markets develop (e.g., Beardsell and
Henderson 1999; Kolko 2002). Rather, we examine the short-run reaction of establishments to
something new. This situation avoids the largest difficulty in previous empirical research, the
simultaneous determination of industrial location, adoption decisions and supplier activity.


                                                                                                             2
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

        Our empirical question of how location affects Internet practice is similar to Kolko (2000). He
uses domain name registrations in the context of a periphery/central city model to find that users in
cities of medium size and above have registration patterns consistent with those areas benefiting
disproportionately from the Internet. We examinethe adoption by businesses of certain processes in
cities of varying size and location.
        Our study is also similar in spirit to Sinai and Waldfogel (2001). They examine household
behavior for evidence that Internet content is either a substitute or a complement to content found
locally. When we examine substitutability or complementarity our focus is on adoption by business
establishments, as opposed to household Internet use. Moreover, our decomposition of the geographic
variation of Internet use into industry- and location-specific factors enables us to test hypothesizes
unexamined by prior work.
        We ultimately accept hypotheses based on the formulation that the Internet is a General Purpose
Technology, or GPT (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg 1995). Although others have hypothesized that the
Internet is a GPT (e.g., Harris 1998), we are the first to link this formulation to a statistical analysis of
adoption behavior by commercial businesses. The GPT framework underscores our distinction between
participation and enhancement, both of which rely, to different degrees, on local market-based support.
In our characterization of how local pooled resources influence the returns to adopting enhancement
applications, our study is similar to adoption studies that examine how knowledge spillovers (e.g.,
Goolsbee and Klenow 2002) and variations in education and skill level (e.g., Chun 2003; Doms, Dunne
and Troske 1997) affect demand for new technologies.
        Our analysis and findings contrast strongly with the prevailing analysis inspired by literature on
the digital divide. Even though, like previous studies, we find that some regions are leaders and some
are laggards in the use of Internet technology, we do not conclude that use of the Internet is
concentrated in a small number of places. Moreover, we emphasize the sharp differences between the
diffusion processes shaping participation and enhancement, both of which support very different
explanations about the factors shaping geographic variation in use.
        In Sections 2 and 3, we describe the theoretical framework, data, and empirical method. In
Section 4, we show that there is regional variation in Internet adoption rates. In Sections 5 and 6, we
separate out the relative importance of global village theory, urban density theory, and industry
composition theory in driving this variation. In Section 7, we conclude with observations about how our
findings shape the analysis of the economic returns from the diffusion of Internet technology.




                                                                                                                3
    Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                             2. Framework and Testable Hypotheses
          Why are technologies, such as the Internet, adopted at different rates by different firms? We
offer a framework that formalizes theories about how the benefits and costs of adoption vary across
establishments in different locations.
          We consider an establishment’s decision to adopt a new technology such as Internet access or
interfirm networking capabilities. For notational simplicity, in this section we consider only a generic
application of technology. Later in our discussion we will consider adoption of both a specific
participation and enhancement application.5 Establishment i will adopt Internet technology by time t if
NB(xi,zi,t) ≡ B(xi,zi,t) - C(xi,zi,t )> 0,
where NB is the net benefit of adoption, B is the gross benefit of adoption, and C is the cost of adoption.
We let xi describe geographic conditions, such as population size and density, while zi describes industry
characteristics that may affect a firm’s decision to adopt Internet technology. Both features are fixed
over time for establishments.
          Our empirical work examines one cross-section at time t. Since adoption of the Internet is rarely
reversed, we are comfortable with the data-driven requirement that we suppress the time dimension.
Under the standard “probit model” of diffusion (e.g., David 1969), adoption costs decline over time for
all potential adopters, so the timing of adoption coincides with intensity of demand. We employ the
standard analysis for a cross-section at any point in time: The difference between adoption and non-
adoption reveals the threshold between those with high and low valuations from use.6
          We now discuss different theories about NB(xi,zi), each of which gives competing predictions
about the role of location in the adoption of the Internet by commercial establishments. Table 1 lists
each of these hypotheses and their predictions.
                                    2.1 Global village versus urban density
          Global village theory argues that gross adoption benefits (1) increase as population size and
density decrease (i.e., dB/dxi < 0, where xi is population size or density) and (2) increase more slowly
than costs (dC/dxi < - dB/dxi for all xi). Together, net benefits from adoption decrease as population size
and density increase (dNB/dxi < 0). While the theory is implausible for sufficiently isolated
establishments (e.g., in the Mohave desert), its proponents generally focus on the predictions for
existing establishments in most urban and low-density settings. Global village theory predicts that


5
  Our data analysis will consider adoption of two distinct layers of Internet technology. It is easily generalizable to
more than two. In fact, Forman (2002) finds that participation and enhancement applications tend to be adopted
in clusters.
6
  Generally, see Rogers (1995). We allow the cost term C to include the opportunity cost of not adopting at some
other time s > t, thus the net benefit condition above is both necessary and sufficient for the establishment to adopt
by t. Another standard formulation would examine an establishment’s decision to adopt at time t, and the equation
above would be supplemented by an “arbitrage condition” (Ireland and Stoneman 1986) that it is less beneficial to
adopt at any other time s ≠ t .

                                                                                                                     4
    Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                       Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

adoption of the Internet will be more common among establishments in rural areas than in urban areas,
all other things being equal.
          Global village theory depends on two observations. First, while all business establishments
benefit from an increase in capabilities, establishments in rural or small urban areas derive the most
benefit from overcoming diseconomies of small local size. That is, Internet technology substitutes for
the disadvantages associated with a remote location. Second, establishments in rural areas lack
substitute data communication technologies for lowering communication costs, such as fixed private
lines.
          The most utopian versions of this hypothesis have received considerable exposure.7 This
hypothesis also predicts that advances in information and communication technology will help decrease
concentration in economic activity. Yet, even the more tempered forecasts are generally treated with
skepticism by most academic research on the geography of the Internet. This hypothesis has not been
directly tested and has not had much empirical verification (Forman’s (2002) study is an exception).
          Urban density theory stands in opposition to global village theory. Urban density theory argues
that adoption costs increase as population size and density decrease (i.e., dC/dxi < 0, where xi is density)
and that these costs increase faster than benefits increase (dC/dxi > - dB/dxi for all xi). Together, net
benefits of adoption increase as population size and density increase (dNB/dxi > 0). Urban density
theory predicts that adoption of the Internet will be less common in rural areas than in urban areas, all
other things being equal.
          There are three major factors supporting this hypothesis: (1) availability of complementary
information technology infrastructure, (2) labor market thickness for complementary services or
specialized skills, and (3) knowledge spillovers. These are closely related to the three major reasons
given for industrial agglomeration (e.g., Marshall 1920; Krugman 1991). For example, the availability
of low-cost complementary inputs, such as broadband services or Internet access, will have an impact
on the cost of adoption.8
          Urban density theory has received considerable exposure, partially because the literature on the
urban/rural digital divide highlights this concern. For example, both Gorman (2002) and Zooks (2000a,
b), summarizing the conclusions of many others as well as their own research, express this view quite
strongly (see, also, Castells 2003). 9 They also argue that Internet technology is a complement to urban
agglomeration. (For a full review of this literature, see Greenstein, 2003).

7
  Most discussion of this hypothesis follows from Cairncross (1997), who was an early proponent of global village
theory. She states, “The death of distance as a determinant of the cost of communicating will probably be the
single most important force shaping society in the first half of the next century” (p. 1).
8
  By this time period, almost all but the poorest and most remote geographic areas were serviced by dial-up
Internet Service Providers (Downes and Greenstein 2002). Yet, broadband access was disproportionately an urban
technology (U. S. Department of Agriculture 2001; Crandall and Alleman 2002)
9
  This is a particularly prominent theme in the series of reports from the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration (1995, 1998, 1999, 2000a, 2000b). See, also, Moss and Townsend (1997).

                                                                                                                5
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

        In comparing global village and urban density theories, we further contrast participation
purposes for business use of the Internet with enhancement purposes.10 Participation is affiliated with
basic communications, such as email use, browsing, and passive document sharing. It represents our
measure of the minimal investment required to do business on the Internet. It is emphasized in many
studies of “universal service” in new technologies. Geographic differences in participation, such as
urban/rural divisions, are important drivers of policy decisions in this area.11
        Enhancement, on the other hand, is affiliated with IT that either changes existing internal
operations or implements new services. It is related to investment in frontier technologies linked to
computing facilities, which are often known as “e-commerce” or “e-business.” Enhancement is linked
to the productive advance of firms and the economic growth of the regions in which these firms reside.
It usually arrives as part of other intermediate goods, such as software, computing or networking
equipment. Benefits accrue to the establishment that employs enhancement through the addition of
competitive advantage. The costs and delays of this activity vary, and enhancement investments are the
most idiosyncratic and difficult. 12
        The contrast between our participation and enhancement results is informative about local
adaptation costs. Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995) argue that the invention of a GPT like the Internet
involves high fixed costs. Users typically must adapt the GPT to their particular environments.
Adoption involves a combination of (1) reproduction and (2) co-invention to meet idiosyncratic
circumstances. Co-invention activity is not just R&D because it involves change to organizational
processes. When requirements and constraints are idiosyncratic and either technically or
organizationally complex, co-invention issues are expensive to address. When technical and
organizational issues are generic and common, co-invention expenses are lower and are spread out
among a larger set of users. 13
        Adaptation costs are relevant to the adoption decision for enhancement and largely negligible
for participation. If the effect of increases in density on adoption benefits (dB/dxi) is similar for both
participation and enhancement, the rate of improvement in net benefits, with respect to density, rises
faster for enhancement than for participation. This hypothesis predicts that enhancement will be more
sensitive to increases in density than will participation (i.e., dNB/dxi for enhancement > dNB/dxi for

10
   In this choice, we follow Forman (2002), who found that investment clustered around a few key margins of
behavior. For further motivation see the discussion in our companion study, Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein
(2002).
11
   See, e.g., Cherry, Hammond and Wildman (1999), Compaine (2001), Noll et al. (2001).
12
   Such applications often involve complementary organizational change to be used successfully. See,for example,
Hitt and Brynjolfsson (1997), Hubbard (2000) and Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002).
13
   This is consistent with other research on IT, complexity and location. For example, in research that examines
worker communication patterns using French data, Charlot and Duranton (2003) find that use of Internet
technology for inter-organization communication is more likely in large cities. However, their discussion
emphasizes the costs of where to locate coordination activity, while ours emphasizes the costs of changing an
organization’s processes as technology diffuses.

                                                                                                               6
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                           Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

participation). This is a prediction about the comparative difference between the two types of
applications, but it has no implication for whether global village or urban density theory holds for none,
either, or both participation or enhancement.
                                           2.2 Industry composition
         We distinguish between different versions of industry composition theory. These theories
provide potential alternative hypotheses for why the adoption of participation and enhancement
increases as population density increases. In all cases the theory argues that there is heterogeneous
demand for Internet technology and that the demand increases with the information intensity of the
industry. Furthermore, establishments from the same industry tend to cluster in similar places to take
advantage of thicker industry-specific labor markets and other shared local resources. For the purposes
of this discussion, we allow zi to denote the IT-intensity of an industry.
         In one version of industry composition theory, concentration of Internet technology-intensive
activity in some locations is due entirely to agglomeration of IT-intensive industries in those locations
and has little to do with population density directly. Previous decisions to concentrate activity could
have resulted in the clustering of some types of firms in urban areas. Concentration of adoption of new
Internet technology could be an unintended by-product of these decisions. This implies two testable
hypotheses: (1) the concentration of IT-intensive industries will explain geographic variation in use for
both participation and enhancement and (2) location will have no marginal impact on adoption behavior
beyond that explained by variation in industry composition. In other words, this version of the theory
hypothesizes that dNB/dzi > 0, corr(xi, zi ) > 0 and dNB/dxi = 0.
         A second version of industry composition theory asserts that increasing population density and
IT intensity may increase the likelihood of Internet adoption. Here, industry composition plays a role,
but so does location. This version hypothesizes that dNB/dzi > 0 and dNB/dxi > 0. We explore two
variants of this alternative theory. Both variants depend on increased demand for complementary
resources from IT-intensive firms and supply responses from the providers of these services.
         In one variant, which we name the industry-agglomeration complements theory, location and
industry effects may be complementary for some applications. Concentration of advanced industries
attracts the entry of complementary third-party services. These complementary services reduce
adaptation costs, particularly for enhancement. Under this theory, new entry increases supply and lowers
prices, despite increased demand from IT-intensive firms. Moreover, firms that are IT-intensive may be
better able to utilize the pooled resources available in large urban areas. To summarize, dNB/dzi > 0,
dNB/dxi > 0, and d2NB/ dxidzi > 0. This is the theory receiving the most exposure in the literature on the
digital divide.14

14
  The discussions about the concentration of industrial demand tend to focus on a narrow array of industries, such
as new media, dot-coms or electronic retailing. This also leads to a focus on Silicon Valley, Silicon Alley and the
greater Boston area. In contrast, we focus on all industries and locations.

                                                                                                                  7
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

        In our second variant, which we title industry-agglomeration substitutes theory, it is possible for
industry composition and urban agglomeration to be substitutes. Concentration of advanced industries
leads to increased demand for limited resources. If new entry is insufficient to compensate for this
resource competition, prices for local services will increase. In other words, dNB/dzi > 0, dNB/dxi > 0,
and d2NB/ dxidzi < 0. Thus, while cities will have more IT-intensive industries, the marginal benefit of
being in a city decreases as the IT intensity of the industry rises.
        Prior research has indicated that entry of third party Internet services in smaller markets was
sometimes low (Greenstein 2000). Accordingly, areas with low population should show the effects of
industry-agglomeration substitutes theory more than areas with high population. This theory has been
discussed as a theoretical possibility (e.g., Gasper and Glaeser 1998) but has seen little empirical
verification to our knowledge.15


                                         3. Data and Method
         The data we use for this study come from the Harte Hanks Market Intelligence CI Technology
database (hereafter CI database).16 The CI database contains establishment-level data on (1)
establishment characteristics, such as number of employees, industry and location; (2) use of technology
hardware and software, such as computers, networking equipment, printers and other office equipment;
and (3) use of Internet applications and other networking services. Harte Hanks collects this information
to resell as a tool for the marketing divisions at technology companies. Interview teams survey
establishments throughout the calendar year; our sample contains the most current information as of
December 2000.
        Harte Hanks tracks over 300,000 establishments in the United States. Since we focus on
commercial Internet use, we exclude government, military, and nonprofit establishments (mostly in
higher education). We focus on this unit of analysis for three reasons. First, the actions of
establishments will reflect local factors better than individual workers (who are mobile) or organizations
(who are in multiple locations). Second, previous studies of organizational use of IT demonstrate that
most co-invention expenses are incurred at a level wider than an individual. Third, and related,
productivity advances take place across a wide array of interdependent processes at an establishment,
even at those where the Internet is not used widely.17




15
   One exception is Kolko (2002), who examines agglomeration in the location decisions of IT-intensive firms.
16
   This section provides an overview of our methodology. For a more detailed discussion, see Forman, Goldfarb
and Greenstein (2002).
17
   See, e.g., Hitt and Brynjolfsson (1997), Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002).

                                                                                                                8
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                                  Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

         Our sample contains all commercial establishments from the CI database that contain over 100
employees, 115,671 establishments in all; 18 19 and HH provides one observation per establishment. We
will use the 86,879 clean observations with complete data generated between June 1998 and December
2000. We adopt a strategy of utilizing as many observations as possible because we need many
observations for thinly populated areas.20 This necessitates routine adjustments of the data for the timing
and type of the survey given by HH. Table A1 in the Appendix compares the HH data with the Census
data. In general, the samples are close, so most adjustments are small.
                                   3.1. Sample construction and statistical method
         Our endogenous variable will be yj, the value to establishment j of adoption. The variable y j is

latent. We observe only discrete choices: whether or not the establishment chooses participation and
whether or not it chooses enhancement. In either case, the observed decision takes on a value of either
one or zero. We will define these endogenous variables more precisely below.
         In our base specification we assume that the value to establishment j of adopting the Internet is

(1)         yj =   ∑α d
                     i
                         i   ij   + ∑ β l d lj + ∑ γ t d tj +
                                     l            t
                                                                 ∑
                                                                t >1995
                                                                          δ t d tj d pj + ∑ φ x mj + ∑ λ wqj + ε j ,
                                                                                       m            q


where dij and dlj are dummy variables indicating the industry and location of the establishment,

respectively, dtj indicates the month in which the establishment was surveyed, and d pj indicates

whether the establishment responded to the long survey.21 The variables xmj and wqj denote other
location-specific (e.g., population size and density) and establishment-specific variables (e.g.,
establishment size and dummies indicating single- or multi-establishment firm), respectively. In
variations of the model, we may allow for interactions among these variables. If we assume the error
term ε j is i.i.d. normal, then the probability that establishment j participates can be estimated with a

probit regression.
         We use this model for two research purposes. Our first purpose is descriptive. We illustrate
average tendencies for particular establishments in particular locations at a particular point in time. We
then weight observations using Census County Business Patterns data to obtain a representative sample.

18
   Because average establishment size differs across urban and rural areas and we only observe establishments
greater than 100 employees, our sampling methodology may create some selection bias could affect our
interpretation of the marginal impact of location. However, we believe this bias will be minor. We have run
regressions with and without size controls and the results remain qualitatively similar.
19
   Previous studies (Charles, Ives and Leduc 2002; Census 2002) have shown that Internet participation varies with
business size and that very small establishments rarely make Internet investments for enhancement. Thus, our
sampling methodology enables us to track the relevant margin in investments for enhancement, while our
participation estimates may overstate participation relative to the population of all business establishments.
20
   If we were only interested in the features of the most populated regions of the country, then we could easily rely
solely on the most recent data from the latter half of 2000, about 40% of the sample. However, using only this data
would result in a very small number of observations for most regions with a population of under one million.



                                                                                                                       9
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

We do this to establish and illustrate the extent of overall variation in adoption propensity. For the
average estimates in Tables 2, 3, and 4, we calculate predicted probabilities of adoption for each
establishment as if it were surveyed in the second half of 2000 and were given the long survey. The
location-specific and establishment-specific variables, xmj and wqj, are not included in this specification.
        Our second (and core) purpose is to test competing hypotheses. We analyze the marginal
contribution of different factors that shape adoption decisions at the establishment. We report marginal
effects from a variety of different specifications, where the model listed above is our base case. The
coefficients on α, β, and φ are weighted to give a representative sample. (We subsequently display these
results in Tables 5 through 9 and Figures 1 through 4).
        Two econometric assumptions support the estimates of marginal effects:
• Exogenous location: We examine short-run marginal effects of industry and location variables on the
decision to invest in Internet technology. To identify these effects, we assume that the location of an
establishment is exogenous. We argue that this assumption is supported by the (ex-ante) unexpected
rapid diffusion of the Internet, as well as by a regression on a subset of the sample.
        For one, this assumption is plausible. As noted in many contemporary accounts, the widespread
diffusion of the Internet took most commercial establishments by surprise. Thus, firms did not make
establishment-location decisions in anticipation of the Internet. In this study we observe short-run
adoption decisions five years into the diffusion of the Internet, before medium and large establishments
had time to relocate. That is to say, unlike prior research that has examined the relationship between
information technology and economic geography, we have a “natural experiment.” The technology was
new and unexpected, so establishment location is exogenous with respect to technology use.
        We can test this assumption directly by comparing results between our entire sample of
establishments and a special subsample of establishments that (we are certain) fixed their locations prior
to 1995 when the commercial Internet became available to most businesses. Since we find that the key
estimates do not differ between these two samples, we infer that the potential endogeneity of
establishment locations does not alter our inferences about the influence of location on adoption of
Internet technology.
• Simultaneity bias: Our base econometric specification assumes that the adoption decision of one
establishment is independent of every other. This assumption is questionable for multi-establishment
firms in which a central executive decision maker (e.g., a CIO) possibly coordinates the choice to adopt
or not adopt for each establishment under his domain. Depending on a wide variety of factors, adoption
decisions at establishments from the same organization could be either substitutes or complements for
one another in use. While understanding that this relationship is of independent interest, it also lies


21
  Harte Hanks used two surveys. One asked for more details on IT use than the other. We interact the long
survey dummy variable with time. See Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein (2002) for detail.

                                                                                                            10
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                           Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

outside the scope of this study. Here, we are concerned that simultaneity influences the coefficient of
interest, the estimate of location on adoption at each establishment.
         We address these concerns directly by characterizing the decisions of related establishments at
other locations in a reduced form, then measuring whether this alters the estimate of the coefficient on
location, while instrumenting for decisions elsewhere. Our focus will be on whether our inferences
about the influence of location on adoption of Internet technology are robust to introducing simultaneity
into the estimation. We find that, no matter how we measure it, our key results do not change.
                              3.2. Identifying participation and enhancement
         As a GPT, Internet technology is employed in many different uses and applications. Our sample
includes at least twenty different types of Internet technology, from basic access to software for TCP/IP-
based Enterprise Resource Planning. Moreover, there are considerable differences in the applications
used across establishments.
         Identifying participation was more straightforward than identifying enhancement. We define
participation by an establishment that has basic Internet access or has made any type of frontier
investment.22 The establishment survey gives plenty of information about these activities, so we identify
participation with confidence.
         In contrast, enhancement activity is less transparent in the survey. We look for indications that
an establishment must have made investments that involved frontier technologies or substantial co-
invention. Most often, these technologies involved inter-organization communication and/or substantial
changes to business processes. We identify enhancement from the presence of substantial investments in
e-commerce or e-business applications. The threshold for “substantial” is necessarily arbitrary within a
range.23 To be clear, the investments we consider go beyond the downstream interactions with
consumers that are traditionally thought of as retail e-commerce. They often involve upstream
communication with suppliers, and/or new methods for organizing production, procurement, and sales
practices. We look for commitment to two or more of the following projects: Internet-based enterprise
resource planning or TCP/IP-based applications in customer service, education, extranet, publications,
purchasing or technical support.24


22
   To be counted as participating in the Internet, an establishment must engage in two or more of the following
activities: (1) have an Internet service provider; (2) indicate it has basic access; (3) use commerce, customer
service, education, extranet, homepage, publications, purchasing or technical support; (4) use the Internet for
research or have an intranet or email based on TCP/IP protocols; (5) indicate there are Internet users or Internet
developers on site; or (6) outsource some Internet activities. We looked for two or more activities to guard against
“false positives.” This was a minor issue as the vast majority of positive responses involved use of more than one
of these criteria.
23
   We tested slight variations on this threshold and did not find qualitatively different results.
24
   In brief, an establishment is counted as enhancing business processes when two or more hold: (1) the
establishment uses two or more languages commonly used for web applications, such as Active-X, Java, CGI,
Perl, VB Script, or XML; (2) the establishment has over five Internet developers; (3) the establishment has two or
more “e-business” applications such as customer service, education, extranet, publications, purchasing, or

                                                                                                                 11
       Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                           Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                 3.3. Descriptive statistics
               To obtain a representative sample, we compared the number of establishments in our database
      to the number of establishments in the Census. We calculated the total number of establishments with
      more than 50 employees in the Census Bureau’s 1999 County Business Patterns data and the number of
      establishments in our database for each two-digit NAICS code in each location.25 We then calculated
      the total number in each location. This provides the basis for our weighting. The weight for a given
      NAICS in a given location is


      Total # of census establishments in location − NAICS       Total # of establishments in our data in location
(2)                                                        ⋅
          Total # of census establishments in location       Total # of establishments in our data in location − NAICS


               Each location-NAICS is given its weighting from its actual frequency in the Census. In other
      words, if our data under samples a given two-digit NAICS at a location relative to the Census then each
      observation in that NAICS-location is given more importance. In Appendix Table A.1, we compare our
      sample to the Census data.
               In Table 2, we present average rates for participation and enhancement for the United States.
      Participation by establishments within the sample is at 80.7% (see Unweighted Average in Table 2).
      The sample underrepresents adopters. Our estimate of the economy-wide distribution, using the true
      distribution of establishments from the Census, is 88.6% (see Weighted Average in Table 2).
      Enhancement has been undertaken by 11.2% of our sample and 12.6% of the true distribution.


                        4. The dispersion of participation and enhancement
               In this section, we argue that there is considerable variation across locations in the propensity to
      adopt Internet technologies. Our results in Table 3 show participation and enhancement rates across
      Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) 26 of varying size in the United States. Because there has been
      little prior work on variation in use of the Internet by business, these descriptive findings are not widely

      technical support; (4) the establishment reports LAN software that performs one of several functions: e-commerce,
      enterprise resource planning, web development, or web server; (5) the establishment has an Internet server that is a
      UNIX workstation or server, mainframe, or minicomputer, or has five or more PC servers, or has Internet storage
      greater than twenty gigabytes; (6) the establishment answers three or more questions related to Internet server
      software, Internet/web software, or intranet applications. For a more precise description of some exceptional cases,
      see the appendix to Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein (2002).
      25
         We use 50 employees because potential differences between different times for taking the survey mean that
      firms could grow after the Census and therefore be in the CI database. It was necessary to be inclusive for the
      weighting because some small rural areas had less than three firms in both the Census and the CI database; and
      therefore if one firm grew from the time of the Census to the time of the CI survey, the weightings would be
      difficult to interpret. The results are robust to weighting by firms with more than 100 employees in the Census and
      those with more than 25 employees. This is not surprising given the high correlation between these values.




                                                                                                                      12
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                          Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

appreciated. In a previous work (Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein 2002), we contrasted them with
other studies of the geographic variation in household use of the Internet and infrastructure deployment.
We reproduce it here because, on a broad level, this table motivates the present study. Table 3 presents
sizable differences in participation and enhancement adoption between large MSAs, medium MSAs,
small MSAs and rural areas. On the surface, this evidence supports either urban density theory or
industry composition theory. We see that large MSAs have very high participation rates, averaging
90.4%. Participation rates in medium-sized MSAs and rural areas are lower at 84.9% and 85.1%,
respectively. In small MSAs the participation rates are even lower, 75.5% on average.
        The disparities in enhancement adoption rates are even greater (again, see Table 3). Large
MSAs have relatively high adoption rates, with an average of 14.7%. In medium MSAs, adoption
averages 11.2%. In small MSAs the rates are even lower, 9.9% on average. Average adoption rates in
large MSAs are almost one-third greater than in medium MSAs. Once again, these averages suggest that
urban density theory or industry composition theory may hold. Clearly there is considerable variation in
adoption propensity by city size.
        There is also variance in adoption propensity within the subset of large MSAs. In Tables 4a
and 4b, we list the participation and enhancement estimates for MSAs with over one million people, in
order of highest to lowest adoption rates.27 As we do in all of our tables, we list the standard errors and
number of observations to identify the degree of statistical confidence in the estimates.28 (For
comparison, Tables 4a and 4b also list the marginal effect of location on adoption, which we will
discuss later.)
        In Table 4a, we show that participation is high in major urban locations. Virtually all
establishments in the major urban areas are participating. Of the forty-nine MSAs, thirty-five are above
90%. All but five are within a 95% confidence interval of 90%. Nevertheless there are large differences
between metropolitan areas at the extremes.
        In Table 4b, the top ten MSAs that adopted enhancement include a set of areas that partially
overlaps with the list in Table 4a. (Five of the top ten are also in the top ten for participation.) Again,
the differences between the lowest adopting areas and the highest adopting areas are substantial. The
considerable variation in adoption propensity by city size and among cities of the same size illustrated in
Table 3 and Tables 4a and 4b, respectively, motivated this study. We next explore some potential
causes for this variation.

26
   From this point forward, MSAs with populations greater than 1 million will be referred to as large MSAs, those
with between 250,000 and 999,999 will be medium MSAs, those with less than 250,000 will be small MSAs, and
non-MSA areas will be called rural.
27
   When two or more MSAs are part of the same urban environment, the census combines them into CMSAs, or
Consolidated Metropolitan Areas. For example the Dallas-Fort Worth CMSA contains both Dallas and Forth
Worth. In Table 4, we present the CMSA results rather than the individual MSA results when an MSA is part of a
CMSA.
28
   These are computed using the delta method.

                                                                                                              13
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                        Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet



             5. The Marginal Impact of Location on Internet Adoption
        In this section, we estimate equation (1), while focusing on testing between global village and
urban density theories. We weight observations by the inverse probability that an establishment will
appear in our sample. To be precise, the weight for each observation is the total number of
establishments in a state/NAICS in Census County Business Patterns data divided by the number of
establishments in the state/NAICS in our sample multiplied by controls for sampling the same
establishment twice.
        In Table 5, we show the roles of population and density in the adoption decision. Part A
presents the coefficients of the probit regressions. Part B presents the marginal effects. All probit
regressions include dummy variables for three-digit NAICS, the month the data were collected, survey
type, survey type interacted with month, and whether or not the establishment was part of a multi-
establishment firm. Employment and employment squared were also included as controls. Population
was measured at the MSA level and density at the county level. For columns 1 and 5, we use rural state
areas for the base. For columns 2, 3, 6, and 7, we include a “rural area” dummy for rural areas, since no
meaningful population figures exist for these areas. In columns 4 and 8 we include population density
for all urban and rural areas using low-density areas as the base.
                                   5.1 The marginal impact of location
        From Table 5, it is clear there is no support for the urban density theory in participation.
Controlling for industry and firm characteristics, location size and density have little impact on the
decision to adopt at the participation level. If anything, the effects of location size and density support
global village theory, but the impact of geography is of limited economic and statistical significance. In
column 1, we show that medium and large MSAs are 0.5% to 1.0% less likely to have adopted
participation by the end of 2000. However, the effect is only significantly different from rural areas for
medium MSAs. Moreover, this effect is only of marginal economic significance as participation rates
average 88.6%.
        In column 2, we identify the effects of size through a variable that captures the effects of
increases in population in urban areas. Increases in population size do not increase the probability of
participation. While not statistically significant, the coefficient suggests a possible decrease in the
probability of participation. In column 3 we include a squared population term. In this formulation, the
linear term remains statistically insignificant, while the squared term is significant, albeit very small.
This model implies that the effects of population will turn negative once urban areas exceed 7.039
million, a threshold that is larger than all but the five largest urban areas. In column 4 we include
dummies for population density. This alternative specification gives very similar results. Variation in



                                                                                                              14
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                            Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

population density does not affect participation by more than 1%, and it is always statistically
insignificant.
         In contrast to participation, the effects of population size and density on enhancement support
urban density theory. Column 5 in part B of Table 5 shows that establishments in medium and large
MSAs adopt enhancement at a rate 0.8% to 1.1% higher than rural areas. Column 8 shows that
establishments in medium and large MSAs adopt enhancement at a rate 1.0% to 1.5% more. All of these
effects are statistically significant. They are economically significant in light of the average
enhancement rates of 12.6%. While column 6 suggests that a linear population term has little effect on
enhancement, column 7 shows that population will have a statistically and economically significant
positive effect for all MSAs below 8.8 million in size (all but New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago).
         Together these results support the key prediction of GPT theory about the comparative
relationship between complexity of application and geographic variance in use. The probability that an
establishment adopts the Internet for enhancement is more sensitive to geographic variation in density
than the similar probability for participation. We interpret this as evidence that the applications more
dependent on third-party support and complementary services are most costly to deploy in less dense
locations.
         Variance in the role of location varies by city size. In Figures 1 and 2 we graph the marginal
effect of location in the baseline probit in model (1) to reinforce the results of Table 5.29 We divide
locations into four types: large MSAs, medium MSAs, small MSAs, and statewide rural (non-MSA)
regions. We plot the kernel density estimates of the effects of location on participation and
enhancement, respectively.30 We use Epanachnikov kernels with “optimal” bandwidths.
         In Figure 1 small MSAs and rural areas have a fatter right tail, while the density for large MSAs
reaches its peak slightly below any of the three other classes of geographic areas. Although the
distributions of each MSA size are roughly centered in the same place, the plot shows that,
comparatively, the large MSAs lave less variance in adoption of participation than the other MSAs,
especial the small MSAs. In all, this figure provides further support for global village theory: Increases
in local population size and density do not increase the likelihood of participation adoption. If anything,
they lower it.
         In Figure 2, the density estimate for large MSAs stochastically dominates those for small
MSAs, medium MSAs, and rural areas. The center peak of the large MSAs’ distribution is obviously at
a higher value than the others. However, it is also apparent that the variance of enhancement adoption
within large MSAs and rural areas is less than that within small and medium MSAs. This figure



29
   This probit is not depicted in any table. We identify the effects of population size and density directly through
the location-specific dummy variables.
30
   The omitted MSA is San Jose, the top MSA in adoption of enhancement.

                                                                                                                       15
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

provides a visual depiction of the results in Table 5 that urban density theory better describes the
geographic diffusion of enhancement than global village theory.
        Despite these results it is important to keep in mind our previous discussion of adoption and
participation diffusion patterns in large MSAs (see Table 4), which shows that the variance of adoption
rates within large MSAs is great. This is not immediately observable from Figures 1and 2 because there
is even more variance in the small MSAs, medium MSAs and rural areas.
        Table 6 provides summary statistics on the marginal effects of the same regressions used for
Figures 1 and 2. Again, the results show that establishments in larger MSAs are less likely to adopt
participation and more likely to adopt enhancement.
        We conducted a number of robustness checks on our results. As noted, we were concerned that
establishment location decisions might be correlated with improvements in communications technology.
To control for this potential source of endogeneity, we re-estimated the model using only establishments
that had been added to the HH database prior to 1995, the year in which Internet technology began to
diffuse widely to businesses. Although this restricted the size of our sample substantially (to 23,436
observations), the basic results remain the same. The correlation coefficients between our baseline
marginal effects and those using pre-1995 data are 0.829 for participation and 0.997 for enhancement.
Qualitative results did not change.
        We tried a number of other robustness checks. In order to ensure our results were not driven by
omitted variables, we experimented with a variety of different specifications, using different location
variables (e.g., CMSA dummies), different firm controls (e.g., revenue, private/public), and alternative
measures of population size and density. To ensure our results were not a function of the particular
weighting scheme used, we tried weighting the probit regressions by three-digit NAICS/states and two-
digit NAICS/MSAs, as well as not weighting at all. In all cases the results remained qualitatively the
same; the correlation coefficients between our baseline coefficient estimates and the alternative
specifications were between 0.88 and 0.95 for participation and 0.78 and 0.90 for enhancement.31
                               5.2 Location and multi-establishment firms
        Multi-establishment firms often adopt new communication technologies at some, but not all, of
their establishments. Multi-establishment firms choose to locate Internet technology in the locations that
are the most cost-effective; this implies that the effects of greater population size and density (urban
density) will be more important to adoption decisions for establishments that are part of multi-

31
  We also explored whether establishment differences across geographic locations drive our results. Though
unobservable establishment differences could play a role, we were unable to uncover any pronounced observable
establishment differences. Using weighted data, establishments in large MSAs are larger (12.8% of establishments
have >500 employees versus 9.0% for small MSAs and 9.9% for rural areas) and more likely to be multi-
establishment (48.7% multi-establishment versus 43.9% for small MSAs and 33.4% for non-MSAs). When using
unweighted data much of the difference disappears (12.7% of establishments in large MSAs >500 employees
versus 12.1% in small MSAs 13.4% in rural areas; 46.3% of establishments in large MSAs multi-establishment
versus 46.8% in small MSAs and 40.8% in rural areas).

                                                                                                             16
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                           Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

establishments firms. This will be particularly true for complex enhancement technologies, if co-
invention costs are lower for firms in locations with better local support. In this section, we
systematically examine how multi-establishment status changes the marginal returns to location. We
find the results to be in the expected direction, but not sufficiently large to alter the evidence for or
against urban density or global village theory.32
         First, we show that multi-establishment status does predict adoption. The results in Tables 7a
and 7b support the hypothesis that the effects of greater population size and density are larger (more
positive) if the establishment is part of a multi-establishment firm. Equivalently, the effects of smaller
population size and density are greater for single-establishment firms. This is particularly true for
enhancement technologies.
         Column 1 of Table 7b shows that when a multi-establishment dummy is interacted with MSA
dummies the non-interacted medium and large MSA dummies now both have a statistically significant
marginal effect of –1.3% and –1.0% respectively. There is no statistically or economically significant
effect in the interaction terms themselves. When multi-establishment is interacted with population, there
is a statistically significant but small marginal impact of 0.042% per 100,000-person increase in
population.33 The effect of population itself has a more negative impact than in Table 5.34 Similar results
hold when using population density rather than size.
         The economic significance of multi-establishment is larger for enhancement. Interactions of
multi-establishment dummies with population size and density weaken the positive effects of non-
interacted population variables. In many cases marginal effects become smaller or less statistically
significant. In all the columns, the interaction terms suggest that the effects of population size and
density are greater for multi-establishment firms.
         The economic effects can be substantial. Columns 5 and 8 suggest that establishments that are
part of multi-establishment firms and are located in large MSAs or densely populated counties are 2.2%
to 2.3% more likely to adopt enhancement than stand-alone establishments in the same locations. These
marginal effects are sizable compared to typical enhancement rates of 13%. The marginal effects of
interacting multi-establishment with MSA population (in column 6) are statistically significant, but only
0.025% per 100,000 person increase in population.
         The previous discussion ignores potential simultaneity bias arising from establishment-level
analysis of adoption decisions in multi-establishment firms. We extended our statistical model to

32
   To our knowledge, this study is the first to address how multi-establishment status affects technology adoption.
Note, however, that our ability to do this comprehensively is restricted by our data. We do not observe all of an
organization’s establishments. We observe only those with more than 100 employees.
33
   This calculation is not shown in the table.
34
   These results do not reflect any collinearity between multi-establishment and urban areas. Multi-establishment
dummies had a statistically and economically significant impact in the baseline regressions in Table 5; the
marginal effect was between –2.6% and –2.8%. Moreover, the correlation between multi-establishment status and
location in an MSA is positive but small (0.0427).

                                                                                                                 17
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                       Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

include variables capturing the behavior of other establishments within the same firm. In particular, we
added variables measuring the percentage and total of other establishments within the same firm
adopting the dependent variable (i.e., participation or enhancement). Because these variables are likely
to be correlated with unobserved factors affecting the decision to adopt participation and enhancement,
we also used nonlinear instrumental variable techniques. For instruments, we used average population
and density of other establishments in the same firm. These should be correlated with adoption
decisions at the firm’s other establishments, but not at the establishment of interest.
        We first show whether our baseline estimates (without multi-establishment interactions) are
robust to the inclusion of other establishment decisions. The results in Appendix Table A.2 show the
marginal effects of probit regressions that add other establishment adoption decisions to the models in
Table 5. These regressions are performed with and without IV. These robustness checks make little
difference to the estimated relationship between population density and Internet adoption; the results of
our tests contrasting global village and urban density theory remain unchanged. Part A of Table A.2
shows that variables capturing the percentage of establishments with participation and enhancement are
positive and significant in weighted probit regressions, however their significance disappears once we
instrument in Part B of Table A.2. We interpret the probit regressions without IV as picking up
unobserved heterogeneity, which is ultimately eliminated in the IV probit regressions. The new
variables have little effect on the population marginal effects. Moreover, statistical significance of our
location variables is retained in the IV version of this model.
        Similarly, Appendix Table A.3 shows that the inclusion of the decisions of other establishments
has almost no impact on the estimates of our multi-establishment interaction models in Table 7. The
new variables have the same pattern as in Table A.2: positive and significant in probit regressions
without IV, insignificant in probit regressions with IV. We conclude that simultaneity of decisions does
not significantly bias our results. In other words, multi-establishment firms chose to disproportionately
place their Internet investments in urban locations. Though these results have statistical significance, for
purposes of understanding the relevance of global village or urban density theory the difference in
behavior is negligible.


                                     6. Industry Composition
        The differences between the average adoption rates in Table 3 and the marginal effects in Table
5 show that the effects of location on participation and enhancement fall if we include controls for
establishment size, industry, and firm status. In Table 3, large MSAs have almost a 15% higher
participation rate and 5% higher enhancement rate than small MSAs. In Table 5, locating in a large
MSA rather than a rural area reduces the probability of participation by 0.6% and increases the
probability of enhancement by 1.1%.


                                                                                                             18
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

        The large differences in adoption rates between large and small urban areas in Table 3 reflect
differences in industry composition across locations. Industry composition explains much more of the
variation in participation and enhancement rates than location does. Once industry is controlled for, the
incremental contribution of location in the probit regressions is small. This is shown in Table 8. The
pseudo-R2 of a probit for participation including only location dummies is 0.1526, whereas the pseudo-
R2 of a probit with only industry dummies is 0.2251. Adding location dummies to a probit that includes
industry dummies barely improves fit, from 0.2251 to 0.2339.
        Enhancement displays a similar pattern. Location dummies explain only 0.0347 of the variation
in enhancement, industry dummies explain 0.0591, and the combination of industry and location
dummies explains 0.0672. While there remains a great deal of unexplained variation in our results, we
conclude that an establishment’s industry explains more of the variation in Internet use than does
geographic location.
                              6.1. What does industry composition explain?
        All three theories that emphasize the importance of industry composition assert that leading
industries concentrate in large urban areas. To test this hypothesis, we separated establishments by
geographic location type (i.e., rural and small, medium, and large MSAs) and calculated the kernel
density of industry marginal effects for each type of location. The underlying marginal effects are the
same across all four types of locations. However, the densities of each marginal effect differ because of
differences in industry composition across locations. We did this for both participation and
enhancement.
        In Figure 3, we show the kernel density estimates of the marginal effects of industry by
geographic area for participation.35 Lead-user industries tend to be concentrated in large geographic
areas. The average of the marginal effects of industry in rural and small MSAs is –18.7% and –20.2%,
while the average of the marginal effects for medium and large MSAs are –18.8% and –16.9%. Except
in comparing rural and medium MSAs, these averages are significantly different from one another at the
99% level. Large MSAs tend to have more lead-user industries, even for participation.
        Figure 4 shows that lead users of enhancement are even more skewed toward large MSAs.
Rural areas and small MSAs have the highest densities along the left tail of the distribution, whereas
large and medium MSAs have higher densities along the right tail. The average marginal effect of
industry on enhancement adoption increases as location size increases: –8.0% in rural, –7.8% in small
MSAs, –7.7% in medium MSAs, and –7.4% in large MSAs. Again, these averages are all significantly
different from one another at the 1% level. The bulk of the variation in Table 3 reflects differences in

35
  All industry results are unweighted. The omitted industry is information and data processing (NAICS 514). We
use Epanachnikov kernels with bandwidth of 0.05 for participation and 0.005 for enhancement. These are wider
than “optimal” bandwidths. Optimal bandwidths fail in this case because there are thousands of observations but



                                                                                                             19
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                          Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

industry composition between small and large MSAs, rather than other location-specific benefits of
locating in large urban areas.
        We conclude that large urban areas are comprised of establishments with a disproportionate
tendency to be information intensive. To be concrete, within large MSAs, 27.5% of establishments are
in industries that are part of the top quartile of adopters, compared to 19.0% of establishments in small
MSAs. The industries in the upper quartile are traditionally information intensive, such as utilities,
finance and insurance, company headquarters, professional and scientific services, electronics
manufacturing, and wholesale trade.36 The geographic dispersion of establishments from these
industries favored large urban areas prior to the diffusion of the Internet and largely contributed to
higher rates of participation and enhancement in large urban areas.
        Two conclusions emerge. First, this supports the importance of controlling for industry
composition when testing between global village and urban density theory. Second, inferences about the
relationship between IT and economic activity are fraught with omitted variable biases in the absence of
such controls. We note that this factor is missing from all existing analysis about the geography of
Internet use.
                      6.2. Are industry and location complements or substitutes?
        The results in Table 8 and Figures 3 and 4 suggest that industry composition theory explains a
major part of establishment decisions to adopt Internet technology. However, more analysis is needed to
determine whether industry and location effects are complements or substitutes. To examine the
industry-agglomeration substitutes and complements hypotheses, we rerun the probit regressions in
Table 5 with additional variables controlling for (1) whether the establishment is in a lead-user industry
and (2) interactions of this lead user dummy with MSA-size dummies. We define lead-user industries
in one of two ways: (1) the top quartile of participation or enhancement adopters among three-digit
NAICS industries in our study or (2) the United States Department of Commerce’s (2002) top fifteen
IT-using industries as reported by Daveri and Mascotto (2002). Both measures of IT intensity have
strengths and weaknesses. The measure based on the top quartile selects on the basis of the dependent
variable; the measure from Daveri and Mascotto’s study is based on a more general measure of IT
intensity than the Internet.
        Consequently, these are not final tests. We present these results as descriptive evidence that may
support either a complement or substitute relationship between industry and location effects. To further
supplement our analysis, we later examine whether establishments in lead-user industries (defined by
high marginal effects) also tend to be located in favorable locations (locations with high marginal
effects). In other words, we examine whether “good” industries are located in “good” locations.

only eighty-one possible values as there are eighty-one relevant three-digit NAICS levels. Therefore the optimal
bandwidth does almost no smoothing.
36
   For more detail, see Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein (2002).

                                                                                                               20
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                       Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

        Using the data on lead Internet adopters, Part A of Table 9 shows that there is little evidence of
a complementary relationship between industry and location in participation; if anything, they are
substitutes. An establishment in a top quartile NAICS and a large MSA is 2.6% more likely to adopt
participation than an otherwise equivalent top quartile establishment in a rural area. However, large
MSAs are 2.8% less likely to adopt than small MSAs, though the difference is not statistically
significant. The NAICS-level controls likely explain the lack of significance of the IT-intensive industry
dummy (under both definitions). Perhaps because they are based on the Department of Commerce’s
more general measure of IT use, the industry-location interactions in Part B of Table 9 are less
significant than in Part A. However, they tell exactly the same story. An establishment in a lead-user
SIC (Standard Industrial Classification) and large MSA is no more likely to adopt participation than an
otherwise equivalent establishment in a small MSA.
        In contrast to participation, the results for enhancement in Table 9 show a strong
complementary relationship between industry and location. Part A shows that an establishment in a top
quartile NAICS and a large MSA is 20.0% more likely to adopt enhancement than an otherwise
equivalent top quartile establishment in a rural area. The difference between small MSAs and large
MSAs is even larger. Large and medium MSA establishments are equally likely to adopt enhancement.
The results based on the Department of Commerce’s more general measure of IT-intensity again are
weaker, but again tell the same general story: An establishment in a lead-user industry and a large MSA
is more likely to adopt enhancement than an otherwise equivalent establishment in a small MSA.
Moreover, the positive coefficient on the interaction of lead-user industry and large MSA is the only
statistically significant interaction in the regression. In summary, as was suggested by the industry-
agglomeration complements theory, industry and location are complements for complex applications.
        As an alternative way of examining whether industry and location effects tend to complement or
substitute one another, we compare median industries by IT use across cities. This is not an explicit test
for complementarities, but rather another way of showing whether establishments in IT-intensive
industries tend also to be located in favorable locations.
        We calculate correlations between the marginal effects of the median industry within each
urban area with those of the urban areas themselves. The results are consistent with our findings in
Table 9. For participation, the marginal contribution of the median industry in a location is uncorrelated
with the marginal contribution of the location itself (ρ =–0.0214). However, this result disguises a large
difference between large and medium MSAs on the one hand and small MSAs and rural areas on the
other. The correlation between the marginal contribution of median industry and location is
significantly positive (ρ = 0.307) for large and medium MSAs but significantly negative (ρ = –0.211)
for small MSAs and rural areas.




                                                                                                         21
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                        Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

          For larger population locations, good cities do have good industries for participation; yet for
smaller areas the opposite is true. For enhancement, there do seem to be complementarities between
cities and locations (ρ = 0.161). These complementarities do not vary much by city size. Regardless of
size, good industries are in good cities and good cities are dominated by good industries. Cities and IT-
intensity appear to be complements for enhancement, but not for participation, especially in low
population areas.
          This is consistent with the industry-agglomeration complements theory, which emphasizes
complementarity for complex applications. We interpret this complementarity as a likely result of
spillover effects in using frontier technologies. The exception is as interesting as the more general
finding. In low population areas, favorable locations likely only help adoption in firms without in-house
expertise. In that case, location and industry become substitutes. This result is potentially consistent
with industry-agglomeration substitutes theory, which is most relevant for small urban areas.


                                             7. Conclusions
          Has the Internet realized its promise of reducing the importance of location to economic
activity? In this paper, we tested competing views by examining hard data about the short-run decisions
of firms to invest in the Internet.
          By 2000, participation activities such as email and web browsing had diffused almost
everywhere. For these simple technologies, there is no evidence that urban density theory held: Industry
composition explains the higher levels of participation adoption in urban areas. Once industry
composition was controlled for, we found that the variation across locations is best explained by the
global village theory. Moreover, we found some evidence of substitution between IT-intensity and
location density: IT-intensive industries in rural locations were the most likely to adopt participation
technologies. For the technology with low adaptation costs, we find little evidence of complementarities
between industry and location.
          For complex enhancement technologies, adoption behavior is best explained by urban density
theory. We find evidence of complementarities between industry and location effects in the adoption of
enhancement: IT-intensive firms found greater benefits than other firms from pooled resources in large
cities.
          The geographic variation in use was consistent with GPT theory: enhancement costs are more
sensitive to variation in density than are participation costs. Adopters of participation faced low
technical hurdles to implementation, while adopters of enhancement faced high ones. Establishments
overcame these costs because they had experience with overcoming technical and co-invention costs,
had access to rich complementary resources through local markets, or both.



                                                                                                            22
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                        Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

        Nevertheless, our research shows that the Internet did not exacerbate geographic inequalities by
diffusing primarily to urban areas with complementary technical and knowledge resources. This is true
even for complex applications that enhance business computing processes. More precisely, there were
forces leading to concentration of complex applications in urban areas, consistent with industry
composition theory with complementarities, but these forces were not concentrated in a few cities. Users
of complex applications are widely dispersed to many industries and locations.
        Of more relevance to economic growth, the geographic pattern of adoption for enhancement is
quite understandable as an economic matter if these applications have high value and potentially high
co-invention costs, which differ depending on local conditions. In smaller MSAs and rural areas, thin
technical labor markets alone could drive up costs of operating facilities employing frontier Internet
technology. These effects are particularly pronounced for multi-establishment firms. Because the
investment is linked to competitive settings, multi-establishment organizations, if they had a choice,
would implement new business processes in the more hospitable settings of major urban areas. In
addition, multi-establishment organizations would hesitate to open their own complex Internet facilities
in rural areas until the costs are lowered. In any case, variation in the availability of complementary
resources would lead to more use of enhancement in major urban areas. Particularly for multi-
establishment organizations, the outcome is not alarming at all.
        Our findings provide several avenues for future research. First, our conclusions apply only to
medium to large establishments. We defer to future research to examine small establishments and newly
founded firms, that may face a different array of benefits, and may have diminished access to internal
resources for idiosyncratic adaptation costs. It is already apparent from existing papers that participation
is lower on average in small firms,37 so we speculate that smaller firms will be more sensitive to
geographic variation in local complementary resources than found here.
        Second, our findings suggest broadly that variations in co-invention costs across technologies
and locations shaped the diffusion of Internet technology. Research on the role of co-invention costs on
Internet diffusion has been hampered by the binary nature of the adoption decision considered in many
studies, including this one. Future work should analyze variations in firm co-invention costs,
emphasizing in particular the impact of variation in labor market conditions, spillovers, and markets for
technical support.
        Third, our findings have implications for variation in the dollar value of investment across
location and industries and the net returns from those investments. The diffusion model of adoption used
in this study implies that magnitudes of investment should follow patterns similar to the patterns for the
binary adoption decision. Hence, we speculate that the flow of investment dollars will correlate


37
 For the beginnings of such research, see Atrostic and Gates (2001) on manufacturing establishments, and
Buckley and Montes (2002) and Bitler (2002) for analysis of small business computer use.

                                                                                                           23
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                      Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

positively with the rankings of location and industries uncovered in this study. Furthermore, if this
model is correct, the investment dollars affiliated with the commercialization of the Internet were
widely dispersed throughout locations and industries in the United States. This speculation awaits
confirmation with data about investment behavior beyond adoption.




                                                                                                        24
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                     Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                            References
Atrostic, Barbara, K., and John Gates. 2001. “U.S. Productivity and Electronic Business Processes in
Manufacturing.” Working Paper #01-11. Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau.

Beardsell, M.; Henderson V. 1999. “Spatial Evolution of the Computer Industry in the USA.” European
Economic Review, 43(2), pp. 431-456.

Bitler, Marianne, P. 2002. “Computer Adoption by Small Businesses: Who Adopts?” Mimeo, Rand
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.

Bresnahan, Timothy, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 1995. “General Purpose Technologies: ‘Engines of
Growth’?” Journal of Econometrics. 65 (1): 83-108.

Bresnahan, Timothy, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin Hitt. 2002. “Information Technology, Work
Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (February): 339-376.

Buckley, Patricia, and Sabrina Montes. 2002. Main Street in the Digital Age: How Small and Medium-
sized Business Are Using the Tools of the New Economy. Department of Commerce. Available at
http://www.esa.doc.gov/reports.cfm.

Cairncross, Frances, 1997. The Death of Distance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Castells, Manuel, 2003. The Internet Galaxy, Reflections on the Internet, Business and Society. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.

Census. 2002. “Detailing Tabulations of Manufacturing E-Business Process Use in 2000.” Survey
Release from United States Department of Commerce. Available at www.census.gov/epcd/www/
ebusiness.htm.

Charles, S., M. Ives, and A. Leduc. 2002. “Embracing E-Business: Does Size Matter?” Research
Report, Statistics Canada.

Charlot, Sylvie and Gilles Duranton. 2003. “Cities and Workplace Communication: Some French
Evidence.” Mimeo, London School of Economics.

Cherry, Barbara, Alan H. Hammond, and Steve Wildman. 1999. Making Universal Service Policy:
Enhancing the Process Through Multidisciplinary Evaluation. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Chun, Hyunbae. 2003. “Information Technology and The Demand For Educated Workers:
Disentangling the Impact of Adoption Versus Use.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 85(1): 1-8.

Compaine, Benjamin. 2001. The Digital Divide: Facing a Crisis or Creating a Myth? Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Crandall, Robert and Alleman, James H. 2002. Broadband: Should We Regulate High Speed Internet
Access? AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, Brookings Institution Press: Washington
DC.

Daveri, Francesco, and Andrea Mascotto. 2002. “The IT revolution across U.S. States.” Mimeo,
IGIER.

                                                                                                     25
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                    Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet


David, Paul A. 1969. “A contribution to the Theory of Diffusion” Stanford Center for Research in
Economic Growth, Memorandum No. 71, Stanford University.

Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne, and Kenneth R. Troske. 1997. “Workers, Wages, and Technology.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 253-290.

Downes, T. and Greenstein, S., 2002, “Universal Access and Local Internet Markets in the U.S.”
Research Policy 31: 1035-1052.

Forman, Chris. 2002. The Corporate Digital Divide: Determinants of Internet Adoption. Mimeo,
Carnegie Mellon University.

Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 2002. “Digital Dispersion: An Industrial and
Geographic Census of Commercial Internet Use.” NBER Working Paper #9287.

Gaspar, Jess, and Glaeser, Edward. 1998. “Information Technology and the Future of Cities.” Journal of
Urban Economics. 43(1): 136-156.

Goolsbee, Austan and Peter Klenow. 2002. “Evidence on Learning and Network Externalities in the
Diffusion of Home Computers.” Journal of Law and Economics 45(2), pp. 317-344.

Gorman, Sean P., 2002, “Where are the Web Factories: The Urban bias of E-Business Location.”
Mimeo, Neoteric Media Inc., Arlington VA.

Greenstein, Shane, 2000. “Building and Developing the Virtual World: The Commercial Internet
Access Market.” Journal of Industrial Economics 48(4): 391-411.

Greenstein, Shane, 2003. “The Economic Geography of Internet Infrastructure in the United States,” in
(eds.) M. Caves, S. Majumdar, and I. Vogelsang, The Handbook of Telecommunications Economics.
Volume II. Elsevier.

Harris, Richard. 1998. “The Internet as a GPT: Factor Market Implications,” in E. Helpman (eds.),
General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Henry, David, and Donald Dalton. 2002. “Information Technology Industries in the New Economy.”
Chapter III in Digital Economy 2002, Department of Commerce, at
http://www.esa.doc.gov/reports.cfm.

Hitt, Lorin and Erik Brynjolfsson. 1997. “Information Technology and Internal Firm Organization: An
Exploratory Analysis.” Journal of Management Information Systems 14 (Summer): 1-101.

Hubbard, Tom. 2000. “The Demand for Monitoring Technologies: The Case of Trucking.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116 (May): 533-560.

Ireland, N. and Stoneman, P. 1986. “Technological diffusion, expectations and welfare.” Oxford
Economic Papers 38: 283-304.

Kolko, Jed. 2000. “The Death of Cities? The Death of Distance? Evidence from the Geography of
Commercial Internet Usage,” In Ingo Vogelsang and Benjamin M. Compaine (eds.), The Internet
Upheaval. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



                                                                                                    26
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                     Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

Kolko, Jed. 2002. “Silicon Mountains, Silicon Molehills, Geographic Concentration and Convergence
of Internet Industries in the US.” Information Economics and Policy 14(2): 211-232.

Krugman, Paul, 1991, Geography and Trade. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Marshall, Alfred. 1920. Principles of Economics. 8th edition. New York: Porcupine Press.

Moss, Mitchell L., and Anthony M. Townsend, 1997. “Tracking the net: using domain names to
measure the growth of the Internet in US cities.” Journal of Urban Technology 4(3): 47-60.

National Telecommunications and Information Administration. 2000a. Falling Through the net: Toward
Digital Inclusion. See http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html.

---, 2000b. “Advanced Telecommunications in Rural America, The Challenge of Bringing Broadband
Service to All Americans.” See http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html.

---, 1999. “Falling Through the Net: Defining the Digital Divide.” http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html.

---, 1998. “Falling Through the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide.”
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html.

---, 1995. “Falling Through the Net: A Survey of the ‘Have Nots’ in Rural and Urban America.”
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html.

Noll, Roger, Dina Older-Aguilar, Gregory Rosston, and Richard Ross, 2001. “The Digital Divide:
Definitions, Measurement, and Policy Issues.” Paper presented at the American Economics Association
Meetings, January 2002.

Price, Lee, and George McKittrick, 2002. “Setting the Stage: The New Economy Endures Despite
Reduced IT Investment.” in Chapter I, Digital Economy 2002, Department of Commerce, at
http://www.esa.doc.gov/reports.cfm.

Rogers, Everett, 1995. The Diffusion of Innovations. Fourth Edition. New York: Free Press.

Sinai, Todd and Joel Waldfogel. 2001. “Geography and the Internet: Is the Internet a Substitute or a
Complement for Cities?” Mimeo, Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2001. “Farm Computer Usage and Ownership Report, 07.30.01.”
Available at http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/reports/nassr/other/computer/

United States Department of Commerce. 2002. “A Nation Online: How Americans are expanding their
use of the Internet,” Joint Report from the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration and the Economics and Statistics Administration.

Zooks, Matthew. 2000a. “Internet Metrics: Using Hosts and Domain Counts to Map the Internet
Globally.” Telecommunications Policy, 24, 6/7.

Zooks, Matthew. 2000b. “The Web of Production: the Economic Geography of Commercial Internet
Content Production in the United States.” Environment and Planning 32: 411-26.




                                                                                                       27
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                        Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet


                                                Table 1
                               Predictions of Alternative Hypotheses
     Hypothesis                       Prediction                  Testable Implication
Global Village             dNB/dxi < 0                     Coefficient on rural>small MSA>
                                                             medium MSA>large MSA
Urban Density              dNB/dxi > 0                     Coefficient on rural<small MSA<
                                                             medium MSA<large MSA
General Purpose            dNB/dxi for enhancement >       (Coefficient on large MSA –
Technology                  dNB/dxi for participation      coefficient on rural/small MSA for
                                                           enhancement) > (Coefficient on
                                                           large MSA – coefficient on
                                                           rural/small MSA for participation)
Industry Composition       dNB/dxi = 0; dNB/dzi > 0        Industrial composition explains
(IC)                                                       adoption and eliminates the
                                                           measured impact of population
                                                           (density)
Industry-                  dNB/dzi > 0, dNB/dxi > 0,       Urban density theory holds and the
Agglomeration               and d2NB/ dxidzi > 0           effect of IT-intensity is increasing
Complements                                                in MSA size
Industry-                  dNB/dzi > 0, dNB/dxi > 0,       Urban density theory holds and the
Agglomeration               and d2NB/ dxidzi < 0           effect of IT-intensity is decreasing
Substitutes                                                in MSA size.

       Notes :
       NB(xi,zi,) ≡ B(xi,zi) - C(xi,zi,)
       xi describes geographic conditions such as population size and density.
       zi describes the IT-intensity of an industry.
       Testable implications describe manifestation of each theory in probit models of decision to adopt
       participation and enhancement.




                                                                                                           28
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                         Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet


                                                 Table 2
                           National Internet Adoption Rates (in percentages)
                                                         Weighted     Unweighted
                                                         Average        Average
                                         Participation    88.6%          80.7%

                                          Enhancement          12.6%              11.2%


Notes:
Source: Author’s calculations using HH database and census data.
Definitions for Participation and Enhancement given in the text. See also Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein
(2002) for further documentation.
Unweighted average uses only HH database sample.
Weights are defined by equation (2), as given in the text.




                                                                                                             29
 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                          Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet


                                               Table 3
                   Average Adoption by Size of Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)
     Population                 Average            Standard           Average             Standard      Number
                              Participation          Error          Enhancement             Error       of Areas
  Rural: Non-MSA                 85.1%               0.1%              10.6%                0.2%           49
    Small MSA:                   75.5%               0.2%               9.9%                0.3%           143
      <250,000
   Medium MSA:                   84.9%               0.2%               11.2%                0.3%          116
  250,000-1 million
    Large MSA                    90.4%               0.1%               14.7%                0.2%           57
     > 1 million

Notes:
Source: Author’s calculations using HH database and census data.
Definitions for Participation and Enhancement given in the text. See also Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein
(2002) for further documentation.
All calculations use weighted averages, where weights are defined by equation (2), as given in the text. Standard
errors are computed using the delta method.




                                                                                                                 30
            Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                  Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

            Table 4a: Participation Among Metropolitan Statistical Areas with Over One Million People
Avg.                          City                         Avg. Std. Err. Marg Marg. Std. Err. Obs. Population
Rank                                                       Rate   Rate Rank Coef.       Coef.
1      San Francisco--Oakland--San Jose, CA                96.4%    0.4%     7 0 (base)    N/A 2135 7,039,362
2      Denver--Boulder--Greeley, CO                        95.9%    0.7%    43 -0.067     0.027  940 2,581,506
3      Cleveland--Akron, OH                                94.8%    0.6%    23 -0.038     0.021 1099 2,945,831
4      Seattle--Tacoma--Bremerton, WA                      93.9%    0.5%     3 0.025      0.015 1012 3,554,760
5      Salt Lake City--Ogden, UT                           93.5%    0.8%     6 0.007      0.019  535 1,333,914
6      San Antonio, TX                                     93.3%    0.8%     1 0.035      0.021  395 1,592,383
7      Providence--Fall River--Warwick, RI--MA             93.0%    1.2%    24 -0.038     0.032  290 1,188,613
8      Grand Rapids--Muskegon--Holland, MI                 93.0%    0.7%     4 0.012      0.021  503 1,088,514
9      Minneapolis--St. Paul, MN--WI                       92.7%    0.5%    10 -0.011     0.017 1411 2,968,806
10     Los Angeles--Riverside--Orange County, CA           92.5%    0.4%    38 -0.061     0.017 4099 16,373,645
11     Kansas City, MO--KS                                 92.2%    0.6%    21 -0.035     0.025  753 1,776,062
12     Austin--San Marcos, TX                              92.1%    0.7%     2 0.033      0.026  344 1,249,763
13     Dallas--Fort Worth, TX                              92.1%    0.5%    36 -0.058     0.019 1720 5,221,801
14     Portland--Salem, OR--WA                             92.1%    0.6%     5 0.009      0.019  776 2,265,223
15     Houston--Galveston--Brazoria, TX                    91.7%    0.6%    17 -0.032     0.018 1413 4,669,571
16     Phoenix--Mesa, AZ                                   91.6%    0.7%    13 -0.022     0.018  988 3,251,876
17     Raleigh--Durham--Chapel Hill, NC                    91.6%    0.9%     9 -0.004     0.028  398 1,187,941
18     Columbus, OH                                        91.5%    0.9%    28 -0.048     0.025  574 1,540,157
19     Milwaukee--Racine, WI                               91.5%    0.7%    14 -0.023     0.023  855 1,689,572
20     San Diego, CA                                       91.5%    0.7%    32 -0.053     0.023  738 2,813,833
21     Detroit—Ann Arbor--Flint, MI                        91.4%    0.6%    42 -0.067     0.021 1621 5,456,428
22     Indianapolis, IN                                    91.3%    0.8%    22 -0.036     0.024  646 1,607,486
23     Greensboro--Winston-Salem--High Point, NC           91.1%    0.9%    18 -0.032     0.024  570 1,251,509
24     Atlanta, GA                                         90.9%    0.6%    40 -0.064     0.024 1426 4,112,198
25     Miami--Fort Lauderdale, FL                          90.9%    0.7%    35 -0.057     0.020 1010 3,876,380
26     Charlotte--Gastonia--Rock Hill, NC—SC               90.7%    0.9%    46 -0.083     0.029  618 1,499,293
27     Boston—Worcester--Lawrence, MA--NH--ME--CT          90.6%    0.5%    12 -0.022     0.015 2231 5,819,100
28     Chicago--Gary--Kenosha, IL--IN—WI                   90.5%    0.4%    27 -0.047     0.016 3431 9,157,540
29     New York—Northern NJ--Long Island, NY--NJ--CT--PA   90.5%    0.4%    30 -0.050     0.015 4775 21,199,865
30     Washington--Baltimore, DC--MD—VA--WV                90.4%    0.5%    20 -0.034     0.017 2222 7,608,070
31     Philadelphia-Wilm.-Atlantic City, PA—NJ--DE--MD     90.3%    0.5%    16 -0.031     0.017 1745 6,188,463
32     Rochester, NY                                       90.3%    1.0%    19 -0.033     0.028  373 1,098,201
33     Hartford, CT                                        90.2%    0.9%    15 -0.024     0.027  500 1,183,110
34     Oklahoma City, OK                                   90.2%    1.1%     8 -0.002     0.024  339 1,083,346
35     Memphis, TN--AR--MS                                 90.0%    1.0%    26 -0.045     0.027  437 1,135,614
36     Louisville, KY--IN                                  89.9%    1.0%    25 -0.044     0.027  448 1,025,598
37     Cincinnati--Hamilton, OH--KY—IN                     89.7%    0.8%    41 -0.066     0.024  772 1,979,202
38     St. Louis, MO--IL                                   89.7%    0.7%    11 -0.020     0.020  936 2,603,607
39     Pittsburgh, PA                                      89.1%    0.8%    34 -0.056     0.023  727 2,358,695
40     Buffalo--Niagara Falls, NY                          88.5%    1.1%    31 -0.051     0.030  393 1,170,111
41     Tampa--St. Petersburg--Clearwater, FL               88.4%    0.9%    33 -0.054     0.021  812 2,395,997
42     Jacksonville, FL                                    87.6%    1.3%    47 -0.094     0.032  373 1,100,491
43     Las Vegas, NV--AZ                                   87.2%    1.2%    48 -0.106     0.030  417 1,563,282
44     Sacramento--Yolo, CA                                87.0%    1.2%    45 -0.070     0.034  427 1,796,857
45     Norfolk--Virginia Beach--Newport News, VA--NC       86.9%    1.2%    49 -0.110     0.032  374 1,569,541
46     New Orleans, LA                                     86.0%    1.1%    37    -0.06   0.031  386 1,337,726
47     West Palm Beach--Boca Raton, FL                     85.9%    1.2%    29 -0.049     0.029  299 1,131,184
48     Orlando, FL                                         85.5%    1.0%    44 -0.067     0.025  622 1,644,561
49     Nashville, TN                                       84.6%    1.1%    39 -0.062     0.028  466 1,231,311


                                                                                                             31
            Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                  Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

            Table 4b: Enhancement Among Metropolitan Statistical Areas with Over One Million People
Avg.                          City                        Avg. Std. Err. Marg Marg. Std. Err.       Obs.     Population
Rank                                                      Rate   Rate Rank Coef.       Coef.
1      Denver—Boulder--Greeley, CO                        18.3%    1.3%     3 0.016     0.015          940     2,581,506
2      San Francisco--Oakland--San Jose, CA               17.0%    0.9%    15 0 (base)    N/A         2135     7,039,362
3      Salt Lake City--Ogden, UT                          16.7%    1.7%     6 0.013     0.017          535     1,333,914
4      Minneapolis--St. Paul, MN--WI                      15.9%    1.0%    10 0.003     0.012         1411     2,968,806
5      Houston--Galveston--Brazoria, TX                   15.7%    1.0%    11 0.003     0.012         1413     4,669,571
6      Atlanta, GA                                        15.4%    1.0%    26 -0.008    0.011         1426     4,112,198
7      Oklahoma City, OK                                  15.4%    2.0%     2 0.020     0.021          339     1,083,346
8      Dallas--Fort Worth, TX                             15.3%    0.9%    19 -0.003    0.011         1720     5,221,801
9      San Antonio, TX                                    15.3%    1.9%     4 0.013     0.020          395     1,592,383
10     Portland--Salem, OR--WA                            15.1%    1.3%     5 0.013     0.019          776     2,265,223
11     Providence--Fall River—Warwick, RI--MA             14.9%    2.2%     7 0.010     0.024          290     1,188,613
12     Austin--San Marcos, TX                             14.7%    1.9%    27 -0.009    0.016          344     1,249,763
13     Cleveland--Akron, OH                               14.7%    1.2%    21 -0.004    0.014         1099     2,945,831
14     Tampa--St. Petersburg—Clearwater, FL               14.6%    1.3%     8 0.009     0.015          812     2,395,997
15     Memphis, TN--AR--MS                                14.5%    1.8%    14 0.002     0.021          437     1,135,614
16     Seattle--Tacoma--Bremerton, WA                     14.5%    1.2%    16 -0.002    0.012         1012     3,554,760
17     Hartford, CT                                       14.4%    1.6%    25 -0.008    0.016          500     1,183,110
18     San Diego, CA                                      14.3%    1.3%    23 -0.005    0.014          738     2,813,833
19     Cincinnati--Hamilton, OH—KY--IN                    14.2%    1.3%    24 -0.005    0.014          772     1,979,202
20     Washington--Baltimore, DC—MD—VA--WV                14.2%    0.8%    22 -0.005    0.010         2222     7,608,070
21     Chicago--Gary--Kenosha, IL—IN--WI                  14.1%    0.7%    17 -0.002    0.009         3431     9,157,540
22     Rochester, NY                                      14.1%    1.9%    18 -0.003    0.018          373     1,098,201
23     Boston--Worcester--Lawrence, MA--NH--ME--CT        13.9%    0.8%    20 -0.004    0.011         2231     5,819,100
24     Detroit--Ann Arbor--Flint, MI                      13.8%    0.9%    39 -0.016    0.010         1621     5,456,428
25     Kansas City, MO--KS                                13.7%    1.3%    35 -0.014    0.013          753     1,776,062
26     Raleigh--Durham--Chapel Hill, NC                   13.7%    1.7%    31 -0.012    0.017          398     1,187,941
27     Pittsburgh, PA                                     13.6%    1.3%    13 0.003     0.015          727     2,358,695
28     Indianapolis, IN                                   13.6%    1.4%    41 -0.019    0.014          646     1,607,486
29     Charlotte—Gastonia--Rock Hill, NC--SC              13.6%    1.5%    29 -0.010    0.014          618     1,499,293
30     West Palm Beach--Boca Raton, FL                    13.6%    2.0%    12 0.003     0.025          299     1,131,184
31     Los Angeles--Riverside—Orange County, CA           13.5%    0.6%    37 -0.015    0.008         4099    16,373,645
32     Miami—Fort Lauderdale, FL                          13.5%    1.1%    33 -0.013    0.011         1010     3,876,380
33     New York--Northern NJ--Long Island, NY-NJ-CT-PA    13.5%    0.6%    36 -0.015    0.008         4775    21,199,865
34     Philadelphia-Wilm.-Atlantic City, PA--NJ--DE--MD   13.3%    0.9%    44 -0.021    0.009         1745     6,188,463
35     St. Louis, MO--IL                                  13.2%    1.2%    28 -0.009    0.013          936     2,603,607
36     Louisville, KY--IN                                 13.2%    1.6%     9 0.006     0.024          448     1,025,598
37     Columbus, OH                                       13.0%    1.5%    30 -0.011    0.018          574     1,540,157
38     Buffalo—Niagara Falls, NY                          12.9%    1.7%    42 -0.019    0.014          393     1,170,111
39     Phoenix—Mesa, AZ                                   12.4%    1.1%    34 -0.014    0.012          988     3,251,876
40     Greensboro—Winston-Salem—High Point, NC            12.2%    1.4%    43 -0.020    0.015          570     1,251,509
41     Grand Rapids--Muskegon—Holland, MI                 12.0%    1.5%    47 -0.031    0.012          503     1,088,514
42     New Orleans, LA                                    11.9%    1.7%    40 -0.018    0.016          386     1,337,726
43     Milwaukee--Racine, WI                              11.7%    1.2%    38 -0.016    0.014          855     1,689,572
44     Nashville, TN                                      11.7%    1.5%    32 -0.012    0.016          466     1,231,311
45     Jacksonville, FL                                   11.3%    1.7%    48 -0.034    0.014          373     1,100,491
46     Sacramento--Yolo, CA                               11.8%    1.6%     1 0.041     0.050          427     1,796,857
47     Norfolk--Virginia Beach—Newport News, VA--NC       10.8%    1.7%    45 -0.021    0.017          374     1,569,541
48     Orlando, FL                                        10.5%    1.3%    46 -0.027    0.012          622     1,644,561
49     Las Vegas, NV--AZ                                   9.0%    1.4%    49 -0.043    0.012          417     1,563,282


                                                                                                              32
              Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                            Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                       Table 5
                Effect of Population Size and Density on Adoption of Participation and Enhancement
                                           (Standard errors in parentheses)
                                                  Participation                                         Enhancement
                                (1)         (2)        (3)              (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)              (8)
               Small MSA        0.0095                                              0.0198
A.                              (0.0285)                                            (0.0350)
               Medium MSA       -0.0491                                             0.0449
Coefficients                    (0.0227)*                                           (0.0265)+
from         Large MSA          -0.0262                                             0.0632
(Weighted)                      (0.0201)                                            (0.0228)**
Probit       MSA Population                 -3.95e-09    1.36e-08                                -8.80e-10    2.10e-08
Regressions                                 (3.80e-09)   (1.02e-08)                              (3.24e-09)   (1.15e-08)+
               MSA Population                            -1.94e-15                                            -2.39e-15
               Squared                                   (1.13e-15)+                                          (1.24e-15)+
               Medium-Low                                               -0.0170                                             0.0275
               Density                                                  (0.0194)                                            (0.0224)
               Medium-High                                              -0.0282                                             0.0860
               Density                                                  (0.0200)                                            (0.0244)**
               High Density                                             -0.0177                                             0.0577
                                                                        (0.0224)                                            (0.0224)*

               Log Likelihood   -33470.6    -33472.1     -33469.3       -33473.5    -28694.7     -28696.9     -28693.1      -28688.2
               Pseudo R2        0.2252      0.2252       0.2252         0.2251      0.0593       0.0592       0.0593        0.0595
                                              Participation                                           Enhancement
                              (1)       (2)        (3)                  (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
B.             Small MSA      0.0021                                                0.0035
                              (0.0064)                                              (0.0062)
Marginal       Medium MSA     -0.011                                                0.008
Effects                       (0.0052)*                                             (0.0048)+
from           Large MSA      -0.0058                                               0.0110
(Weighted)                    (0.0045)                                              (0.0039)**
Probit         MSA Population           -8.89e-10 3.06e-09                                     -1.54e-10 3.67e-09
Regressions                             (8.56e-10) (2.30e-09)                                  (5.67e-10) (2.02e-09)+
               MSA                                 -4.37e-16                                              -4.18e-16
               Population
                                                   (2.55e-16)+                                                (2.17e-16)+
               Squared
               Medium-Low                                               -0.00385                                            0.00485
               Density                                                  (0.00440)                                           (0.00399)
               Medium-High                                              -0.00639                                            0.0154
               Density                                                  (0.00456)                                           (0.00450)**
               High Density                                             -0.00400                                            0.0103
                                                                        (0.00508)                                           (0.00406)*
      Notes:
      All regressions include dummy variables for 3-digits NAICS, month that data was collected, and whether it was a multi-
      establishment firm. Employment and Employment squared were also included as controls. Population was measured at
      the MSA level.Standard errors are in parentheses.
      (1) & (5) Non-MSA is the base for these regressions.
      (2), (3), (6), & (7) Since no meaningful population data was available for non-MSA areas, we include a “rural area”
      dummy variable in each of these regressions. The population and density variables were interacted with (1-RURAL).
      Therefore the coefficients on the population variables do not include non-MSA areas.
      (4) & (8) Low density is the base for these regressions. One quarter of the observations fit into each density type.
      +significant at 90% confidence level
      *significant at 95% confidence level
      **significant at 99% confidence level



                                                                                                                                  33
      Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                        Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                 Table 6
                        Average and Median Location Effects, by Type of Location
      Type              N    Median    Average    Std. Dev. Median         Average              Std. Dev.
                             Particip. Particip. Particip. Enhance. Enhance.                    Enhance.
                             Marginal on          Marginal Marginal Marginal                    Marginal
                             Effect    Marginal Effect         Effect      Effect               Effect
                                       Effect
      Rural      49           -0.029        -0.0292      0.0486       -0.020         -0.0135    0.0274
      Small MSA  130*          -0.0225      -0.0271      0.0772       -0.018         -0.00708   0.0495
      Medium MSA 95           -0.046        -0.0535      0.0579       -0.012         -0.0111    0.0313
      Large MSA  48           -0.0445       -0.0397      0.0324       -0.008         -0.00652   0.0150

Notes:
Author’s calculation using estimates from probit models shown in Figures 1 and 2.
*
  N=127 for enhancement because three small MSAs perfectly predicted non-adoption.




                                                                                                             34
            Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                           Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                        Table 7a
                 Effect of Population Size and Density on Adoption of Participation and Enhancement,
                     Includes Multi-Establishment/Population Interactions: Coefficient Estimates
                                            (Standard errors in parenthesis)
                                         Participation                                         Enhancement
                          (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)              (8)
Multi-Est. dummy        -.1511      -0.1661         -0.1661      -0.1509      -0.0578     -0.0014       -0.0038         -0.0463
                     (0.0339)**   (0.0211)**      (0.0210)**   (0.0289)**    (0.0404)     (0.0210)      (0.0212)        (0.0334)
Small MSA               0.0247                                                 0.0013
                       (0.0430)                                              (0.0492)
Medium MSA             -0.0571                                                 0.0317
                      (0.0321)+                                              (0.0342)
Large MSA              -0.0463                                                 0.0134
                      (0.0279)+                                              (0.0284)
Small MSA ×            -0.0267                                                 0.0532
Multi-Est. dummy       (0.0570)                                              (0.0696)
Medium MSA ×            0.0196                                                 0.0436
Multi-Est. dummy       (0.0446)                                              (0.0538)
Large MSA ×             0.0442                                                 0.1234
Multi-Est. dummy       (0.0378)                                             (0.0447)**
MSA Population                    -1.27e-08*     -3.07e-09                               -4.96e-09        2.07e-08
                                  (5.16e-09)    (9.37e-09)                               (4.08e-09)     (1.03e-08)*
MSA Population                                  -1.09e-15                                                -2.92e-15
Squared                                         (1.02e-15)                                             (1.13e-15)**
MSA Population ×                  1.86e-08**     1.82e-08**                               1.45e-08         1.44e-08
Multi-Est. dummy                  (6.38e-09)      (6.29e-09)                             (5.91e-09)*     (6.01e-09)*
Medium-Low                                                     -0.0222                                                 -0.0024
Density                                                        (0.0280)                                                (0.0294)
Medium-High                                                    -0.0212                                                 0.0574
Density                                                        (0.0286)                                                (0.0341)+
High Density                                                   -0.0619                                                 0.0059
                                                               (0.0323)+                                               (0.0289)
Medium-Low                                                     0.0132                                                  0.0760
Density × Multi-
Est.                                                           (0.0382)                                                (0.0450)+
Medium-High                                                    -0.0112                                                 0.0738
Density × Multi-
Est.                                                           (0.0386)                                                (0.0465)
High Density ×                                                 0.0961                                                  0.1238
Multi-Est.                                                     (0.0417)*                                               (0.0435)**

Log Likelihood        -33467.9     -33463.5       -33462.5     -33465.8     -28686.8      -28695.9      -28689.2       -28681.9
Pseudo R2              0.2253       0.2254         0.2254       0.2253       0.0596        0.0593         0.0595        0.0597
    Notes:
    All regressions include dummy variables for 3-digits NAICS, month that data was collected, and whether it was a multi-
    establishment firm. Employment and Employment squared were also included as controls. Population was measured at
    the MSA level.
    (1) & (5) Non-MSA is the base for these regressions.
    (2), (3), (6), & (7) Since no meaningful population data was available for non-MSA areas, we include a “rural area”
    dummy variable in each of these regressions. The population and density variables were interacted with (1-RURAL).
    Therefore the coefficients on the population variables do not include non-MSA areas.
    (4) & (8) Low density is the base for these regressions. One quarter of the observations fit into each density type.
    +significant at 90% confidence level
    *significant at 95% confidence level
    **significant at 99% confidence level




                                                                                                                          35
          Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                            Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                      Table 7b
               Effect of Population Size and Density on Adoption of Participation and Enhancement,
                      Includes Multi-Establishment/Population Interactions: Marginal Effects
                                          (Standard errors in parenthesis)
                                          Participation                                        Enhancement
                         (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)           (8)
Multi-Est. dummy      -0.0343      -0.0377            -0.0377      -0.0342     -0.0101     -0.0002     -0.0007      -0.0081
                    (0.0077)**   (0.0048) **        (0.0048) *     (0.0066)   (0.0070)     (0.0037)    (0.0037)     (0.0058)
Small MSA              0.0055                                                   0.0002
                      (0.0095)                                                (0.0086)
Medium MSA            -0.0131                                                   0.0056
                     (0.0075)+                                                (0.0061)
Large MSA             -0.0104                                                   0.0023
                     (0.0062)+                                                (0.0050)
Small MSA ×           -0.0061                                                   0.0096
Multi-Est. dummy      (0.0132)                                                (0.0130)
Medium MSA ×           0.0043                                                   0.0078
Multi-Est. dummy      (0.0099)                                                (0.0098)
Large MSA ×            0.0099                                                 0.0224**
Multi-Est. dummy      (0.0083)                                                (0.0084)
MSA Population                    -2.85e-09        -6.91e-10                              -8.68e-10     3.63e-09
                                 (1.17e-09)*       (2.11e-09)                             (7.15e-10)  (1.81e-09)*
MSA Population                                     -2.44e-16                                           -5.12e-16
Squared                                            (2.30e-16)                                        (1.98e-16)**
MSA Population ×                   4.19e-09          4.09e-09                             2.53e-09       2.52e-09
Multi-Est. dummy                 (1.44e-09)**     (1.42e-09) **                          (1.03e-09)* (1.05e-09)*
Medium-Low                                                        -0.0050                                           -0.0004
Density                                                           (0.0064)                                          (0.0051)
Medium-High                                                       -0.0048                                           0.0102
Density                                                           (0.0065)                                          (0.0062)+
High Density                                                      -0.0141                                           0.0010
                                                                  (0.0075)+                                         (0.0051)
Medium-Low                                                        0.0030                                            0.0138
Density × Multi-
Est.                                                              (0.0085)                                          (0.0085)
Medium-High                                                       -0.0025                                           0.0134
Density × Multi-
Est.                                                              (0.0088)                                          (0.0087)
High Density ×                                                    0.0208                                            0.0229
Multi-Est. dummy                                                  (0.0087)*                                         (0.0085)**

   Notes:
   All regressions include dummy variables for 3-digits NAICS, month that data was collected, and whether it was a multi-
   establishment firm. Employment and Employment squared were also included as controls. Population was measured at
   the MSA level.
   (1) & (5) Non-MSA is the base for these regressions.
   (2), (3), (6), & (7) Since no meaningful population data was available for non-MSA areas, we include a “rural area”
   dummy variable in each of these regressions. The population and density variables were interacted with (1-RURAL).
   Therefore the coefficients on the population variables do not include non-MSA areas.
   (4) & (8) Low density is the base for these regressions. One quarter of the observations fit into each density type.
   +significant at 90% confidence level
   *significant at 95% confidence level
   **significant at 99% confidence level




                                                                                                                        36
    Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                        Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet




                                            Table 8
            Contribution of Industry and Location to Explaining Adoption Decisions
                          Participation                     Enhancement
                          Pseudo R2      Log Likelihood     Pseudo R2      Log Likelihood
Full model                0.2339         -33093.4           0.0672         -28443.4
No MSA dummies            0.2251         -33475.0           0.0591         -28701.4
No NAICS dummies          0.1526         -36604.2           0.0347         -29434.6

      Notes:
      Source: Author’s calculation. Pseudo-R2 from full model shown in Figures 1 and 2, and subsets of coefficients
      controlling for industry and location effects.
      Cities defined by CMSA.




                                                                                                                37
                                                 Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                     Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                                        Table 9
                                                      Interaction of Industry and Location Effects
                                    A. Leading Internet Adopters (NAICS)                           B. Top IT-Using Industries (SIC)
                                  Participation                  Enhancement                   Participation               Enhancement
                           Coefficient      Marginal       Coefficient     Marginal      Coefficient     Marginal    Coefficient    Marginal
                                               Effect                        Effect                         Effect                   Effect
Small MSA                     -0.0127        -0.0029      0.0085         0.0476           -0.0175         -0.00397    -0.00153    -0.000267
                             (0.0302)        (0.0069)     (0.0062)       (0.0338)          (0.029)       (-0.0130)    (0.0405)    (0.00707)
Medium MSA                    -0.0640        -0.0147      0.0013         0.0073           -0.0569          -0.0130     0.0279     0.00494
                           (0.0241)**      (0.0056)** (0.0047)           (0.0269)        (0.0237)*      (0.00554)*    (0.0291)    (0.00521)
Large MSA                     -0.0372        -0.0083      0.0042         0.0243           -0.0409         -0.00917     0.0371     0.00646
                            (0.0214)+       (0.0048)+ (0.0040)           (0.0228)        (0.0210)+      (0.00470)+    (0.0247)    (0.00430)
Top quartile NAICS3           0.8869          0.1512      0.0390         0.2072
                             (0.7270)        (0.0906)     (0.0908)       (0.4489)
Small MSA*                    0.2791          0.0539      -0.0121        -0.0727
Top quartile NAICS3        (0.0864)**      (0.0140)** (0.0169)           (0.1062)
Medium MSA*                   0.1618          0.0335      0.0397         0.2020
Top quartile NAICS3         (0.0692)*       (0.0131)*     (0.0181)*      (0.0831)*
Large MSA*                    0.1205          0.0259      0.0382         0.1998
Top quartile NAICS3        (0.0582)**      (0.0119)** (0.0155)*          (0.0744)**
IT intense SIC                                                                            -0.0739          -0.0169     -0.0672    -0.0115
                                                                                          (0.0702)        (0.0163)    (0.0662)    (0.0112)
Small MSA*                                                                                 0.1761          0.0361      0.0917     0.0170
IT intense SIC                                                                           (0.0927)+       (0.0171)+    (0.0833)    (0.0163)
Medium MSA*                                                                                0.0683          0.0149      0.0773     0.0141
IT intense SIC                                                                            (0.0707)        (0.0149)    (0.0677)    (0.0129)
Large MSA*                                                                                 0.0996          0.0217      0.1022     0.0187
IT intense SIC                                                                            (0.0620)        (0.0130)    (0.0595)+ (0.0113)+

Log Likelihood              -33464.7       -33464.7        -28674.1      -28674.1         -33465.9        -33465.9       -28691.3     -28691.3
Pseudo R2                    0.2253         0.2253          0.0600        0.0600           0.2253          0.2253         0.0594        0.0594
Notes:
All regressions include dummy variables for 3-digits NAICS, month that data was collected, and whether it was a multi-establishment firm. Employment and
Employment squared were also included as controls. Standard errors are in parentheses. Non-MSA is the base for these regressions
+significant at 90% confidence level
*significant at 95% confidence level
**significant at 99% confidence level



                                                                                                                                                     38
      Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                           Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet




                                                   Figure 1
                     Comparison by City Size of Location Marginal Effects for Participation



                               large MSA                                    medium MSA
                               small MSA                                    rural

               15




               10




                 5




                 0
                       -.4                        -.2                          0                             .2
                                                    marginal participation rate



Notes:
Source: Author’s calculation.
Figure shows Epanachnikov kernel density estimates of the marginal effect of location on participation, by city size.
Uses baseline probit in model (1).




                                                                                                                        39
      Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                          Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                               Figure 2
                 Comparison by City Size of Location Marginal Effects for Enhancement



                        large MSA                                    medium MSA
                        small MSA                                    rural

         30




         20




         10




          0
              -.1                         0                        .1                           .2
                                              marginal enhancement rate



Notes:
Source: Author’s calculation.
Figure shows Epanachnikov kernel density estimates of the marginal effect of location on enhancement, by city size.
Uses baseline probit in model (1).




                                                                                                                      40
      Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                           Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                 Figure 3
                           Industry Marginal Effects for Participation by City Size



                        large MSA                                     medium MSA
                        small MSA                                     rural

          3




          2




          1




          0
                 -.6                  -.4                 -.2                    0                    .2
                                            marginal industry participation



Notes:
Source: Author’s calculation.
Figure shows Epanachnikov kernel density estimates of the marginal effect of industry on participation, by city size.
Uses baseline probit in model (1).




                                                                                                                        41
      Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                          Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                     Figure 4
                           Differences in Industry Marginal Effects for Enhancement


                          large MSA                                 medium MSA
                          small MSA                                 rural

         30




         20




         10




          0
                    -.1                      -.05                     0                             .05
                                          marginal industry enhancement



Notes:
Source: Author’s calculation.
Figure shows Epanachnikov kernel density estimates of the marginal effect of industry on enhancement, by city size.
Uses baseline probit in model (1).




                                                                                                                      42
       Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                       Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

            Table A1: Harte Hanks Sample Versus the Census of Business Establishments
                                                                 Sample               Census
# of Establishments with over 100 Employees                       86,879              168,372
% MSA                                                             82.5%                86.7%
% CMSA                                                            37.2%                42.5%
% >500 Employees Given Have 100 Employees                         12.7%                10.6%
% Northeast                                                       17.7%                19.6%
% Midwest                                                         27.9%                25.5%
% South                                                           34.8%                34.0%
% West                                                            19.6%                21.0%
% Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting                       0.2%                 0.1%
(NAICS = 11)
% Mining                                                           0.6%                 0.5%
(NAICS = 21)
% Utilities                                                        0.8%                 0.8%
(NAICS = 22)
% Construction                                                     2.9%                 4.1%
(NAICS = 23)
% manufacturing                                                   27.9%                20.8%
(NAICS = 31, 32, 33)
% Wholesale Trade                                                  6.0%                 4.8%
(NAICS = 42)
% Retail Trade                                                    17.1%                14.7%
(NAICS = 44, 45)
% Transportation and Warehousing                                   2.9%                 3.1%
(NAICS = 48, 49)
% Media, Telecommunications and Data Processing                    3.7%                 3.7%
(NAICS = 51)
% Finance and Insurance                                            4.5%                 4.6%
(NAICS = 52)
% Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                               0.5%                 1.0%
(NAICS = 53)
% Professional, Scientific and Technical Services                  5.2%                 5.0%
(NAICS =54)
% Management of Companies and Enterprises                          0.3%                 3.2%
(NAICS =55)
% Administrative and Support and Waste Management and              2.7%                10.2%
Remediation Services (NAICS = 56)
% Educational Services                                            0.01%                 1.2%
(NAICS = 61)
% Health Care and Social Assistance                               16.7%                12.8%
(NAICS =62)
% Arts, Entertainment and Recreation                               1.6%                 1.5%
(NAICS = 71)
% Accommodation and Food Services                                  5.5%                 5.1%
(NAICS = 72)
% Other Services (except Public Administration)                    0.9%                 2.2%
(NAICS = 81)
       Source: Author’s calculation using HH and census data.




                                                                                                        43
       Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                          Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                 Table A.2
                 Population Variable Marginal Effects from Probit Regressions in Table 5,
                  Includes Percent Participation and Enhancement Adopters within Firm
                          Model                                   Variable                       Old        New Result
                                                                  Small MSA                    0.0021         0.0021
                          Add percentage of other
                                                                  Medium MSA                  -0.0110*       -0.0112*
                          establishments adopting participation
                          to column (1)                           Large MSA                    -0.0058        -0.0063
                                                                  Pct. shallow                   N/A         0.2401**

                                                                  Small MSA                    0.0035         0.0038
                          Add percentage of other
                                                                  Medium MSA                  0.0080+        0.0081+
                          establishments adopting enhancement
                          to column (5)                           Large MSA                   0.0110**       0.0108**
                                                                  Pct. deep                      N/A         0.1026**
A. Weighted probits
without IV                                                        Medium-Low Density           -0.0039        -0.0039
                          Add percentage of other
                                                                  Medium-High Density          -0.0064        -0.0069
                          establishments adopting participation
                          to column (4)                           High Density                 -0.0040        -0.0052
                                                                  Pct. shallow                   N/A         0.1637**

                                                                  Medium-Low Density            0.0049         0.0049
                          Add percentage of other
                                                                  Medium-High Density         0.0154**       0.0152**
                          establishments adopting enhancement
                          to column (8)                           High Density                 0.0103*        0.0099*
                                                                  Pct. deep                      N/A         0.1024**

                          Add percentage of other                 Small MSA                    0.0032         0.0025
                          establishments adopting participation   Medium MSA                  -0.0072+       -0.0075+
                          to column (1) (instrument using         Large MSA                    -0.0045        -0.0051
                          average population)                     Pct. shallow                   N/A           0.0193

                          Add percentage of other                 Small MSA                    0.0095*        0.0097*
                          establishments adopting enhancement     Medium MSA                   0.0077*        0.0078*
                          to column (5) (instrument using         Large MSA                   0.0129**       0.0128**
                          average population)                     Pct. shallow                   N/A           0.0336
B. Unweighted probits
with IV#                  Add percentage of other                 Medium-Low Density           -0.0019        -0.0013
                          establishments adopting participation   Medium-High Density          -0.0012        -0.0010
                          to column (4) (instrument using         High Density                 -0.0027        -0.0028
                          average density)                        Pct. shallow                   N/A         0.1538**

                          Add percentage of other                 Medium-Low Density           0.0044         0.0042
                          establishments adopting enhancement     Medium-High Density         0.0167**       0.0171**
                          to column (8) (instrument using         High Density                0.0110**       0.0114**
                          average density)                        Pct. shallow                   N/A          -0.1604

       Notes:
       Table compares results of probit regressions with and without variables measuring behavior of other
       establishments within the same firm.
        #
          “Old” coefficients are different because probits are unweighted. Instruments are average population or
       density of locations other establishments in same firm
       +significant at 90% confidence level
       *significant at 95% confidence level
       **significant at 99% confidence level




                                                                                                               44
       Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                     Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet

                                                Table A.3
                Population Variable Marginal Effects from Probit Regressions in Table 7,
                 Includes Percent Participation and Enhancement Adopters within Firm
                      Model                         Variable                            Old      New Result
                                                    Small MSA                         0.0055       0.0042
                                                    Medium MSA                       -0.0131+     -0.0138+
                                                    Large MSA                        -0.0104+     -0.0111+
                      Add percentage of other       Small MSA * Multi-Est. dummy      -0.0061      -0.0099
                      establishments adopting       Medium MSA * Multi-Est.
                      participation to column (1)                                     0.0043        0.0054
                                                    dummy
                                                    Large MSA * Multi-Est. dummy      0.0099        0.0098
                                                    Multi-Est. dummy                -0.0343**     -0.1510**
                                                    Pct. shallow                       N/A         0.1636**

                                                    Small MSA                         0.0002        0.0005
                                                    Medium MSA                        0.0056        0.0059
                                                    Large MSA                         0.0023        0.0029
                      Add percentage of other       Small MSA * Multi-Est. dummy      0.0096        0.0096
                      establishments adopting       Medium MSA * Multi-Est.
                      enhancement to column (5)                                       0.0078        0.0071
                                                    dummy
                                                    Large MSA * Multi-Est. dummy     0.0224**      0.0205*
                                                    Multi-Est. dummy                  -0.0101     -0.0219**
                                                    Pct. deep                           N/A       0.1015**

                                                    Medium-Low Density                -0.0050       -0.0057
A. Weighted probits                                 Medium-High Density               -0.0048       -0.0058
without IV                                          High Density                     -0.0141+      -0.0145*
                                                    Medium-Low Density * Multi-
                                                                                      0.0030        0.0042
                      Add percentage of other       Est. dummy
                      establishments adopting       Medium-High Density * Multi-
                      participation to column (4)                                    -0.0025       -0.0016
                                                    Est. dummy
                                                    High Density * Multi-Est.
                                                                                     0.0208*       0.0195*
                                                    dummy
                                                    Multi-Est. dummy                  -0.0342     -0.1505**
                                                    Pct. shallow                        N/A        0.1634**

                                                    Medium-Low Density               -0.0004       -0.0001
                                                    Medium-High Density              0.0102+       0.0107+
                                                    High Density                      0.0010        0.0016
                                                    Medium-Low Density * Multi-
                                                                                      0.0138        0.0131
                      Add percentage of other       Est. dummy
                      establishments adopting       Medium-High Density * Multi-
                      enhancement to column (8)                                       0.0134        0.0117
                                                    Est. dummy
                                                    High Density * Multi-Est.
                                                                                     0.0229**      0.0207*
                                                    dummy
                                                    Multi-Est. dummy                  -0.0081     -0.0199**
                                                    Pct. deep                           N/A       0.1014**




                                                                                                      45
      Forman, Goldfarb & Greenstein                          Location and the Diffusion of the Commercial Internet


                                                       Small MSA                             0.0050         0.0041
                                                       Medium MSA                           -0.0076         -0.0081
                        Add percentage other           Large MSA                            -0.0072        -0.0077+
                        establishments adopting        Small MSA * Multi-Est. dummy         -0.0032         -0.0032
                        participation to column (1)    Medium MSA * Multi-Est.
                        (instrument using average                                            0.0011         0.0011
                                                       dummy
                        population)                    Large MSA * Multi-Est. dummy          0.0056         0.0049
                                                       Multi-Est. dummy                    -0.0315***      -0.0311+
                                                       Pct. shallow                           N/A           0.0150

                                                       Small MSA                             0.0065         0.0064
                                                       Medium MSA                            0.0029         0.0026
                        Add percentage other           Large MSA                             0.0017         0.0013
                        establishments adopting        Small MSA * Multi-Est. dummy          0.0090         0.0091
                        enhancement to column (5)      Medium MSA * Multi-Est.
                        (instrument using average                                           0.0137+        0.0140+
                                                       dummy
                        population)                    Large MSA * Multi-Est. dummy         0.0288**       0.0299**
                                                       Multi-Est. dummy                     -0.0125*        -0.0037
                                                       Pct. shallow                            N/A          -0.0904

                                                       Medium-Low Density                    -0.0016        -0.0021
B. Unweighted probits                                  Medium-High Density                   0.0023         0.0013
with IV#                                               High Density                         -0.0113*       -0.0115*
                        Add percentage other           Medium-Low Density * Multi-
                                                                                            -0.0004         0.0018
                        establishments adopting        Est. dummy
                        participation to column (4)    Medium-High Density * Multi-
                        (instrument using average                                           -0.0065         -0.0042
                                                       Est. dummy
                        density)                       High Density * Multi-Est.
                                                                                            0.0175**       0.0177**
                                                       dummy
                                                       Multi-Est. dummy                    -0.0315**      -0.1316**
                                                       Pct. shallow                           N/A          0.1384**

                                                       Medium-Low Density                   -0.0017         -0.0024
                                                       Medium-High Density                  0.0052           0.0041
                                                       High Density                         0.0000          -0.0015
                        Add percentage other           Medium-Low Density * Multi-
                                                                                            0.0159*        0.0173**
                        establishments adopting        Est. dummy
                        enhancement to column (8)      Medium-High Density * Multi-
                        (instrument using average                                           0.0279**       0.0326**
                                                       Est. dummy
                        density)                       High Density * Multi-Est.
                                                                                            0.0279**       0.0336**
                                                       dummy
                                                       Multi-Est. dummy                     -0.0113*        0.0156
                                                       Pct. shallow                           N/A           -0.2599

      Notes:
      Table compares results of probit regressions with and without variables measuring behavior of other
      establishments within the same firm.
      #
        “Old” coefficients are different because probits are unweighted. Instruments are average population or
      density of locations other establishments in same firm
      +significant at 90% confidence level
      *significant at 95% confidence level
      **significant at 99% confidence level




                                                                                                                 46
