                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      INFLATION TARGETING IN THE UNITED STATES?

                                           Marvin Goodfriend

                                          Working Paper 9981
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9981


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




The paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on Inflation Targeting, Miami, Florida, January 2003. It
benefitted from seminars at the Federal Reserve Board and the Richmond Fed, and from discussions with B.
Bernanke, A. Broaddus, R. Ferguson, B. Hetzel, R. King, D. Kohn, J. Lacker, B. McCallum, A. Meltzer, R.
Mishkin, A. Orphanides, D. Small, S. Williamson, and A. Wolman. The views expressed are the author’s
alone and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Marvin Goodfriend. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Targeting in the United States?
Marvin Goodfriend
NBER Working Paper No. 9981
September 2003
JEL No. E3, E4, E5

                                              ABSTRACT

The paper begins by tracing the origins of the case for inflation targeting in postwar US monetary

history. It describes five aspects of inflation targeting practiced implicitly by the Greenspan Fed. It

argues that (1) low long run inflation should be an explicit priority for monetary policy, (2) as a

practical matter it is not desirable for the Fed to vary its short run inflation target (3) strict inflation

targeting can be regarded as effcient constrained countercyclical stabilization policy. Finally, the

paper suggests that the Fed publicly acknowledge its implicit priority for low long run inflation, that

Congress recognize that priority, and that in return representatives of the FOMC consider

participating in a monetary policy forum to better inform the public and congressional oversight

committees about current monetary policy.


Marvin Goodfriend
Senior Vice President and Policy Advisor
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
701 East Byrd Street
Richmond, VA 23261
marvin.goodfriend@rich.frb.org
1    Introduction
In what sense can monetary policy as currently practiced by the Federal Reserve (Fed)
be characterized as inflation targeting? And what, if any, features of an inflation
targeting policy regime should the Fed adopt more formally? These are the questions
implicit in the title of this paper. US macroeconomic performance has improved greatly
since the early 1980s. The 1980s and 1990s saw two of the longest expansions in US
history and two of the mildest contractions in 1990-01 and 2001-02. The paper argues
that this success can be attributed in large part to inflation targeting policy procedures
that the Fed has adopted gradually and implicitly over the last two decades. Much
of the paper is devoted to explaining the origins of the Fed’s implicit commitment to
inflation targeting. Understanding the historical record suggests that some form of
inflation targeting is likely to remain at the core of Fed monetary policy indefinitely.
    Explicit inflation targeting is characterized by the announcement of an oﬃcial target
for the inflation rate and by an acknowledgment that low inflation is a priority for mon-
etary policy. Inflation targeting also involves enhanced transparency of the procedures
and objectives of monetary policy, and increased accountability of the central bank for
attaining those objectives.1
    To a large extent the explicit adoption of inflation targeting would merely continue
the approach to monetary policy developed under Chairmen Volcker and Greenspan.
Nevertheless, it seems worthwhile to consider whether more explicit inflation targeting
procedures could help the Fed sustain good monetary policy in the future.2 Detailed,
explicit, and transparent inflation targeting procedures have been adopted by numerous
central banks abroad to build and secure credibility for low inflation.3 The main
objection to some sort of explicit, public commitment to inflation targeting is the concern
that inflation targeting would focus the Fed too narrowly on inflation at the expense
of output and employment. Moreover, the Fed has achieved price stability and arrived
at monetary policy procedures that resemble inflation targeting by “just doing it.”
So one might argue that the Fed has little need to adopt inflation targeting formally.
Admittedly, the priority for low inflation is “in the water” at the Fed these days; but
   1
     See Bernanke and Mishkin (1997) and Meyer (2001) for discussions of explicit inflation targeting
policy procedures.
   2
     Federal Open Market Committee (1995, 1996) contain early debates on inflation targeting. Saxton
(1997, 2002) makes the case for inflation targeting. McCallum (2000) argues that the US should
formalize its monetary standard by committing to a low long run target for inflation. A consensus
among well-known monetary economists supporting a priority for low long run inflation is evident in
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1996).
   3
     See Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999), Blejer, Ize, Leone, and Werlang (2000), Haldane
(1995), King (1997), Kohn (2000), Liederman and Svensson (1995), Loayza and Soto (2002), McCallum
(1997), Neumann and von Hagen (2002), Schmitt-Hebbel and Tapia (2002), Sterne (1999), and Svensson
(2001).
on the other hand “bottling” it for the future might not be a bad idea.
    The Fed has been extraordinarily fortunate in having two remarkable chairmen since
the late 1970s who skillfully helped to turn monetary policy from a source of instability
into a major stabilizing force for the macroeconomy. It is well to remember how uniquely
qualified they were to lead the Fed. Each had decades of professional experience
observing the business cycle before becoming chairman—Volcker at the New York Fed
and Greenspan as a private business economist in New York. Each had an extensive
knowledge of financial markets and market participants from having worked in New
York.4 Each had prior experience in Washington—Volcker at Treasury and Greenspan at
the Council of Economic Advisors. And both were trained economists. Moreover, both
men personally experienced and understood as professionals the disruptive consequences
of inflation. It will be diﬃcult to find a successor to lead the Fed with all these
qualifications who can navigate the appointments process successfully.5
    A second, more fundamental reason to consider the adoption of explicit inflation
targeting is simply that in a democracy a central bank should be fully accountable for
the monetary policy that it pursues.6 Adopting inflation targeting procedures explicitly
would improve the transparency of the policy process and the ability of Congress to hold
the Fed accountable for monetary policy. For both of these reasons it is important to
distill the essence of the implict inflation targeting procedures developed under Volcker
and Greenspan and to consider how inflation targeting could be institutionalized to help
the Fed sustain its improved performance after Chairman Greenspan retires.
    The paper addresses these objectives in four parts. Section 2 describes the origins of
the case for price stability in the US by reviewing postwar monetary policy as practiced
by the Fed and enumerating the problems created by failing to make price stability
a priority. In particular, Section 2 discusses the inflationary go/stop era and the
Volcker disinflation, and describes the ways in which monetary policy as conducted
in the Greenspan era can be characterized as implicit inflation targeting. Section
3 considers arguments for and against making low long run inflation a priority, and
whether a quantitative inflation target is a good idea. Section 4 considers inflation
targeting in the short run, including complications involved in managing departures of
inflation from its long run target, the feasibility and desirability of strictly targeting a
constant inflation objective in the short run, and the relationship of inflation targeting
to countercyclical stabilization policy. Finally, Section 5 suggests how to make the
Fed’s inflation targeting procedures explicit in order to secure the commitment to low
inflation, enhance transparency, and improve the Fed’s accountability for attaining its
monetary policy objectives. A brief summary concludes the paper.
  4
    See, for instance, Martin (2000) and Woodward (2000).
  5
    See, for instance, Stevenson (2002).
  6
    See Blinder (1996).



                                                2
2       Origins of the Case for Price Stability in the US
In order to appreciate fully the rationale for inflation targeting as implicitly practiced in
the US today and why inflation targeting will likely remain at the core of Fed monetary
policy in the future, one must understand the origins of the case for price stability in the
US. These are found in three distinct subperiods of postwar US monetary history: the
period of inflationary go/stop policy from the late 1950s to the late 1970s, the Volcker
disinflation from 1979 to 1987, and the subsequent achievement of credibility for low
inflation under Greenspan. The go/stop period illustrates the consequences of failing
to make low inflation a priority for monetary policy. The Volcker period illustrates the
diﬃculty in restoring credibility for low inflation after its has been compromised. And
the Greenspan era illustrates how and why the Fed has come to target low inflation
implicitly in recent years. Each subperiod is discussed in turn below.7

2.1     Inflationary Go/Stop Monetary Policy
The inflationary tendency evident during the period of go/stop monetary policy de-
rived initially from a desire not to repeat the disastrous deflation of the 1930s. The
disruptive potential of inflation was consistently underestimated, and each increase in
inflation was tolerated in the belief that it would soon die down. Moreover, go/stop
policy reflected the Fed’s inclination to be responsive to the shifting balance of concerns
between inflation and unemployment. In the “go” phase of the policy cycle inflation
became a major concern only after it clearly moved above its previous trend; hence, the
Fed did not tighten policy early enough to preempt inflationary outbursts before they
became a problem. By the time the public became concerned about rising inflation,
pricing decisions already embodied higher inflation expectations. At that point the Fed
would need a recession to bring inflation and inflation expectations back down, and an
aggressive increase in short term interest rates would initiate the “stop” phase of the
policy cycle. At best, there was only a relatively narrow window of public support for
the Fed to raise interest rates. That window opened when rising inflation was widely
judged to be a problem and closed after tighter monetary policy caused the unemploy-
ment rate to begin to rise. Thus, the Fed found it diﬃcult to reverse rising inflation,
and the trend rate of inflation tended to ratchet up with each go/stop policy cycle.8
    Another reason for the rising inflation trend was that deliberately expansionary
monetary policy in the go phase of the policy cycle came to be anticipated by workers and
firms. Workers learned to take advantage of tight labor markets to make higher wage
demands and firms took advantage of tight product markets to pass along higher costs
    7
     Goodfriend (1997) provides a longer-term historical perspective on the evolution of monetary theory
and policy.
   8
     See, for instance, Romer and Romer (1989).



                                                   3
in higher prices. Increasingly aggressive wage and price behavior tended to neutralize
the favorable eﬀects of stimulative monetary policy. The Fed persisted in trying to
pursue what it regarded as a reasonable balance between inflation and unemployment
objectives. But in practice it became evermore expansionary on average in the pursuit
of low unemployment, which produced correspondingly higher inflation and inflation
expectations. As a result, lenders demanded ever higher inflation premia in bond
rates. In the absence of an anchor for inflation, inflation expectations and bond rates
moved higher and fluctuated widely, which destabilized the economy and complicated
countercyclical stabilization policy enormously.
    In retrospect, the central problem for most of the postwar period up to the Volcker
disinflation beginning in 1979 was that the Fed tended to justify its periodic inflation-
fighting actions against an implicit objective for low unemployment. In doing so, the
Fed made monetary policy a source of instability and wound up worsening both inflation
and unemployment. Eventually the Fed recognized that it would be better to justify
its actions to stimulate employment against a commitment to low inflation.

2.2     The Volcker Disinflation: 1979-1987
The case for price stability as we know it today was strengthened by the extaordinary
diﬃculties encountered in dealing with inflation during the period of the Volcker disin-
flation from 1979 to 1987. In particular, the Fed experienced the adverse consequences
of a near total collapse of credibility for low inflation, and learned how diﬃcult it is to
pursue interest rate policy to restore credibility for low inflation once that credibility
has been thoroughly compromised. Although the challenges confronting the Fed dur-
ing the Volcker disinflation were far larger than those today, their nature is similar and
still relevant. This section considers, in turn, four features of this tumultuous period:
the breakdown of mutual understanding between the Fed and the public, the loss of
flexibility to use interest rate policy to stabilize the output gap, the nature of the cost
of restoring low inflation, and the inflation scare problem.

2.2.1    The Breakdown of Mutual Understanding Between the Fed and the
         Public
By the time that Volcker became Fed chairman in 1979, the sharp increase in the
level and volatility of inflation and inflation expectations born of the previous decade’s
go/stop monetary policy made it exceptionally diﬃcult for the Fed to contribute con-
structively to macroeconomic stabilization. The Fed continued to make monetary policy
by managing short-term nominal interest rates. But the eﬀect of interest rate policy on
the economy is determined by its eﬀect on real interest rates—nominal rates minus infla-
tion expectations. Stabilization policy became more diﬃcult, in part, because relatively


                                            4
large adjustments in the real rate were necessary to stabilize the economy. Moreover,
the Fed found it increasingly diﬃcult to judge the public’s inflation expectations and
how its own policy actions might influence those expectations. Hence, the Fed could
not judge how a given nominal interest rate policy action would translate into an adjust-
ment in real interest rates. In short, there was a breakdown of mutual understanding
between the Fed and the public: the public could no longer discern the Fed’s policy
intentions and the Fed could not predict how the economy would respond to its policy
actions. Consequently, the opportunity for policy mistakes was greatly enlarged and
macroeconomic stabilization policy became increasingly diﬃcult.
    As a result, the Volcker Fed came to appreciate what the Fed had taken for granted
previously—that monetary policy must be conducted so as to preserve a mutual under-
standing between the public and the Fed. In particular, the Volcker Fed realized that
price stability must be the cornerstone of that mutual understanding. In large part the
subsequent disinflation can be seen as an eﬀort to rebuild that mutual understanding
in order to rehabilitate countercyclical stabilization policy.

2.2.2   Loss of Flexibility to Use Interest Rate Policy to Stabilize Output
        Relative to Potential
When the Fed’s credibility for low inflation is in question, the Fed loses the flexibility
to use interest rate policy to stabilize output relative to its potential. Obviously, when
the Fed needs an output gap to restrain inflation and stabilize inflation expectations, it
cannot also use interest rate policy to narrow that output gap. The behavior of interest
rate policy in the brief recession of 1980 makes this point well.
    The Volcker Fed raised the nominal federal funds rate target sharply from around
11 percent in September of 1979 to around 17 percent in April 1980 in its initial eﬀort
to bring down inflation. About half of that 6 percentage point increase occurred in the
fall of 1979. January 1980 later turned out to be an NBER busines cycle peak, and
evidence of a weakening economy caused the Fed to pause in its aggressive tightening
between late 1979 and March 1980. But with the federal funds rate held steady, the
30 year (long) bond rate jumped by around 2 percentage points between December and
February despite the weakening in the economy. A number of factors contributed to the
unprecedented increase in inflation expectations evident in the sharp rise in the bond
rate: the ongoing increase in oil prices, the unprecedented rise in the price of gold, and
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In addition, the Fed’s hesitation to tighten further
probably created doubts about its willingness to bear the output costs necessary to
reduce inflation. In any case, faced with this evidence of a further increase in inflation
expectations, the Fed was forced to react with an enormous 3 percentage point increase
in the nominal funds rate in March. The short recession that occurred in the first half
of 1980 probably resulted from this aggressive policy tightening in conjuntion with the


                                            5
imposition of credit controls in March.9
    Thus, interest rate policy helped to precipitate the 1980 recession as it would pre-
cipitate the 1981-2 recession, and for the same reasons. The diﬀerence is that in 1980
the Fed cut the federal funds rate sharply by around 8 percentage points between April
and July to act against the downturn, and the recession ended quickly with around 8
percent real GDP growth in the 4Q 1980. However, inflation remained high in 1980.
The lesson of 1980 was that the Fed could not restore credibility for low inflation if it
continued to utilize interest rate policy to stabilize the output gap.

2.2.3      The Cost of Restoring Credibility for Low Inflation
The Volcker disinflation made particularly clear why it is so costly to restore credibility
for low inflation once it has been compromised. Consider the striking disinflation that
occurred in 1981. In early 1981 the Fed maintained the nominal federal funds rate at
19 percent. As measured by PCE inflation, which was around 10 percent in Q1 1981,
real short-term interest rates were then a very high 9 percent. Not surprisingly, the
aggressive policy tightening began to take hold by midyear. The NBER business cycle
peak was reached in July, and real GDP growth fell at a 6 percent annual rate in Q4
1981 and at a 5 percent annual rate in Q1 1982. The Fed brought the nominal federal
funds rate down from 19 percent in the summer to the 14 percent range at the end of
the year, where it remained until the summer of 1982 when it was reduced further to
around 10 percent.
    The 5 percentage point funds rate reduction through the end of 1981 was large in
nominal terms. But PCE inflation also fell by about 5 percentage points by early 1982
to the 5 percent range. To the extent that short-term inflation expectations followed
the decline in actual inflation during 1981, the Fed maintained an extraordinarily high 9
percent real funds rate during the recession! Amazingly, the Volcker Fed maintained a
9 percent real short rate even as the recession worsened and the unemployment rate rose
from around 7 percent in July 1981 toward a peak of nearly 10 percent at the recesion
trough in November 1982.
    Why did interest rate policy remain so extraordinarily tight even after the sharp
break in inflation in 1981? One reason is that the behavior of long bond rates suggested
that the Fed’s credibility for low inflation continued to deteriorate. In fact, the long
bond rate actually rose by about 3 percentage points from January 1981 to more than
14 percent in October, even as the economy weakened. And although the rate showed
some tendency to decline thereafter, it remained in the 13 to 14 percent range until it
began to come down more persistently in the summer of 1982. Only after this evidence
emerged in the bond market, that the Fed was finally beginning to acquire credibility
  9
      See Schreft (1990).



                                            6
for low inflation, did the Fed ease policy decisively in August 1982. This policy easing
paved the way for an end to the recession. Inflation stabilized at around 4 percent.
And real GDP grew by a spectacular 6.7 percent in 1983 and 4.5 percent in 1984.
    The Volcker Fed disinflation of 1981 is an extreme illustration of the point mentioned
in Section 2.2 that, in practice, the Fed needs a recession to restore credibility for low
inflation after it has been compromised. The reason is this: if a disinflation is fully
credible, then wage and price inflation can slow immediately without much eﬀect on
real interest rates or output.10 If, however, as in 1981, a disinflation is not immediately
credible, then wage and price inflation continue as before. If the Fed persists in tight-
ening monetary policy anyway, real interest rates rise, aggregate demand moves below
potential output, employment falls, and the output gap thus created causes wage and
price inflation to slow gradually. Postwar US monetary history makes it abundantly
clear that disinflation is costly in practice because credibility for low inflation is hard to
acquire after it has been lost. Moreover, the Fed’s commitment to low inflation is only
as credible as the public’s support for it. And that support usually remains in question
until a disinflation is nearly complete.

2.2.4    The Inflation Scare Problem
The Fed’s credibility problems during the Volcker era showed up as “inflation scares,”
sharply rising long term bond rates reflecting rising long-term inflation expectations.11
Inflation scares presented the Fed with a costly dilemma because ignoring them would
encourage even more doubt about the central bank’s commitment to low inflation. Yet
raising real short rates to restore credibility for low inflation risked precipitating a
recession. There were four striking examples of inflation scares in the bond rate during
the Volcker era. As discussed above, the Fed’s response to the first two “scares” in
1980 and 1981 precipitated recessions in those years.
    The third inflation scare occurred in 1983-84. By then, inflation was running at
around 4 percent and, for the most part, it held in that range during this episode.
Nonetheless, an inflation scare in the bond market raised the long rate from the 10
percent range in the summer of 1983 to its peak the following summer in the 13 percent
range—only about 1 percentage point short of its 1981 peak even though inflation was
over 6 percentage points lower in 1983 than in early 1981! The Fed reacted by moving
the nominal funds rate up from the 8 percent range to the 11 percent range. Inflation
remained low, so the tightening took the real short-term interest rate up by about 3
  10
     See Ball (1994).
  11
     See Goodfriend (1993). Ireland (1996) uses the modern theory of interest to show that movements
in long bond rates reliably signal changes in expected inflation. Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2003)
present evidence that the apparent “excess sensitivity” of long bond rates to macro data largely reflects
fluctuations in inflation expectations.



                                                   7
percentage points to around 7 percent briefly in mid-1984 before the inflation scare
subsided and the bond rate began to come down. In this case, the high real short rate
needed to contain the scare succeeded in bringing real GDP growth down to a sustainable
2 to 3 percent range in the second half of 1984. This episode was important because
it demonstrated that a well-timed and well-calibrated series of preemptive interest rate
policy actions could defuse an inflation scare without creating a recession. The 6
percentage point drop in the bond rate from its June 1984 peak to the 7 percent range
in early 1986 indicates that the Fed acquired enormous additional credibility for low
inflation during this period, in large part no doubt due to the aggressive inflation-
fighting actions taken in 1983-84.
    Remarkably, even after the Volcker Fed had demonstrated its determination to act
against inflation for almost a decade, there was yet another inflation scare when the
bond rate rose by 2 percentage points from March to October 1987. Surprisingly, the
Fed reacted little to this scare. In part, this may have reflected real growth weaker than
in 1983-84. The scare may have occurred in part because Volcker was near the end of his
term as chairman and there was doubt about whether the Fed under Volcker’s successor
would continue to place a high priority on low inflation. In any case, the 1987 scare is
particularly striking evidence of the fragility of the credibility of the Fed’s commitment
to low inflation, possibly connected to the transition from one Fed chairman to another.

2.3     The Greenspan Era: 1987-Present
When Alan Greenspan succeeded Paul Volcker as Fed chairman in the summer of 1987
the inflation scare needed immediate attention. However, the October 1987 stock
market crash forced the Fed to ease monetary policy and put oﬀ raising interest rates
until the spring of 1988. Judging by the behavior of the long bond rate, which did not
return to its early 1987 levels until 1992, it took the Greenspan Fed about five years to
overcome the 1987 inflation scare.
    The discussion of the Greenspan era below is in four parts. It begins by emphasizing
the diﬃculty of reversing even a relatively minor loss of credibility for low inflation. It
then describes the preemptive interest rate policy actions in 1994 that achieved virtual
price stability and the benefits, thereafter, of having achieved full credibility for low
inflation. One can see in the behavior of the Greenspan Fed the emergence of an
implicit inflation targeting policy regime. The section concludes by pointing out five
aspects of inflation targeting practiced implicitly by the Greenspan Fed.

2.3.1    Reversing a Minor Loss of Credibility for Low Inflation
As a result of the 1987 inflation scare and the policy easing that followed the October
1987 crash, PCE inflation rose by over 2 percentage points from around 3 percent in


                                            8
1986 to around 5.5 percent in 1990. In response, the Fed raised the funds rate by over 3
percentage points to a peak of nearly 10 percent from the spring of 1988 to the spring of
1989 in an eﬀort to reverse the rise in inflation and inflation expectations. As a result
of those policy actions and the Gulf War recession, inflation began to recede in 1991.
However, the unemployment rate rose by about 1 percentage point during the 1990-91
recession and rose further to nearly 8 percent in June 1992 during the “jobless recovery”
that followed. Here is another instance where, having been insuﬃciently preemptive
in containing inflation (in 1987 and 1988), monetary policy was obliged to be more
restrictive than otherwise. With its credibility for low inflation compromised earlier,
the Greenspan Fed lowered the federal funds rate tentatively and haltingly from a peak
around 8 percent at the start of the recession in mid-1990 to 3 percent in the fall of
1992. By September 1992, the bond rate had returned to the 7 percent range, inflation
had come down to around 3 percent, and the real federal funds rate was therefore near
zero.
    The zero real short rate was in place for eighteen months from September 1992 to
February 1994. During that time the unemployment rate came down to 6.6 percent,
the bond rate fell to the 6 percent range, and the inflation rate fell slightly. It appeared
that the Fed had acquired an additional degree of credibility for low inflation. To secure
that credibility, however, the Fed would need to preempt rising inflation by raising real
short rates as the economy strengthened further in 1994. At a minimum, the Fed
would have to move real short rates up from zero to a range historically consistent with
sustainable growth without inflation. In part, preemptive policy was motivated by yet
another inflation scare in the bond market. The more than 2 percentage point increase
in the bond rate from late 1993 to November 1994 indicated that the Fed’s credibility
for low inflation still was not secure.

2.3.2      Preemptive Interest Rate Policy in 1994
The series of policy actions that lifted the real funds rate by 3 percentage points from
February 1994 to February 1995 marked the Greenspan Fed’s first preemptive actions
against inflation. Like the Volcker Fed’s 1983-84 actions, the Greenspan Fed’s 1994
preemptive policy held the line on inflation without creating unemployment. After
falling to the mid-5 percent range during 1994, the unemployment rate moved up only
slightly in April 1995 and then began to fall again. The 1994 tightening proved once
more that well-timed preemptive interest rate policy actions are nothing to be feared.
By January 1996 the bond rate was down to around 6 percent and there was widespread
talk of the “death of inflation.”12
     The successful preemptive policy in 1994 brought the economy to virtual price sta-
bility. Inflation and inflation expectations were anchored more firmly than ever before.
 12
      See Bootle (1996).


                                             9
Inflation has remained low ever since, and long bond rates have remained in the 5 to
6 percent range with little evidence of inflation scares. Remarkably, price stability
was maintained even though the economy grew in the 4 percent range annually from
1996 through 1999, and the unemployment rate briefly fell below 4 percent for a while.
Unquestionably, rising productivity growth during the period helped to hold down in-
flation, but the fact that the economy achieved this growth without much of an increase
in inflation or an inflation scare further reinforced the Greenspan Fed’s credibility for
low inflation.13

2.3.3    Benefits of Full Credibility for Low Inflation
Three closely related benefits of full credibility for low inflation have been apparent in
the second half of the Greenspan era. First, credibility helped the economy to operate
well beyond the levels that might have created inflation and inflation scares in the past.
Second, when in 1999 and 2000 the Fed set out to slow the growth of real aggregate
demand to a more sustainable rate, it raised real short rates to the 5 percent range,
somewhat below the range of real short rates it had targeted in previous periods of
policy restraint. As in 1994, less real rate restraint was necessary in 2000 because the
Fed did not have to restore low inflation or its credibility for low inflation after they had
been compromised. Having attained price stability, the Fed did not need a recession to
bring inflation and inflation expectations down. The Fed’s objective in 2000 was only
to bring aggregate demand back into line with potential output so that the expansion
would not end with an outbreak of inflation, an inflation scare, or an unsustainable real
boom and bust.
    Third, when the expansion did end in an unsustainable boom and bust, the fact
that inflation and inflation expectations were well anchored enabled the Greenspan Fed
to cut the nominal federal funds rate aggressively from 6.5 percent to 1.75 percent in
2001 to cushion the fall in aggregate demand and employment.14 Amazingly, the Fed
was able to cut the real federal funds rate by 4 or 5 percentage points to around zero
without a hint of an inflation scare. Since the Fed did not need a recession in 2001, it
had the flexibility to cut the real funds rate aggressively to prevent one.

2.4     Implicit Inflation Targeting Practiced by the Greenspan Fed
When one considers the Greenspan era as a whole, it would appear that the Greenspan
Fed adopted, gradually and implicitly, an approach to monetary policy that can be
  13
     Goodfriend (2002) discusses the consequences of rising productivity growth and credible price sta-
bility in the second half of the 1990s for inflation and monetary policy.
  14
     Some economists argue that monetary policy should have acted more aggressively against the ex-
treme asset price increases in the late 1990s. See Bernanke and Gertler (1999) and Goodfriend (2003)
for reasons why interest rate policy should not react directly to asset prices.


                                                  10
characterized as inflation targeting. To begin, the Greenspan Fed must have appreciated
something like the case for price stability described above as it developed in the years
of go/stop policy and during the Volcker disinflation. Moreover, Chairman Greenspan
testified in 1989 in favor of a qualitative zero inflation objective for the Fed defined as a
situation in which “the expected rate of change of the general level of prices ceases to be
a factor in individual and business decisionmaking.”15 Thus, it is reasonable to think
that the Greenspan Fed set out to achieve low enough inflation to make that definition
of price stability a reality. This is the first sense in which it is plausible to think that
the Greenspan Fed has adopted an implicit form of inflation targeting.
    However, the Greenspan Fed clearly has not focused singlemindedly on achieving
low inflation. Had it done so, it surely could have restored low inflation and the
credibility for low inflation lost in 1987-1988 sooner than it did. However, given the
initial credibility problems, attempting to act against inflation too aggressively could
have come at too great a cost in lost employment and output. It was plausible to
think that the relatively small slipage in inflation and credibility for low inflation that
occurred in the late 1980s could be contained eventually without an aggressive monetary
tightening. Such reasoning probably contributed to the decision to pursue a mildly
restrictive interest rate policy to build back credibility for low inflation gradually. In
other words, the Greenspan Fed displayed great patience in overcoming the eﬀects on
inflation and Fed credibility of the unfortunate initial conditions (the 1987 inflation
scare and stock market crash) that it started with.
    Moreover, the Greenspan Fed did not proceed to push the inflation rate down de-
liberately to price stability after 1992 in a way that might have been costly in terms of
employment and output. Instead, preemptive policy was utilized in 1994 to reinforce
the transition to price stability. The Fed held real short rates near zero for a year and a
half until the economy showed strength in 1994 and then acted to preempt what might
have been a cyclical increase in inflation. Holding the line on inflation proved to be a
virtually costless way of moving the economy to price stability and fully securing the
Fed’s credibilty for low inflation.
    The manner in which the Greenspan Fed moved to restore credibility for low inflation
before 1992 and pushed to price stability after 1992 demonstrates a second sense in which
it may be said to have targeted inflation implicitly. It is clear that the Greenspan Fed
practiced a form of flexible inflation targeting in its pursuit of price stability.
    Arguably, it is plausible to think that the Fed has finally achieved price stability
in the sense that a measure of inflation favored by the Fed, core PCE inflation, has
remained in the 1 to 2 percent range since the mid-1990s.16 It is diﬃcult to imagine
circumstances that would cause the Greenspan Fed to deliberately target core PCE
 15
      See Greenspan (1990), p. 6.
 16
      See Federal Open Market Committee (1996), p. 11.



                                                11
inflation above 2 percent in either the long run or the short run. This is the third sense
in which it may be said that the Greenspan Fed has adopted an implicit form of inflation
targeting. Likewise, it is hard to imagine any circumstances in which the Greenspan
Fed would deliberately target core PCE inflation below 1 percent. There is no reason
to take the inflation rate lower than that given the risk of deflation and the problems
associated with the zero bound on nominal interest rates. This is the fourth sense in
which it may be said that the Greenspan Fed has adopted an implicit form of inflation
targeting.
     Finally, it is clear that the Greenspan Fed practices inflation targeting in large part to
enhance the flexibility of interest rate policy to stabilize the output gap over the business
cycle. For instance, the discussion above explained how the Greenspan Fed exploited
its full credibility for low inflation to lower short term interest rates flexibly to cushion
the 2001 recession. In this sense, inflation targeting as practiced by the Greenspan Fed
involves a fifth characteristic: constrained countercyclical stabilization policy. In other
words, the Greenspan Fed appears willing to pursue aggressive countercyclical interest
rate policy as long as inflation and inflation expectations remain anchored in or near
the long run target range.


3         Should Low Long Run Inflation be a Priority?
Since the record shows that the Greenspan Fed has pursued inflation targeting implicitly,
we now ask what features of those implicit inflation targeting procedures should be made
explicit. We use the case for inflation targeting developed in Section 2 to help answer
that question. In this section we consider only whether the Fed should make low
long run inflation a priority. We begin with arguments supporting a priority for price
stability. Then we consider opposing arguments and counterarguments. Finally we
consider the case for a quantitative long run inflation target.

3.1         Arguments Supporting a Long Run Priority for Price Stability
A priority for low long run inflation derives not so much from a belief in its intrinsic value
relative to other goals such as full employment and economic growth, but from theory
and evidence suggesting that monetary policy encourages employment and growth in
the long run mostly by controlling inflation.17 Moreover, the US monetary policy
record outlined in Section 2 suggests that the flexibility to pursue short run stabilization
policy has been enhanced by a credible commitment to low inflation. Arguably, that
credibility would be strengthened if the Fed announced publicly a priority for low long
    17
         See, for instance, Feldstein (1997) and Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1996).




                                                      12
run inflation.18
     Further, in 1994 the Fed began to announce its current federal funds rate target pub-
licly for the first time. The Fed became more forthcoming about its policy instrument
in part because Congress and the public expressed an interest in greater transparency
in monetary policy. For instance, all twelve reserve bank presidents were invited to
explain their views on monetary policy before the senate banking committee in March
1993, and again before the house banking committee in October of that year. This
increased transparency of the Fed’s policy instrument, the federal funds rate, has en-
hanced the understanding of monetary policy and facilitated a public debate about Fed
policy. A healthy debate about whether the Fed’s policy actions are appropriate to
achieve its objectives is to be expected. But the current situation is one in which the
Fed has not clarified its priority for low inflation as well as it might. Thus, a debate
about Fed policy actions in the current institutional environment can become a debate
about the Fed’s policy objectives.
     The combination of instrument transparency with ambiguity about the priority for
low inflation creates problems for monetary policy. For instance, the visibility of the
Fed’s aggressive preemptive tightening against inflation in 1994 attracted much criticism
in part because the priority the Fed placed on low inflation had not been clarified,
understood, and accepted by Congress and the public. The criticism from Congress
and elsewhere at the time was seen by many as a threat to price stability and probably
contributed to the severity of the inflation scare that raised the long bond rate by over
2 percentage points in 1994. Especially now that price stability has been achieved,
and the transition costs are behind us, the Fed’s commitment to long run price stability
could be clarified to minimize the risk that a debate about Fed policy actions could
create inflation scares in the future.19

3.2    Opposing Arguments and Counterarguments
The most fundamental argument against making low long run inflation a priority is
that it might unduly constrain interest rate policy from stabilizing output relative to
its potential in the short run. The concern is that, in practice, the Fed might become
more timid in using interest rate policy flexibly to stabilize real economic activity over
the business cycle for fear of the inflationary consequences. That said, the policy record
outlined above shows that the Fed’s power to stabilize the output gap over the business
cycle was considerably enhanced as inflation and inflation expectations became more
  18
     Fed oﬃcials have spoken repeatedly over the years about the benefits of low inflation and the Fed’s
commitment to price stability. However, the Fed has not asserted a priority for low long run inflation.
  19
     Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2003) present evidence indicating that the Bank of England’s
credible commitment to an inflation target helped to anchor long term inflation expectations and bond
rates in the UK.



                                                  13
firmly anchored. Nevertheless, the above argument must be taken seriously.
     The second argument against formally adopting a priority for low long run inflation is
that there is little to be gained, since the Fed has achieved and maintained low inflation
by “just doing it.” The Greenspan Fed appears to have acquired near full credibility
for low inflation without a formal priority for low inflation. And there is every reason
to think that the Greenspan Fed can continue to pursue inflation targeting implicitly
and successfully. This argument seems to take it for granted that the Fed needs no
institutional help in carrying on after Chairman Greenspan retires.
     The third argument admits that a legislative mandate for low long run inflation
would be helpful but stresses that it would be awkward, inappropriate, and potentially
counterproductive for the Fed to announce a priority for low long run inflation unilat-
erally. To be sure, the Fed is an independent central bank in the sense that its interest
rate policy actions are not subject to further evaluation by other authorities. And
Congress did not object to the Volcker disinflation and the Greenspan Fed transition to
price stability. Yet, the Fed is supposed to take direction on its goals from Congress.
The current understanding between the Fed and the Congress would appear to amount
to a “don’t ask, don’t tell” equilibrium: Congress doesn’t ask the Fed whether it places
a priority on low long run inflation, and the Fed does not say whether it has such a
priority.20 Both the Fed and the Congress appear to be satisfied with don’t ask, don’t
tell, so apparently the status quo is satisfactory.
     The problem with this argument is that waiting for Congress to endorse formally a
priority for low long run inflation poses some risks. Currently, a large fraction of the
public has had first-hand experience with inflation and naturally supports the view that
it must be contained. But as the Fed succeeds over time in maintaining low inflation,
that collective memory will fade. And Congress will be less likely to mandate a priority
for price stability than it may be today. If the Greenspan Fed, in its capacity as the
repository of central banking expertise in the US, believes that monetary policy would
benefit from a legislatively mandated priority for low long run inflation, then it could
ask Congress for one. The time is right to do so. Because price stability has been
achieved, transition costs are no longer an obstacle. More importantly, the public
has great confidence in the Greenspan Fed, and future Fed’s will have less personal
experience with and appreciation of the reasons why monetary policy would benefit
from such a mandate. Institutionalizing that knowledge and experience in a mandate
will go a long way toward insuring that future generations don’t repeat the inflationary
mistakes of the past.
 20
  Federal Open Market Committee (1996) pages 64, 67, and 72 indicates the consensus within the
FOMC on the desirability of a 2 percent long run objective for a CPI measure of inflation.




                                             14
3.3   The Case for a Quantitative Long Run Inflation Target
The above discussion made the case that low long run inflation should be a priority for
monetary policy. In principle, that priority could be specified in either a qualitative or
a quantitative way. If a priority for low inflation is largely about anchoring inflation
expectations, then arguably much of the benefit could be derived by specifying the
priority in qualitative language using Chairman Greenspan’s definition of price stability.
For instance, such a commitment could be stated as a priority for maintaining monetary
conditions in which “the expected rate of change of the general level of prices ceases to
be a factor in individual and business decisionmaking.” The discussion above suggests
that explicitly adopting even a qualitative priority for low long run inflation would be
a major step forward for monetary policy.
     There are a number of reasons, however, why a priority for low long run inflation
could be stated usefully in quantitative terms. The Fed could choose the measure of
inflation to target from any number of candidate measures that have been exceptionally
stable since the mid-1990s. Moreover, Fed staﬀ routinely uses for internal policy simu-
lations a quantitative working definition of low inflation that constitutes price stability.
Arguably, that working definition is the FOMC’s de facto quantitative long run inflation
target, and it would serve naturally as a quantitative long run inflation target for exter-
nal purposes as well. It makes sense to put a quantitative lower bound on inflation to
protect against deflation and the problem of the zero bound on nominal interest rates.
Announcing an explicit lower bound on inflation would make the public more confident
that the Fed will not allow the US to fall into a Japanese style deflation, zero bound
trap. That, in turn, would protect against potentially destabilizing deflation scares,
to which the Fed would have to respond by pushing the nominal funds rate closer to
zero. If it makes sense for the Fed to announce an explicit lower bound on its long run
inflation target to protect against deflation, then it also makes sense to announce an
explicit upper bound to emphasize that the Fed intends to hold the line on inflation as
well. Finally, a quantitative long run inflation target would serve as a better benchmark
against which to judge departures from price stability in the short run.
     A target range would have advantages over a point inflation target. A target range
would give the Fed a “safe harbor” within which it would not have to explain or respond
to movements in inflation very much. Only when inflation moved outside the range
would the Fed be expected to explain how policy would return inflation to the range.
Without a range, the Fed might find it diﬃcult to switch rhetorically from relatively
little concern about inflation to greater concern when inflation moved up or down on
a sustained basis. Specifying a quantitative range would not tie the Fed’s hands in
practice. What it would do is put the burden of proof on the Fed to explain how it
intends to return inflation to its target. And that would be a valuable disciplining
device.


                                            15
    A range of 1 to 2 percent for core PCE inflation monthly over 12 or 24 months
earlier would be a reasonable quantitative long run target. The Fed is apparently
comfortable using the core PCE price index to measure inflation.21 Core PCE inflation
has ranged between 1 and 2 percent since 1997. Given this observed stability, a 1
percentage point range should provide enough leeway for routine short run fluctuations
of inflation. Finally, core PCE inflation would provide a more stable measure than
overall PCE inflation against which to judge departures from price stability in the short
run.
    The main reasons for the Fed not to adopt a quantitative inflation target are four-
fold. First, the Fed may not be quite sure yet what measure of inflation and target
range to adopt. Second, as discussed above there is no pressing need to adopt a
quantitative inflation target. Finally, the Fed’s credibility for low inflation may actually
be jeopardized if, for whatever reason, it cannot keep inflation within its long run
quantitative target range. Fourth, adopting a quantitative inflation target may generate
pressure to adopt a quantitative target for the unemployment rate, which would create
problems for monetary policy of the sort encountered during the go/stop period reviewed
in Section 2.1.


4         Inflation Targeting in the Short Run
This section considers inflation targeting in the short run. It begins by outlining
complications that the Fed must confront in managing departures of inflation from the
long run target range. It then suggests strongly that it is both feasible and desirable
for the Fed to keep inflation within its long run inflation target even in the short run.
The section closes by pointing out that strict inflation targeting is compatible with
stabilizing output at its potential over the business cycle in a reasonable benchmark
macromodel.
    This discussion does not deny that inflation could be pushed outside of the target
range in the short run. The analysis asserts only that it is likely to take an excep-
tional event to destabilize inflation when the Fed purposefully pursues price stability.
Undoubtedly, bad luck or bad judgement could create excessively inflationary or de-
flationary conditions. If that were to happen, then presumably the Fed would return
inflation to the target range flexibly, much as the Greenspan Fed restored credibility for
low inflation in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
    21
         Again, see Federal Open Market Committee (1996), p. 11.




                                                    16
4.1   Managing Departures of Inflation from the Long Run Target
If inflation moves outside its long run target range, for whatever reason, the Fed must
choose a path for its interest rate policy instrument that balances the speed with which
inflation is returned to target against the cost in lost output relative to potential. The
Fed must decide how fast to rebuild credibility for its long run inflation objective. As
a formal matter, the decision would depend on the following factors: 1) the mechanism
by which interest rate policy is assumed to be transmitted to aggregate demand in the
macromodel used by the Fed, 2) the specification of the relationships among aggregate
demand, the output gap, and the inflation generating process in that macromodel, 3)
the relative weights placed on the output gap and inflation stabilization in the Fed’s
(implicit) loss function, or 4) the length of time that the Fed arbitrarily allows for
returning its conditional inflation forecast to the long run target, and 5) any conditional
information on current shocks and adjustments to the model or the loss function weights
due to special circumstances or evolving economic conditions. In sum, the policy
response would depend on all information available to the Fed aﬀecting the conditional
inflation forecast and the output gap forecast.22
    The complexity of the elements listed above shows how diﬃcult it is for the Fed to
manage inflation once it moves outside its long run target range. Arguably, the inflation
generating process is the weakest part of the macromodel. Among other things the cost,
in terms of lost output relative to potential, of returning inflation to its long run range
depends on the credibility of the Fed’s commitment to do so. The historical record
discussed in Section 2 suggests that such credibility is sensitive to the Fed’s actions
themselves in the context of other aspects of the political economy in a way that is
diﬃcult to model. In any particular case the Fed must judge the extent to which
drawing out the return of inflation to its long run target might be counterproductive by
reducing the credibility of its intention to bring inflation all the way back down. That
consideration must be balanced against attempting to bring inflation down before the
credibility for doing so has been built up. An error in either direction would increase
the output cost of restoring price stability.
    Another problem arises because the Fed may tend to overstate the extent to which
inflation has an inherent tendency to persist after it has been shocked. US inflation
has exhibited a high degree of persistence in the past.23 The Fed tolerated outbursts
of inflation in the go phase of the policy cycle and showed only a limited inclination
to risk recession to reverse those outbursts, but a willingness to allow “opportunistic”
shocks to reduce inflation. Thus, both positive and negative inflation shocks tended
to be propagated through time.24 Firms would quickly build a shock to inflation into
 22
    See Svensson (1999) and Gali (2001).
 23
    See Fuhrer and Moore (1995) and Goodfriend and King (2001), pp. 75-81.
 24
    The empirical findings reported in Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) reflect this behavior.



                                                17
inflation expectations and incorporate those expectations into their own price setting
behavior. By underestimating its own role in creating inflation persistence in the past,
the Fed may be too quick to accommodate and propagate deviations of inflation from
its long run target in the present.25
     It is optimal for the monetary authority to vary its short run inflation target deliber-
ately in response to some shocks in some macromodels. However, that optimal variation
depends sensitively on the details of the macromodel and on the size and type of shocks
hitting the economy. Given our uncertainty about the structure of the economy, the
diﬃculty in promptly and accurately identifying the shocks hitting the economy, and
the complications discussed above, attempting to fine tune the inflation target in the
short run is more likely to be counterproductive than not.26 In any case, the historical
record suggests that the Fed’s ability to deliberately and systematically manipulate in-
flation in response to shocks is very limited. Moreover, such attempted manipulation
would open the door to inflation scares. For all these reasons the presumption must
be that it is inadvisable for the Fed to attempt to vary the short-run inflation target
deliberately over time.

4.2   Precluding Inflation from Moving Outside the Long Run Range
As a practical matter, the Fed can adhere closely to its long run inflation target only if
interest rate policy can preclude shocks from moving inflation outside the long run target
range. Is it plausible that the Fed can do so? The answer would appear to be yes,
especially for a core inflation index that excludes highly flexible commodity and food
prices. As mentioned above, evidence from the mid-1990s to the present suggests that
inflation will remain stable over the business cycle when the Fed makes price stability
a priority.
    Theory suggests why the Fed has been able to stabilize inflation so well and is likely
to continue to do so in the future. Credibility for stable prices is self-enforcing to a great
extent. Forward-looking, sticky-price firms are less likely to pass cost shocks through
to prices if firms expect the Fed to take policy actions promptly to conform aggregate
demand to potential output in order to relieve the cost pressures.27 Moreover, credible
price stability gives the Fed greater leeway to cut short term interest rates in response
to a financial market crisis or to stabilize the output gap without creating inflation or
an inflation scare in bond markets. Thus, the Fed was able to cut the federal funds rate
target by 75 basis points for about a year in 1998-99 in aftermath of the Russian debt
default, and then by 475 basis points when the economy turned down in 2001, without
much eﬀect on inflation or inflation expectations in either case. Because the Fed is
 25
    See Cecchetti (1995) and Cogley and Sargent (2001).
 26
    See Orphanides and Williams (2002) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2002).
 27
    See Taylor (2000).


                                              18
known to have such leeway to act aggressively and preemptively against recessions,
firms are less likely to pass deflationary cost shocks through to prices as well.

4.3      Strict Inflation Targeting and Countercyclical Stabilization Policy
According to the argument above, strictly targeting core inflation within its long run
range has much to recommend it. The strength of that argument derived in part from
the fact that doing otherwise would require the Fed to take a stand on theoretical and
empirical inflation dynamics about which there is much uncertainty. This section sup-
plements the case by pointing out that strict inflation targeting is entirely consistent
with stabilizing output at its potential over the business cycle in a reasonable benchmark
macromodel. In other words, strict inflation targeting can be regaded as the anchor
for constrained countercyclical stabilization policy along the lines of the description in
Section 2.4 of inflation targeting as practiced by the Greenspan Fed. From this per-
spective, even those who care mainly about output and employment can support strict
inflation targeting.
    This point is clear with respect to a shock to aggregate demand. For instance,
a positive shock that moves aggregate demand above potential output would increase
labor demand and put upward pressure on wages. That cost pressure would be passed
to sticky (core) prices in the absence of a tightening of monetary policy. However, by
raising short term interest rates, the Fed could bring aggregate demand back into line
with potential output, move employment back down, eliminate the upward pressure on
wages, and hold the line on inflation. In other words, interest rate policy can stabilize
simultaneously both inflation and the output gap in the face of a shock to aggregate
demand.
    What about a shock to aggregate supply, such as a temporary increase in the price
of oil? The question is: can the interest rate policy actions that stabilize core inflation
against an oil price shock also be construed as stabilizing output relative to its potential?
The higher price of oil would raise the cost of production for sticky-price firms; and again
that cost pressure could be passed to sticky (core) prices in the absence of a tightening
of monetary policy. To stabilize sticky (core) price inflation the Fed would have to raise
real short rates and depress aggregate demand enough to reduce employment and wages
in order to oﬀset the eﬀect of higher oil prices on production costs. In eﬀect, price
stability could be maintained by making aggregate demand conform to the temporary
reduction in potential output. From this perspective, the answer to the question above
could be yes.
    In fact, in a benchmark macromodel with sticky prices and eﬀectively flexible wages,
interest rate policy that stabilizes sticky (core) prices automatically makes output con-
form to its time-varying potential.28 The reason is two-fold: 1) strict inflation targeting
 28
      See Goodfriend and King (1997, 2001) and Goodfriend (2002) for a discussion of the benchmark new


                                                  19
neutralizes fluctuations in employment and output that would otherwise occur due to
sticky prices, and 2) eﬀective wage flexibility assures that output fluctuates with its po-
tential defined as the outcome of an imperfectly competitive RBC model with a constant
markup and perfectly flexible wages and prices.
    Of course, there is some question about the extent to which actual wages are eﬀec-
tively flexible. Nominal wages exhibit about the same temporary rigidity as nominal
prices.29 To the extent that nominal wages are temporarily rigid, the Fed might have
to push employment and output below potential as defined above in order to relieve cost
pressures and stabilize core inflation against an oil price shock. Pushing employment
down further would reduce labor costs by raising the marginal physical product of labor.
In this case, however, the Fed would face a short run tradeoﬀ between inflation, and
output relative to its potential.
    That said, there are two reasons why such a tradeoﬀ may be of relatively little con-
cern in practice. First, an inflation target of 1 to 2 percent with trend productivity
growth of around 2 percent would yield average nominal wage growth in the 3 to 4 per-
cent range. Such high nominal wage growth should keep the economy safely away from
situations in which significant downward nominal wage rigidity, as opposed to slower
nominal wage growth, is required to stabilize inflation and the output gap. Second,
wages may be eﬀectively flexible in the context of the long-term implicit and explicit
contracts that characterize most employment relationships. It would be ineﬃcient for
either firms or workers to allow temporary nominal wage rigidity to upset the terms of
otherwise eﬃcient long term employment relationships. In particular, one might expect
future wage adjustments to undo any eﬀects of temporary nominal wage stickiness, so
that wages would be eﬀectively flexible. Such behavior would neutralize the allocative
consequences of sticky nominal wages.30


5     How to Make Inflation Targeting Explicit in the US
At the core of the case for inflation targeting is the idea that monetary policy encour-
ages economic growth and stabilizes output at its potential over the business cycle in
large part by anchoring inflation and inflation expectations. The need to influence
expectations puts a premium on a central bank’s credibility, commitment to goals, and
perceived independence and competence to achieve its objectives. Currently, these
foundations are secure in the US because the public has confidence in the Greenspan
Fed. If price stability is to be sustained, however, the operating procedures of the
neoclassical synthesis model in which strict inflation targeting also stabilizes the output gap. Goodfriend
(2002), Ireland (1996), and Woodford (2001) show why strict inflation targeting maximizes welfare in
related models.
  29
     See Taylor (1999).
  30
     See Barro (1977) and Hall (1999).


                                                    20
Greenspan Fed must be credibly transferred to its successor. Over the long run, the
Fed’s credibility must be based on an understanding of how inflation targeting works
rather than in the leadership of the Fed. Making the Fed’s inflation targeting proce-
dures explicit would help to achieve these ends by securing the Fed’s commitment to low
inflation and improving the transparency and accountability of the Fed for attaining its
monetary policy objectives.31
     Based on the discussion above, it seems fair to say that consistent with theory and
US experience, and in line with practices that have been adopted abroad, low inflation
is a priority for Fed monetary policy in the following sense: in the long run there are
no circumstances in which sustained inflation should ever be much higher or lower than
it is today. A public acknowledgement by the Fed of this would be a useful starting
point for making the Fed’s inflation targeting procedures explicit. The priority for long
run price stability would simply reflect best practice monetary policy as the Fed, other
central banks, and the economics profession have come to understand it. Hence, the Fed
could assert that priority on its own initiative without direction from Congress. In fact,
the Fed has an obligation to inform Congress to that eﬀect without any expectation of
a response in order to help the oversight committees understand better how to evaluate
monetary policy. The Fed Chairman could add that as a practical matter there is little
reason for the Fed deliberately to allow inflation to deviate from price stability in the
short run either, since price stability best facilitates maximum sustainable employment,
growth, and output stabilization relative to potential.
     A unilateral acknowledgement of this sort would be worthwhile in its own right.
Openly clarifying the priority for price stability would reinforce the Fed’s commitment
to low inflation and enhance the credibility of that commitment. It would balance
the recently increased transparency of the Fed’s interest rate instrument with greater
transparency of its low inflation goal. And it would act to defuse further the idea that
secrecy has any role to play in monetary policy.32 In this regard, the Fed could go further
and publicly acknowledge its quantitative working definition of long run price stability.
If a 1 to 2 percent range for core PCE inflation is it, then the Fed could acknowledge
that it intends to keep core PCE inflation in or near that range indefinitely.
     An acknowledgement of either a quantitative or a qualitative priority for low long
run inflation would open the door for the oversight committees in Congress to recognize a
priority for low long run inflation. By accepting that priority, the oversight committees
could then hold the Fed accountable for maintaining low inflation. Presumably, the Fed
would welcome being held accountable by Congress because that would secure further
its commitment to low inflation. Congress, of course, might be concerned that holding
the Fed accountable for low long run inflation would skew Fed policy in the short run
 31
      See Broaddus (2001) and Ferguson (2002).
 32
      See Goodfriend (1986).



                                                 21
toward price stability at the expense of stabilizing output relative to its potential. The
reality, though, is that it is not feasible to hold the Fed accountable for employment
or output objectives because in the long run these are determined independently of
monetary policy. This is the lesson of the inflationary go/stop period discussed in
Section 2.1.
    There is a chicken and egg problem here. Without a mechanism by which the Fed’s
reasoning about short run policy can be assessed more fully, Congress may be reluctant
to recognize a priority for low long run inflation. And without some assurance that
Congress accepts a priority for low long run inflation, the Fed may be reluctant to be
more transparent about how it strikes a balance between inflation and output in the
short run.
    This conundrum suggests the following possibility: in exchange for a congressional
acceptance of a priority for low long run inflation, the Fed could consider participating
in a public monetary policy forum where the FOMC (through its Chairman and other
representatives) would subject its current assessment of the economy and thinking about
recent policy actions to questions from invited academic and business economists expert
in monetary policy. The discussion would be disciplined by a congressional directive
to utilize monetary policy flexibly to stabilize output at its potential over the business
cycle subject to inflation remaining in or near its long run target range.
    The policy forum could be held publicly for one full day, twice a year, a month before
the Fed’s regular monetary policy reports to Congress in order to unearth key policy
issues and better inform the congressional oversight hearings. Invited participants
would be drawn from the community of professional Fed watchers, economic forecasters,
and academic monetary economists. The forum could be arranged and participants
invited by the Fed itself or by a private non-profit sponsor, and held independently of
Congress, although representatives from Congress would be welcome to attend. By
enabling Congress to observe a professional exchange of views on monetary policy, the
forum would give Congress more insight into the thinking of the FOMC.
    To achieve balance in the questions and comments, the invited participants should
be grouped according to whether they think that policy is too easy, about right, or too
tight, and equal time should be given to all points of view. The opportunity for the
FOMC to address comments and questions from all perspectives would enable the Fed
to build public understanding as well as confidence in its own policy position. The
Fed’s thinking on the economy and current policy could be summarized in an “Inflation
Report” prepared and distributed in advance of the forum. The forum would provide the
Fed with regular opportunities to comment on its assessments of the economy without
appearing defensive or self-congratulatory. The forum would also provide the Fed with
a convenient and eﬃcient means of acquiring regular professional advice and council
on monetary policy. Finally, the forum would help to educate economists, the press,
and the financial markets so that eventually the public’s confidence in monetary policy

                                           22
could be based on a deeper understanding of how inflation targeting works to optimize
the economy’s performance.


6    Conclusion
The paper began by tracing the origins of the case for inflation targeting in postwar US
monetary history from the inflationary go/stop period, through the Volcker disinflation,
to the period of price stability in the Greenspan era. This historical review made clear
why the Fed has made price stability a priority as never before in its history and why
low inflation will remain a priority indefinitely. In particular, the historical review
served three purposes. First, it showed why price stability improves monetary policy.
Second, it showed how the Greenspan Fed practices inflation targeting implicitly. Third,
it showed why the Fed should continue to utilize the inflation targeting procedures
developed and employed implicitly by the Greenspan Fed after Chairman Greenspan
retires.
     In the second half of the paper consideration was given to whether the Fed’s implicit
inflation targeting procedures should be made explicit, how tightly inflation should be
targeted in the short run, and how the Fed’s inflation targeting procedures could be made
explicit. The main findings were these: 1) low long run inflation should be an explicit
priority for monetary policy, 2) as a practical matter it is not desirable for the Fed to
vary its inflation target in the short run, and 3) strict inflation targeting can be eﬃcient
constrained countercyclical stabilization policy. The Fed should publicly acknowledge
its implicit priority for low long run inflation so that Congress could publicly accept that
priority and agree to hold the Fed accountable for attaining it. In return, representatives
of the FOMC should consider participating in a monetary policy forum to better inform
the congressional oversight committees and the public about current monetary policy.




                                            23
References
 [1] Atkeson, A., and L. E. Ohanian. 2001. Are Phillips curves useful for forecasting
        inflation? Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Reivew 25: 2-11.
 [2] Ball, L. 1994. Credible disinflation with staggered price-setting. American Eco-
        nomic Review 84: 282-89.
 [3] Barro, R. 1977. Long-term contracting, sticky prices, and monetary policy. Jour-
        nal of Monetary Economics: 305-16.
 [4] Bernanke, B. S., and M. Gertler. 1999. Monetary policy and asset price volatility.
        In New Challeges for Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
 [5] Bernanke, B. S., and F. S. Mishkin. 1997. Inflation targeting: a new framework
        for monetary policy? Journal of Economic Perspectives 11: 97-116.
 [6]           , T. Laubach, F. S. Mishkin, and A. S. Posen. 1999. Inflation target-
        ing: lessons from the international experience. Princeton: Princton University
        Press.
 [7] Blejer, M. L., A. Ize, and others. 2000. Inflation targeting in practice: strategic and
        operational issues and application to emerging market economies. Washington,
        D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
 [8] Blinder, Alan S. 1996. Central banking in a democracy. Federal Reserve Bank of
        Richmond Economic Quarterly 82: 1-14.
 [9] Bootle, R. 1996. The death of inflation. London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
[10] Broaddus, J. Alfred, Jr. 2001. Transparency in the practice of monetary policy.
        Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 87: 1-9.
[11] Cecchetti, Stephen G. 1995. Inflation indicators and inflation policy. In NBER
        macroeconomics annual, 1995, ed. B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg. Cambridge,
        Mass.: MIT Press.
[12] Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent. 2001. The evolution of postwar U.S. inflation
        dynamics. In NBER macroeconomics annual, 2001, ed. B. Bernanke and K.
        Rogoﬀ. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
[13] Federal Open Market Committee. 1995. Transcript, January 31 - February 1:
        39-59.
[14]         . 1996. Transcript, July 2-3.
[15] Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 1996. Achieving price stability: a sympo-
        sium. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.



                                            24
[16] Feldstein, M. 1997. The costs and benefits of going from low inflation to price sta-
        bility. NBER Working Paper 5469. In C. Romer and D. Romer, eds., Monetary
        Policy and Inflation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[17] Ferguson, R. 2002. Why central banks should talk. Remarks at Graduate Institute
        of International Studies, Geneva, Switzerland, January.
[18] Fuhrer, J., and G. Moore. 1995. Inflation persistence. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 110: 127-59.
[19] Gali, J. 2001. Targeting inflation in an economy with staggered price setting. Pre-
        pared for the conference Ten years of inflation targeting: design, performance,
        challenges. Santiago, Chile, Central Bank of Chile.
[20] Goodfriend, M. 1986. Monetary mystique: secrecy and central banking. Journal
       of Monetary Economics 17: 63-92.
[21]        . 1993. Interest rate policy and the inflation scare problem: 1979-1992.
        Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 79: 1-24.
[22]        . 1997. Monetary policy comes of age: a 20th century odyssey. Federal
        Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 83: 1-22.
[23]        . 2002. Monetary policy in the new neoclassical synthesis: a primer. Inter-
        national Finance 5 : 165-92.
[24]       . 2002. The phases of U.S. monetary policy: 1987 to 2001. Federal Reserve
        Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 88: 1-17.
[25]        . 2003. Interest rate policy should not react directly to asset prices. In
        Asset Price Bubbles: Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and International
        Policies, eds. W. C. Hunter, G. G. Kaufman, and M. Pomerleano. Federal
        Reserve Bank of Chicago and World Bank Group. Cambridge, Mass., MIT
        Press.
[26] Goodfriend, M. and R. G. King. 1997. The new neoclassical synthesis and the role
       of monetary policy. In NBER macroeconomic annual 1997, ed. B. S. Bernanke
       and J. J. Rotemberg. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
[27]        . 2001. The case for price stability. In Why price stability?, eds. A. G.
        Herrero, V. Gaspar, L. Hoogduin and others. Frankfurt, Germany, European
        Central Bank.
[28] Greenspan, A. 1990. Statement before the U.S. Congress, House of Representa-
        tives, Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy of the Committee on Bank-
        ing, Finance and Urban Aﬀairs, Zero Inflation. Hearing, 101 Cong. 1 Sess.
        Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Oﬃce.


                                           25
[29] Gurkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson. 2003. The excess sensitivity of
       long-term interest rates: evidence and implications for macroeconomic models.
       Federal Reserve Board. February.
[30] Haldane, A. G. ed., 1995. Targeting inflation. London: Bank of England.
[31] Hall, R. E. 1999. Labor market frictions and employment fluctuations. In Handbook
        of Macroeconomics, eds. J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford. Amsterdam: Elsevier
        Science B. V.
[32] Ireland, P. 1996. The role of countercyclical monetary policy. Journal of Political
         Economy 104: 704-24.
[33]         . 1996. Long-term interest rates and inflation: a fisherian approach. Fed-
        eral Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 82 : 21-36.
[34] King, M. 1997. The inflation target five years on. Lecture delivered at the London
        School of Economics.
[35] Kohn, D. 2000. Report to the non-executive directors of the court of the Bank
       of England on monetary policy processes and the work of monetary analysis.
       Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Manuscript.
[36] Leiderman, L., and L. E. O. Svensson, eds. 1995. Inflation targets. London: Centre
        for Economic Policy Research.
[37] Loayza, N., and R. Soto, eds. 2002. Inflation targeting: design, performance,
        challenges. Santiago, Chile, Central Bank of Chile.
[38] McCallum, B. 1997. Inflation targeting in Canada, New Zealand, Sweden, the
       United Kingdom, and in general. In Towards more eﬀective monetary policy,
       ed. I. Kuroda. New York: St. Martin’s Press, Inc.
[39]       . 2000. The United States deserves a monetary standard. Shadow Open
        Market Committee. Manuscript.
[40] Martin, J. 2000. Greenspan: the man behind money. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus
       Publishing.
[41] Meyer, L. H. 2001. Inflation targets and inflation targeting. Federal Reserve Bank
       of St. Louis Review 83: 1-13.
[42] Neumann, M. J. M., and J. von Hagen. 2002. Does inflation targeting matter?
        Center for European Integration Studies Working Paper no. B 01. Bonn, Ger-
        many: Center for European Integration Studies.
[43] Orphanides, A. and J. C. Williams. 2002. Imperfect knowledge, inflation expecta-
        tions, and monetary policy. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
        May. Manuscript.


                                          26
[44] Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer. 1989. Does monetary policy matter? A new
       test in the spirit of Friedman and Schwartz. In NBER macroeconomics annual,
       1989, ed. O. J. Blanchard and S. Fisher. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
[45] Saxton, J. 1997. A response to criticisms of price stability. Joint Economic
        Committee. Manuscript.
[46]       . 2002. Inflation targeting goals for the Federal Reserve. Joint Economic
        Committee. Manuscript.
[47] Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe. 2002. Optimal fiscal and monetary policy under
        sticky prices. NBER Working Paper no. 9220. Cambridge, Mass.: National
        Bureau of Economic Research.
[48] Schmitt-Hebbel, K., and M. Tapia. 2002. Monetary policy implementation and
        results in twenty inflation-targeting countries. Central Bank of Chile Working
        Paper no. 166. Santiago, Chile, Central Bank of Chile.
[49] Schreft, S. L. 1990. Credit controls: 1980. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
        Economic Review 76: 25-55.
[50] Sterne, G. 1999. The use of explicit targets for monetary policy: practical experi-
        ences of 91 economies in the 1990s. Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 39:
        272-81.
[51] Stevenson, R. W. 2002. Oh so quietly: fed ponders what follows Greenspan. New
        York Times, October 3: C1; C6.
[52] Svensson, L. E. O. 1999. Inflation targeting as a monetary policy rule. Journal
        of Monetary Economics 43: 607-54.
[53]        . 2001. Independent review of the operation of monetary policy in New
        Zealand: report to the minister of finance. Institute for International Economic
        Studies, Stockholm University. Manuscript.
[54] Taylor, J. 2000. Low inflation, pass through, and the pricing power of firms.
        European Economic Review 44: 1389-408.
[55] Taylor, J. B. 1999. Staggered price and wage setting in macroeconomics. In
        Handbook of Macroeconomics, eds. J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford. Amsterdam:
        Elsevier Science B. V.
[56] Woodford, M. 2001. Inflation stabilization and welfare. NBER Working Paper
       no. 8071. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
[57] Woodward, B. 2000. Maestro:        Greenspan’s fed and the american boom. New
       York: Simon & Schuster.



                                          27
