                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTING IN KOREA

                                           Alan J. Auerbach
                                           Young Jun Chan

                                          Working Paper 9983
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9983


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Alan J. Auerbach and Young Jun Chun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Generational Accounting in Korea
Alan J. Auerbach and Young Jun Chun
NBER Working Paper No. 9983
September 2003
JEL No. H22, H55, H60

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper reassesses the long-term fiscal position of Korea using Generational Accounting,

modified to reflect the special features of the Korean fiscal situation, such as prospective changes

in public pension benefit profiles and social welfare expenditures due to the maturing of public

pensions, increasing demand for social welfare expenditures, and population aging. Our findings

suggest that unless policy toward existing generations is substantially altered, future generations will

face an excessively heavy fiscal burden. For reasonable growth and interest rate assumptions, the

difference between 2000 newborns and those born after 2000 ranges from 60% to 120%. We also

find that a substantial part of the fiscal burden on the future generations is explained by the long-run

budgetary imbalance of public pensions and Medical Insurance.

Alan J. Auerbach                                       Young Jun Chun
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880                                  University of Incheon, Korea
University of California at Berkeley                   yjchun@incheon.ac.kr
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction
 The government budget in Korea has been viewed as relatively sound compared with other
OECD countries, based on positive government net wealth and consolidated budget surpluses
in recent years. For Korea, however, both government net wealth and consolidated budget
balance suffer from some conceptual problems. First, the consolidated budget’s coverage is
not wide enough to include all relevant fiscal policies, omitting local government and
important government activities such as the Medical Insurance. Second, government budget
balance and net wealth are the results of past and present government activities. Therefore,
they cannot be used to evaluate the effects of future changes in the economic environment,
future cash flows of the government budget, or future fiscal policies. For example, population
aging will raise Medical Insurance benefits and the Medical Insurance budget deficit unless
the Medical Insurance contribution rate is substantially raised. The budget balance of the
National Pension system, currently in surplus, will turn into a rapidly increasing deficit in the
near future. The increasing demand for social welfare programs will contribute to the
increase in government expenditure in the future.
   Generational Accounting (GA) provides a useful tool for the investigation of the
sustainability of fiscal policies in Korea. GA covers all relevant government fiscal policies.
Moreover, its forward-looking properties allow us to explore how the sustainability of the
public finances is affected by various future developments such as maturing of the National
Pension, increase in social welfare expenditure and population aging.
   The purpose of this paper is to assess Korea’s long-term fiscal position using Generational
Accounting. In order to take into account the special features of Korea’s fiscal situation, we
extend the traditional GA calculation in two ways. First, we incorporate prospective changes
in the age profiles and aggregate benefits and contributions of public pensions. Maturing of
the National Pension, whose benefit amount is currently small, will increase benefit payments
to older age groups in the future, which will substantially change the age profile of transfer
payments. A second extension of the standard method is that we incorporate expected changes
in social welfare expenditures in the future. Even though its aggregate amount was limited in
the past, social welfare spending has been increasing rapidly and this increasing trend is
expected to continue for the time being.
  Our findings suggest a much larger fiscal burden on future generations than on 2000
newborns under current policy. For reasonable growth and interest rate assumptions, the
difference between the two cohorts ranges from 60% to 120%. We also find that a substantial
part of fiscal burden on the future generations is explained by the long-run budgetary
imbalance of public pensions and Medical Insurance. The generational accounts of public


                                               1
pensions and Medical Insurance explain about 34% and 12% respectively of the net payments
(defined as the present value of tax payments minus transfer income from the government) for
future generations. The magnitude of the adjustment of tax and social insurance contributions
burden required to attain long-run government budget balance is substantial. A 56-59%
increase in tax burden will be needed if the adjustment is just the tax side and applies only for
the generations born after 2000. If the adjustment is made to all cohorts alive in 2004 and
later, the required adjustment is a 19-20% increase in the tax burden. If we delay the tax
adjustment until 2030, the required tax increase reaches 37-39%. All these findings suggest
that unless policy toward existing generations in Korea is substantially altered, future
generations will face very heavy fiscal burdens
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the fiscal situation
in Korea. Section 3 explains GA calculation procedure. In this section we describe our
extensions of the standard methodology of Generational Accounting, and data used to
construct the accounts. Section 4 presents the accounts and discusses their implications.
Section 5 summarizes findings and draws conclusions.

2. The Fiscal Situation in Korea
   Table 1 shows some recent developments of the Korean fiscal situation. The first
remarkable change is the rapid increase in government expenditure and debt, even though
their level is not high compared with that of OECD countries. The expenditure of the
consolidated budget (CB), whose coverage includes the central government (general account,
special account, and public trust funds) and non-financial public enterprises, has increased
from 19.0% of GDP in 1995 to 25.1% in 2001. Government debt has increased from 9.4% of
GDP to 20.8% during the same period. Despite these recent changes, the government budget
in Korea has been evaluated as relatively sound compared with other OECD countries. Except
for the (IMF bailout) period 1997-1999, a period of financial crisis triggered by the shortage
of foreign currencies in 1997, the consolidated budget was in surplus and government net
wealth (gross wealth less debt) is still positive.
  However, the surplus of the CB and positive net wealth do not necessarily imply that
current fiscal policies in Korea are sustainable. Excluding the National Pension (NPS) budget
transforms the consolidated budget balance from surplus to deficit. Excluding the NPS fund
(75.6 trillion won as of December 2001) eliminates government net wealth (75.2 trillion won
as of December 2001). The NPS budget surplus will be maintained for the time being,
because the number of current pension benefit recipients is limited; it will take a considerable
time for the majority of current NPS participants to acquire entitlement to NPS benefits




                                                2
because of its short history1. However, the budget will eventually turn to deficit, since
promised pension benefits are too generous relative to contributions. According to the
projection of the National Pension Corporation, the administrative organization of the NPS,
the NPS budget will turn to deficit in 2034 and its fund will be exhausted in 2049.
   Another important trend in Korean budget structure is the rapid increase in social welfare
expenditure. The rate of increase in social welfare expenditure for the period 1995-2001
(25%) is much higher than that of total central government expenditure (12.4%). Until the
mid-1990s, social welfare expenditure was limited, as the Korean government placed a higher
priority on other sectors, including economic development and national defense. The
government restricted Medical Insurance benefits and maintained fees for services at low
levels. Eligibility for the benefits of the public aid programs to low income classes was very
restrictive and benefit levels were quite low. Coverage of other social insurance programs was
also limited. However, since the mid 1990s social welfare expenditure has been increasing
rapidly. This reflects structural change in the social welfare policies. The coverage of social
insurance programs such as the NPS, Medical Insurance, Employment Insurance2, and
Industrial Accident Compensation Insurance3 has been expanded. Public aid programs are
also experiencing a structural change. In 2000, the Livelihood Protection System, which
restricted eligibility by age and working ability, was replaced by the Minimum Living
Standards Security System, which guarantees a minimum living standard to everyone who
passes an income-and-asset-based means test, regardless of one’s working ability. Therefore,
we expect a substantial increase in social welfare expenditure, one that will be accelerated by
population aging. Our projection shows that aggregate public pension benefits will increase
from 1.1% of GDP currently to 16% in 2080. Benefits of the Medical Insurance and public aid
programs are projected to increase from 1.7% and 1.1% of GDP, respectively, to 5.1%, 2.1%4
during the same period.



1
  The NPS, which covers the largest proportion of the Korean population, was introduced in 1988. The
minimum requirement for entitlement to a “full-old-age pension,” which will eventually account for the largest
share of NPS benefit expenditure, is 20-year participation, which implies that this benefit has not yet been paid.
Therefore, the NPS benefit payment at present is limited.
2
  Employment Insurance activities include the provision of unemployment insurance, employment stability
promotion, and vocational ability development activities.
3
 This program is the Korean version of workers’ compensation, i.e., it insures the risks of accidents in the
workplace.
4
  This projection is based on a conservative assumption about the income elasticities of social welfare
expenditure (1.2) and MI benefits (1.2). Considering reduction of work incentives caused by the MLSS and the
increase in fees for services by the MI, the expenditure of social welfare programs could increase more rapidly
than our projection.



                                                        3
 Unfortunately, social insurance contributions are not projected to increase fast enough to
match the increase in social welfare expenditure. With population aging further contributing
to a decrease in tax bases, a substantial increase in rates of tax and social insurance
contributions, to which there would likely be strong resistance, would be needed. Absent this,
the Korean government will eventually face large fiscal deficits. For example, our projection
shows that the deficit of the NPS and the Medical Insurance will amount to 12.6% and 3% of
GDP in 2080, if the current levels of benefits and contribution rates are maintained.
  These prospective changes in government budget indicate that the current consolidated
budget and government net wealth are poor indices of Korea’s fiscal sustainability. A better
assessment of Korea’s fiscal position requires a method, such as Generational Accounting,
that incorporates prospective changes in the economic environment, government budget
flows, and fiscal policies.

3. GA Calculation Procedures

3.1. Basic Framework5

  Generational Accounting is based on the government’s intertemporal budget constraint.
This constraint, written as equation (1), requires that the future net tax payments of current
and future generations be sufficient, in present value, to cover the present value of future
government consumptions as well as service the government’s initial net indebtedness.6


                      D             ∞             ∞
(1)                  ∑ N t ,t −s + ∑ N t ,t +s = ∑ Gs (1 + r ) −( s−t ) − Wt g
                     s =0          s =t          s =t



   The first summation on the left-hand side of (1) adds together the generational accounts
(the present value of the remaining lifetime net payments) of existing generations. The term
Nt,t-s stands for the account of the generation born in year t-s. The index s in this summation
runs from age 0 to age D, the maximum length of life.7 The second summation on the left-


5
 See Auerbach, Gokhale, and Kotlikoff (1991, 1992a, 1992b, 1994) and Kotlikoff (1992) for further discussion
and development of the method of generational accounting.
6
  The constraint does not assume that government debt is ever fully paid off, merely that the debt grows less
quickly than the rate of discount, i.e., that it does not explode. Thus, it is consistent with the long-run existence
of government deficits, as long as deficits are smaller than the amount needed simply to service the level of
outstanding debt.
7
  Hence, the first element of this summation is Nt,t, which is the present value of net payments of the generation
born in year t, the last is Nt,t-D, the present value of remaining net payments of the oldest generation alive in year
t, namely those born in year t-D.



                                                            4
hand side of (1) adds together the present value of remaining net payments of future
generations, with s representing the number of years after year t that the generation is born.
The first term on the right-hand side of (1) is the present value of government consumption.
In this summation the values of government consumption, Gs in year s, are discounted by the

pre-tax real interest rate, r. The remaining term on the right-hand side, Wt g , denotes the

government’s net wealth in year t − its assets minus its explicit debt.
  Equation (1) indicates the zero sum nature of intergenerational fiscal policy. Holding the
present value of government consumption fixed, a reduction in the present value of net taxes
extracted from current generations (a decline in the first summation on the left side of (1))
necessitates an increase in the present value of net tax payment of future generations.
  The term Nt,k is defined by:

                                    k +D
(2)                  N t ,k =       ∑T       s ,k
                                s = max(t , k )
                                                    Ps ,k (1 + r ) −( s −t )


In Expression (2), Ts,k stands for the projected average net tax payments to the government
made in year s by the generation born in year k. The term Ps,k stands for the number of
surviving members of the cohort in year s who were born in year k. For the generations who
are born in year k, where k>t, the summation begins in year k. Regardless of the generation’s
year of birth, the discounting is always back to year t.
   A set of generational accounts is simply a set of values of Nt,k, one for each existing and
future generation, with the property that the combined present value adds up to the right-hand
side of equation (1). Though we distinguish male and female cohorts in the results presented
below, we suppress sex subscripts in (1) and (2) to ease notation.
   Note that generational accounts reflect only taxes and social insurance contributions (taxes
henceforth) paid less transfers received. With the exception of government expenditure on
education8, the accounts do not impute to particular generations the value of government’s
purchases of goods and services because it is difficult to attribute the benefits of such
purchases9. Therefore, the accounts do not show the full net benefit or burden that any

8
 We compute the generational accounts under two alternative assumptions about government expenditures on
education, treating them as (i) government consumption expenditures; and (ii) government transfers.
9
  Bovenberg and ter Rele (1999) tried to incorporate the incidence of government consumption into generational
accounts, assuming that all current generations enjoy the same (per capita) benefits from both government
consumption and the public capital stock. The latter benefits are set at the imputed rent on the public capital
stock, computed as depreciation plus the product of the interest rate and the public capital stock. However, their
approach does not adequately deal with the “public” nature of government public goods.



                                                                               5
generation receives from government policy as whole, although they can show a generation’s
net benefit or burden from a particular policy change that affects only taxes and transfers.
Thus, generational accounting tells us which generations will pay for government spending,
rather than telling us which generations will benefit from that spending. Another characteristic
of generational accounting that should be understood at the outset is that, as its name
suggests, it is an accounting exercise that, like deficit accounting, does not incorporate
induced behavioral effects or macroeconomics responses of policy changes. As a corollary, it
does not incorporate the deadweight loss of taxation in its measure of fiscal burden, again
following the tradition of budget incidence analysis.

3.2. Assessing the Fiscal Burden Facing Future Generations

   Generational Accounts are calculated in two steps. The first step involves calculation of the
net tax payment of current generations (the first term on the left-hand-side of equation (1)).
This is done on the basis of current fiscal rules without being constrained by the intertemporal
budget constraint of the government. In the second step, given the right-hand-side of equation
(1) and the first term on the left-hand-side of equation (1), we determine, as a residual, the
value of the second term on the left-hand side of equation (1), which is the collective
payment, measured as a time-t present value, required of future generations. Accordingly,
whereas the fiscal burdens for current generations are based entirely on current fiscal rules,
the government budget constraint fully determines the fiscal burdens for future generations.
Future generations are thus assumed to absorb the entire adjustment that is required to make
the claims of various generations consistent with the intertemporal budget constraint.
   Based on the collective amount required of future generations, we determine the average
present value lifetime net tax payment for each member of each future generation under the
assumption that the average lifetime tax payment of successive generations rises at the
economy’s rate of productivity growth. Leaving out this growth adjustment, the lifetime net
tax payments of future generations are directly comparable with those of current newborns,
since the generational accounts of both newborns and future generations take into account net
tax payments over these generations’ entire lifetimes. Measuring the generational imbalances
as the difference between two lifetime tax burdens provides a measure for the sustainability of
the public finances. If future generations bear a heavier tax burden than the newly born do,
current fiscal rules will have to be adjusted in the future to meet the budget constraint.

3.3. Extending the Standard Method
  The standard method used to project the average values of particular taxes and transfer
payments by age and sex starts with government forecasts of the aggregate amounts of each


                                               6
type of tax and transfer payment in future years. These aggregate amounts are then distributed
by age and sex based on cross-sectional relative age-sex-tax and age-sex-transfer profiles
derived from cross-sectional micro-data sets. For years beyond those for which government
forecasts are available, age- and sex-specific average tax and transfer amounts are set equal to
those for the latest year for which forecasts are available, with an adjustment for growth.
  This procedure is based on the assumption that the age-sex-profiles of transfer payments
and tax burden do not change over time. The standard procedure also assumes that
government purchases, transfer payments and tax revenues grow at the same rate as GDP,
although in some cases they are broken down into age-specific components, with the
assumption that each component remains constant per member of the relevant population,
adjusted for the overall growth of GDP per capita.
   We extend this standard method in two ways. As the first extension, we incorporate the
prospective changes in the age profiles and aggregate amounts of benefits and contributions of
public pensions. At present, the average National Pension benefit per member of cohorts aged
70 and older is low compared with that for the aged between 55 and 70, since the NPS does
not cover a large proportion of the older age groups. In addition, the number of beneficiaries
and the aggregate benefit amount are limited, since most of those covered by the NPS, in
older age cohorts, have not acquired the entitlement to full benefits because of its short
history. However, maturation of the system will increase the average amount of benefit
payments to the old-age groups, which will flatten the age profile of benefits and increase the
number of the pension recipients and aggregate pension benefit amount. The proportions of
the participants of the Pension for Civil Servants and Pension for Private School Employees
are expected to change, since population aging is likely to change the demand for government
service and education. Therefore, the change in the age profiles of benefits and contribution
will be inevitable.
   Another extension of the standard method is that we incorporate expected future changes in
social welfare expenditures. Even though the aggregate amount of transfer payments by
Medical Insurance and social welfare services and public assistance was limited in the past, its
amount has been increasing rapidly for the past decade due to the recent structural changes in
social welfare policies. However, the current level of social welfare expenditure in Korea
remains much lower than OECD average level, despite its increase in recent years. Therefore,
the social welfare expenditure is expected to increase more rapidly than other components of
government expenditure for a considerable period. Based on this expectation, we assume that
the per capita amount of social welfare expenditure will increase more rapidly than per capita
GDP until they reach the OECD average10.
10
     For detailed information about the future path of social welfare expenditure, see section 3.4.3.


                                                           7
3.4. Calculation Procedure and Underlying Assumptions
     To produce generational accounts for Korea, we require projections of population, taxes,
transfers, and government expenditures, initial government wealth, and a discount rate. We
consider the impact of total, not national, government. The fiscal policies in Korea are
classified into following groups: social welfare policies, tax system, seigniorage, and
government consumption (see Table 3). The social welfare policies are composed of public
pensions, Medical Insurance (MI), Employment Insurance (EI), Industrial Accident
Compensation Insurance (IACI), and social welfare services and public assistance (Minimum
Living Standards Security System (MLSS) and other social transfer programs (OSTP)). Taxes
are classified as labor income tax, capital income tax, consumption tax, taxes on asset-
holdings, taxes on asset-transactions and other taxes. Government consumption is broken
down into expenditure on education and other government consumption.
  We follow the standard procedure, mentioned in section 3.3, to produce the generational
accounts for most of the components of fiscal policies, except for the cases of public pensions,
the MI, the MLSS and the OSTP. To project contributions and benefits of public pensions, we
construct projection models for each public pension scheme. The aggregate benefits of the
MI, the MLSS and the OSTP are assumed to increase more rapidly than the GDP growth rate,
until they reach the OECD average.

3.4.1. Population Projection
   The projections used to compute generational accounts are based on the 2001 population
projection model of National Statistics Office (NSO). The 2001 NSO population projection
covers the period 2001-2050. We extend the population projection up to 2110 using fertility
rates11, mortality rates12, and international mobility rates13. Baseline calculations are
conducted under the assumption that the total fertility rate and age-sex mortality rates will
remain constant at their 2050 levels until 2110.

3.4.2. Projecting Contributions and Benefits of Public Pensions
  Public pensions in Korea consist of 2 different plans: National Pension (NPS); and
Occupational Pensions. The Occupational Pensions has 3 different plans: Pension for Civil

11
   The fertility rates (per 1000 women) are projected to decrease from currently 1.47 to 1.40 in 2050. For the
time path of fertilities and alternative assumptions about the fertilities, see Table 2.
12
     The average life expectancy is projected to rise from currently 76 years to 83 years in 2050.
13
   International movement of population is limited in Korea. For example, net immigration in 2000 was 11
thousand (emigration 43 thousand, immigration 54 thousand). We assume that the international movement rates
remain constant at their 2050 levels until 2110.



                                                           8
Servants (PCS); Pension for Private School Employees (PPS); and Pension for Military
Personnel (PMP). The PMP is excluded in GA calculation, since the data necessary for
calculation are not published. Instead, we treat the deficit of the PMP budget as government
consumption14.

     The National Pension
  We project the contributions and benefit payments of the NPS by year-sex-age, using the
long-term projections of the National Pension Corporation (NPC) and data published in
National Pension Statistical Yearbook.
  The projections of the NPC consist of: (i) projection of macroeconomic variables; (ii)
projection of the number of insurants and their average income by year, sex, and age; and (iii)
projection of the number of new pension benefit recipients and their average pension benefits
by year-sex-age. The National Pension Statistical Yearbook publishes the items (ii) and (iii)
for existing pension participants and pension recipients. We adjust the projection of the NPC
in two ways: we recalculate the distributions of the NPS insurants and pension benefit
recipients based on the 2001 population projection, since the projection of the NPC is based
on the 1996 population projection; we also recalculate the average income of the pension
participants and the average level of benefit amount, since our assumptions about
macroeconomic variables, such as growth and inflation rates, are different from projected
values of the NPC.
  We assume that the current NPS policies including replacement ratio of benefits and
contribution rates is maintained, in order to evaluate the sustainability of the current system.

     The Occupational Pensions
   We construct a projection model for benefits and contribution of the PCS and the PPS,
since their administrative organizations do not provide long-term projections. The projection
model consists of 3 parts: (i) projection of the number and the distribution of participants and
retirees by year-sex-age-period of service15; (ii) projection of contributions by participants by
year-sex-age-period of service; (iii) projection of the number of benefit recipients and
average benefit payment by year-sex-age.
  Projection of the number and the distribution of participants and retirees begins with an
imputation of their distribution in benchmark year 2000. Neither the Statistical Yearbook for

14
   The total expenditure of the PMP for recent years is about 20-30% of that of the PCS. Since the ratio of
expenditure for the former to that for the latter is declining, ignoring the PMP will not produce highly biased
results.
15
   The distribution of participants and retirees by period of service is needed, since participants’ income and the
benefits of the retirees depend crucially on the period of service.



                                                         9
the PCS nor the Statistical Yearbook for the PPS reports the joint distribution of the
participants and the retirees by age-period of service. Instead, they report the distributions by
age and by period of service separately16. In order to estimate the joint distribution, we
assume that the age and the period of service are positively correlated: i.e. the insurants with
shorter period of service are more likely to be younger. Under this assumption, we allocate the
insurants with shorter period of service to younger age groups. The distributions after the
benchmark year are computed based on the retirement rates by sex-age-period of service and
distribution of new entrants estimated with the data reported in the Statistical Yearbooks. The
number of new entrants of the PCS (the PPS) is assumed to increase at the rate of population
growth rate for all ages (for those aged 16-24)17.
   Projection of contributions requires the projection of average wage profile by sex-age-
period of service. We generally assume that wages of participants depend only on sex and
period of service, although for PCS participants the wage is assumed not to depend on the sex,
based on the facts that (1) a civil servant’s wage is determined by position and period of
service and (2) there is little sex discrimination on wages among civil servants, compared with
the private sector in Korea. The wage level of each group is imputed using the data reported
in the Statistical Yearbook for the PCS, the Statistical Yearbook for the PPS, and the Statistical
Yearbook of Ministry of Government Administration and Home Affairs. Contribution rates for
the occupational pensions are assumed to remain constant at the current rates.
   The distribution of new recipients of the pension benefits by year, sex, age, and period of
service is projected using the retirement rates and the distribution of participants. The average
amount of benefits of new recipients by year-sex-age-period of service is computed based on
the pension benefit formula. The Statistical Yearbook for the PCS and the Statistical Yearbook
for the PPS publish the distribution of the existing benefit recipients and average benefit level
of each group in the benchmark year. Using these values and distributions for the existing and
new pension recipients, we compute the distribution of pension recipients and average benefit
amount by sex-age after the benchmark year.
   Projection of the path of contributions and benefits by sex and age requires an assumption
about the rate of wage growth, since new pension recipients’ benefits increase at this rate and
the benefits of existing pension recipients are wage-indexed. We assume the same path of
wage growth as that in the case of the NPS.

16
   The Statistical Yearbook for the PCS does not report the sex-age distribution. We assume that the proportion
of female government employees is 30% for all age groups, based on the fact that the proportion is about 30%
in recent years.
17
  This assumption is based on the fact that the role of government employees is closely related with the welfare
of the whole population while the distribution of the students attending private schools is concentrated on the
group aged 16-24.



                                                      10
     Income Tax on Pension Benefits
     Income tax is newly imposed on the pension benefits from 2002. Since data on taxation of
pension income are not available, we project the tax burden on the pension benefits under the
assumption that the average effective tax rates across income levels (adjusted for overall
growth of GDP per capita) remain constant at current levels.
  The tax burdens by year, sex, and age so estimated are reflected in the accounts for public
pensions reported in Tables 4, 5, and 6, instead of being added to the accounts for income tax
burden, under the implicit assumption that the tax revenue from taxation on pension income is
transferred to the public pension trust funds.

3.4.3. Fiscal Projections of Other Components

     Determining Generational Profiles
   The profiles of taxes and transfers are estimated in two steps. The first step involves the
calculation of the profiles of the components belonging to each program. In the second step,
we compute the weighted average of profiles of components for each program, where the
weight is the tax revenue (benefit amount) proportion of each tax (each benefit). In order to
estimate tax and transfer profiles we use various micro-data sets and statistical yearbooks
published by the government (see Table 3). The micro-data sets include Daewoo Panel18,
Korea Labor Panel19, Family Income and Expenditure Survey20, and National Survey of
Income and Expenditure21.
  The Daewoo Panel is used to estimate the profiles of most taxes and social insurance
contributions and some components of social welfare programs such as the Minimum Living
Standards Security System. The profiles for consumption taxes and seigniorage are estimated
using the Family Income and Expenditure Survey, since more detailed information about
consumption and cash-holdings is contained in that data set. The Korea Labor Panel Survey
contains the information needed to estimate the age-sex-profiles of net wealth. We use this to
estimate the profiles of taxes on asset holdings, and also some components of capital income

18
   This data set is a PSID-type micro-data set constructed by Daewoo Economic Research Institute, which is a
private research institute. The data set covers the whole population and the period 1993-1998.
19
   This data set is a PSID-type micro-data set constructed by Korea Institute of Labor, a state-run research
institute. This data set covers the whole population and the period since 1998.
20
   This data set is annually constructed by the National Statistics Office. Unlike the Daewoo Panel and the
Korea Labor Panel, this data set is not panel data. The sample is renewed every five years. The Family Income
and Expenditure Survey covers families in urban areas with two or more members. It contains detailed
information about consumption expenditures.
21
   This data set is constructed by the National Statistics Office every five years. It covers the whole population
and contains detailed information about income, consumption, asset holdings and asset transactions.



                                                       11
tax and labor income tax such as corporation tax and Inhabitant Tax, since the standard
method attributes the corporation tax burden to asset holders and the Inhabitant Tax burden is
dependent upon the corporation tax burden. The National Survey of Family Income and
Expenditure is used to estimate the profiles of Taxes on Asset Transactions, since it surveys
the transactions in financial assets and real estate. Tax bases of Education tax and Special Tax
for Rural Development Tax consist of: (1) the tax amount of some components of labor
income tax, capital income tax, consumption tax, and tax on asset holding and transactions;
(2) receipts of banks and insurance companies; and (3) some tax expenditures. Therefore, we
use various data sources, containing information about the tax burden, financial asset holdings
and tax expenditures, for the estimation of the profiles of the tax burden.
  For the components that are not covered by the micro-data sets, we use statistical yearbooks
published by the government. In the case of Medical Insurance and Expenditure on Education,
the government’s statistical yearbooks report their age-sex profiles of the benefits and
contributions. For the case of other components such as Employment Insurance, Industrial
Accident Compensation Insurance, the social transfer programs other than the MLSS, we
impute the profiles in two steps. In the first step, we decompose the benefits of each social
welfare program into age-specific benefits and non-age-specific benefits. The age-specific
benefits and the non-age-specific benefits are assumed to distribute equally to the relevant
age-sex groups and to the whole population respectively. In the next step, we compute the
weighted average of the benefits for each age-sex group, with the weight being the proportion
of each benefit’s amount, and impute its relative age-sex profile, with the level for the
representative male aged 40 being normalized to be 1. Figures 1-20 show the age-sex profiles
of benefits and tax burdens.

  Projection of Aggregates
   In order to project the aggregates of government consumption, taxes and transfers, we need
to define the scope of government. We follow the definition of the National Income and
Product Account (NIPA) of Korea. The government defined by the NIPA covers the central
government, local governments, public education institutions, some social insurance
programs, and non-profit organizations financed by the government and providing services
such as research on the economy, science and public administration. Social Insurance
programs classified as government organizations include the National Pension (NPS),
Medical Insurance (MI), Employment Insurance (EI), Industrial Accident Compensation
Insurance (IACI) and other programs into which to participation is mandatory. The
Occupational Pensions that consist of the Pension for Civil Servants (PCS), the Pension for
Private School Employees (PPS) and the Pension for Military Personnel (PMP) are not



                                              12
defined as government organizations but as financial corporations in Korean NIPA, since they
do not cover the whole population. We include the Occupational Pensions in the scope of the
government program since the government controls them though various fiscal policies and
guarantees their benefit payments
  The total expenditure of the government defined in Korean NIPA as of 2000 amounts to
119 trillion won (23% of GDP). This amount includes government final consumption
expenditure, subsidies, social security benefits and assistance grants, current transfers, gross
fixed capital formation and capital transfers. We define government consumption expenditure
as total expenditure on these items22 less social insurance benefits and benefits of social
welfare services and public assistance. In order to prevent double counting of social insurance
benefits, we subtract the benefits of social welfare programs such as the NPS (1.61 trillion
won), the MI (8.79 trillion won), the EI (2.06 trillion won), IACI (1.68 trillion won), the
MLSS (2.40 trillion won) and OSTP (3.20 trillion won), since these benefits are included in
the NIPA measure of government expenditure.
   Our procedure for projecting the future path of total government consumption begins with
decomposing 2000 government consumption expenditure into (1) age-specific expenditures
and (2) non-age-specific expenditures. The NIPA in Korea classifies government expenditure
into 13 groups: general public service (10.7% of government consumption as of 2000),
defense (12.4%), public order and safety (6.2%), education (17.5%), health (1.3%), social
security and welfare services (18.2%)23, housing and community amenities (6.6%),
recreation-culture-religion (2.7%), fuel and energy (1.3%), agriculture-forestry-fishing
(7.2%), mining-manufacture-construction (2.3%), transportation and communication (11.7%)
and others (2.2%). The government consumption on education, health, and social security and
welfare services are defined as age-specific expenditures, and other groups are defined as
non-age-specific. The per capita level of non-age-specific government consumption is
assumed to increase at the rate of productivity growth, whose real value is assumed to be
1.5% per annum in the base case. All government transfer programs including social
insurance and social welfare programs such as the MLSS and OSTP are age-specific, since
the distribution of participants and benefit recipients depends on the demographic structure.
22
  As pointed out by Auerbach et al. (1991), an important issue that arises in considering government as well as
private consumption is the treatment of durables. The proper economic treatment involves imputing rent on
private and government durables and including this rent (and excluding expenditures on durables) in private and
government consumption, respectively. However, the Korean NIPA does not compute and report the imputed
rent. The government capital income reported in NIPA is mainly composed of interest income from financial
assets. Therefore, we include capital expenditures such as gross fixed capital formation and capital transfers in
government consumption expenditure. This simplification affects the annual estimates of government
consumption expenditures, but not their present value and hence our estimates of generational imbalance.
23
  This proportion includes the amount subtracted for prevention of double counting. When computing the GA,
we subtract the amount from this item.


                                                       13
  Government consumption on education is assumed proportional to the population aged 0-
24, and the per capita level of expenditure for the relevant group is assumed to increase at the
rate of productivity growth. Government consumption on health care, social security and
welfare services are assumed as dependent upon the sex-age distribution of the MI benefits
and government social transfers (the MLSS and the OSTP) respectively. We assume that
government consumption on health, social security and welfare services, and the benefits of
MI, the MLSS and the OSTP will increase more rapidly than per capita GDP until they reach
the OECD average, since current levels of these expenditures are much lower than those of
other OECD countries. Per capita levels of health and MI benefits (government consumption
on social security and welfare services and the MLSS and OSTP benefits) of relevant age-sex
groups are assumed to increase at the rate of per capita GDP growth multiplied by the income
elasticity (1.2)24, until the total amount of government consumption on the health care and MI
benefits (or on government consumption on social welfare and the MLSS and the OSTP
benefits) reaches the OECD average as of 1995, 5.94% (or 4.12%) of GDP. The per capita
benefits of relevant age groups for other social insurance programs, such as the EI and the
IACI, are assumed to increase at the rate of productivity growth.
   Social insurance contributions are age-specific, since the bases for the contributions are
labor income and business income that are associated with the economically active
population. We assume that per capita contributions of relevant age groups will increase at the
productivity growth rate except for the case of the MI. The MI contributions are treated
separately in order to take into account the tendency of per capita MI benefits to increase
more rapidly than productivity growth, and the structural problem of the MI budget in Korea.
In recent years, MI contribution revenues have fallen far short of MI benefits. As of 2000,
revenues were 80% of benefits; the difference between them is financed by government
subsidy. We assume that the difference between the contribution revenue and the benefit
expenditure per participant remain constant at the level of 200025, since there is strong
resistance to increases in the MI contribution rate.
  Aggregate labor income tax and capital income tax revenues are projected under the
assumption that per capita values depend on productivity growth and the size of the

24
   The income elasticity of the government expenditure on health care is based on the estimates by Newhouse
(1997), Leu (1983, 1986), Gertham et al. (1998, 1992) and the OECD (1993), whose values range between 1.2
and 1.4. Exceptionally low or high estimates are produced by Gerdtham (1991, 1992) (0.74), Moon (2000)
(1.75) and the OECD (1993) (1.6). In the case of the government expenditure on social security and welfare
services, Moon (2000) produced a high estimate of income elasticity (1.54). We make a very conservative
assumption about the income elasticity (1.2) in order to avoid the over-projection of the government
expenditure on these sectors. We also try sensitivity analyses assuming the estimates of Moon (2000) and lower
values for the elasticities (see section 4.4).
25
     The population aging will widen the gap between the total MI contribution revenue and benefits expenditure.



                                                        14
economically active population, i.e., labor income tax and capital income tax revenues are
assumed to be proportional to the product of the economically active population (aged 18-65)
and average productivity of those belonging to these age groups, and average productivity is
assumed to increase at the rate of productivity growth. Other taxes are treated as non-age-
specific, i.e. the total tax revenue increases at the rate of GDP growth.

3.5. Treatment of Corporation Tax
  The corporation tax burden is assumed proportional to the wealth. The distribution of net
wealth is estimated using the Korea Labor Panel. The corporation tax requires special
treatment, because of two related problems with using measured corporation tax revenue to
determine the burden of corporate income taxation. First, existing assets may have excess
future taxes capitalized into their values; such taxes should not be assigned to new investors
even if they occur in the future. On the other hand, the timing of payments of taxes from new
investment may have a different pattern than would an income tax, meaning that the ratio of
current annual tax payments may not provide an accurate measure of the effective marginal
tax rate facing new investment. To correct these biases, we use the following methodology.
Our calculation is based on the user cost of capital approach, which assumes that the marginal
product of capital equals the user cost of capital, C, where


                      (r + δ )(1 − τz )
(3)              C=
                           1−τ


where r is the investor’s required after-tax return, δ is the investment’s economic rate of
depreciation, τ is the investor’s marginal tax rate, and z is the present value of depreciation
allowances.
   Two measures are necessary for the allocation of capital income taxes: the tax-based
discount on old capital (Q) and difference between the marginal effective tax rate on new
capital and average capital income tax rate (∆).

(4)              Q = τ (z − z0 )


where z 0 is the present value of depreciation allowances per unit of old capital.

(5)              ∆ = (α − m)(C − δ )


where


                                               15
                        C − (r + δ )
(6)               m=
                          C −δ


is the marginal effective tax rate on new capital and


                       τ (C − b)
(7)               α=
                         C −δ


is the average capital income tax rate.
   In order to calculate z0, we need to consider past patterns of investment. We assume that
investment grows at a constant rate n. Then at date 0 (the present) the nominal amount of
capital purchased at date –s was I0e-(n+π)s, where π is the inflation rate. If this investment has
been written off at the constant geometric rate ϕ, the asset at date 0 has a basis of I0e-(n+π)se-φs
and receives depreciation allowances of ϕ times this basis. Thus total allowances on the
existing capital stock K are

                             ∞                                      ϕ
(8)               bK = ϕ ∫ I 0 e −( n+π ) s e −ϕs ds =                   I0
                             0                                   n +π +ϕ


Since the capital stock equals the sum of depreciated net investment we have

                         ∞                              1
(9)               K = ∫ I 0 e − ns e −δs ds =              I0
                         0                            n +δ


As a result, we have

                       ϕ (n + δ )
(10)              b=
                       n +π +ϕ


  The present value of all depreciation allowances on old capital equals the basis of each
vintage multiplied by the present value of remaining depreciation deductions on that vintage:


                             1       ∞                        ∞
                     z0 =
                             K   ∫
                                 0
                                         I 0 e −( n+π ) s e −ϕs ∫ e −( r +π )ν ϕe −ϕν dv ds
                                                             0
(11)                             ϕ           I0           ϕ       n +δ           n +δ
                         =                           =                    = zˆ
                             r + π + ϕ K (n + π + ϕ ) r + π + ϕ n + π + ϕ      n +π +ϕ



                                                                  16
where ẑ is the present value of depreciation allowances per unit of depreciated basis.

  Substituting (6), (7), and (10) into (5) yields


                                     (r + π + ϕ )(n + δ )
(12)             ∆ = (r + δ )τz −                         τ zˆ
                                          n +π +ϕ



Substituting (11) into (4) implies



                                  n+δ
(13)             Q = τz − τzˆ
                                n +π +ϕ


By assuming that zˆ = z , we have


                                  (r + π + ϕ )(n + δ ) 
(14)             ∆ = (r + δ )τz 1 −                   
                                  (n + π + ϕ )(r + δ ) 

                             n+δ 
(15)             Q = τz 1 −      
                          n +π +ϕ 

                       ∞                              ϕ
(16)             z = ∫ e −( r +π ) vϕ e −ϕv dv =
                      0                            r +π +ϕ


   We select values of the parameters used for the calculation of ∆ and Q based on the
realized values of variables related to corporation management and tax law for the period
1991-2001. The economic depreciation rate δ is calculated using the analysis of Kwack
(1985) and the estimated asset proportion reported in Pyo (2002). The resulting value of
economic depreciation is 8%. The inflation rate and real growth rate of investment are
assumed to be 5% and 4% respectively. The geometric rate of the depreciation allowance ϕ is
assumed to be 15% based on the estimate of Chun (2003). The investor’s required after-tax
rate of return is calculated using the formula for cost of capital for each type of marginal fund
source and the estimated proportion of investment by source of fund reported in the Analysis
of Private Enterprise Management; the resulting value is 8.5%. The present value of
depreciation allowances (z) is 0.528, based on the calculation using equation (16). The


                                                       17
corporation tax rate is assumed 0.32. The resulting values for Q and ∆ are 0.0844 and
0.003826. These fractions are multiplied by the 404 trillion won, the value of depreciable
assets held by the corporation in 2000 to arrive at a 34.1 trillion won capitalized burden on
old capital and 1.53 trillion won subtraction from current total corporation income taxes.
With these values, we correct for the capitalization of corporation tax in old capital values
and the timing of taxes on new capital.

3.6. Determining Government Net Wealth and Discount Rates
   We take net capital income (6.3 trillion won as of 2000), including net interest income and
rents, divided by the sum of our assumed real interest rate (3.5%) and an assumed inflation
rate (3%)27 as our measure of 2000 government net wealth, as in Auerbach et al. (1991). The
resulting value of government net wealth as of 2000 is 97.1 trillion won. We assume that the
value is 100 trillion won at the end of 2000.
   The discount rate for the evaluation of GA is assumed 6.5%, based on the values of the
assumed real interest rate and the assumed inflation rate. We also try sensitivity analysis using
higher discount rate (7.5%), since in the presence of uncertainty the discount rate should
probably be higher than the government’s borrowing rate28.

4. Findings
   The benchmark year in the GA calculation is 2000. We regard the generations alive in the
benchmark year as current generations and classify cohorts by the age. We treat cohorts born
in 2001 and after as future generations. We compute net payments (or net taxes) across
generations under the alternative assumptions of treatment of corporation tax and educational
expenditure. Net Payment (I) is the generational account taking account of the infra-marginal
corporation tax adjustment, explained in section 3.5. Net Payment (II) is the account without
consideration of the tax adjustment. Net Payment (III) is the net payment, treating educational
expenditure as a transfer. We also compute the composition of generational accounts for fiscal
policies including social insurance programs, social transfer programs and taxation of various
tax bases separately.

26
  The values of Q and ∆ differ noticeably from those in Auerbach et al. (1991). The difference for the values is
due mainly to the difference in the required after-tax rate for investors. The value adopted in this study is 8.5%
while that used in Auerbach et al. (1991) is 4%. The other parameter values related to Q and ∆ adopted in the
two studies are quite similar.
27
  The assumed real interest rate and inflation rate are based on the values of interest rates for government bonds
and inflation rates realized in recent years.
28
   In the presence of uncertainty, we need to adjust the risk of uncertain government spending and taxes in the
future. If the risk aversion on the uncertain taxes is larger than that of uncertain spending, a higher discount rate
than the risk-free government’s borrowing rate should be adopted.


                                                        18
4.1. The Burden on Future Generations
  Tables 4-6 report the generational accounts for male, female and sex-combined cohorts,
under the base case assumptions for the productivity growth rate (1.5%), the discount rate
(6.5%) and fertility rate (medium fertility). All of these tables show positive values of the net
payments for most cohorts alive in 2000 except for cohorts aged 90 or older, indicating that
most generations will, on balance, pay more in present value than receive. This result is robust
under the alternative assumptions regarding the treatment of intra-marginal capital income
taxes and educational expenditure. One reason for positive burdens even among the elderly is
the high taxes on consumption, capital income and assets, relative to taxes on labor income29.
The age profile of the average tax burden on capital is shown more skewed to older age
groups than that of labor income tax and the average level of consumption tax burden for
older age groups is quite high (see Figures 13-16).
   The more important reason for the result is that the aggregate amounts of social welfare
benefits such as public pensions benefits, Medical Insurance (MI) benefits, Minimum Living
Standards Security (MLSS) Benefits and other social welfare services (OSTP) are quite small
as of 2000 (see Figures 25-27). Aggregate public pension and MI benefits are 1.1% and 1.7%
of GDP respectively as of 2000 and those for the MLSS and the OSTP are 0.5% and 0.6% of
GDP respectively. As a result, the net taxes as of 2000 are positive for most cohorts except for
the groups aged 90 or more (see Figures 21-23). However, maturation of the public pension
system30 and the projected increase in social welfare expenditures will increase transfer
payments to old-age groups. As a result, the accounts for a wider range of old-age groups will
turn to negative. For example, net taxes for groups aged 65 or more as of 2050 are negative
(see Figure 24).
   There are some differences among the three measures of net payment. Net Payment (I) is
larger than Net Payment (II) for older generations31. This is mainly due to the fact that older
cohorts hold much larger proportion of net wealth, whose prices are reduced because of
capitalization of capital income taxation. Treating all capital income taxes as marginal taxes
on new capital income lowers the fiscal burden on older living generations, since these groups
are no longer being assigned the reduction in capital values associated with the infra-marginal
taxation on old capital. The difference between the two measures is larger for males, since the
proportion of net wealth owned by males is larger than that owned by females. The

29
   Revenues from consumption tax, capital income tax, taxes on asset holding, and labor income tax as of 2000
were 9.1%, 5.1%, 1.3%, and 2.2% of GDP respectively.
30
   Figure 4 shows that the maturing of the public pension will increase the benefit levels of the aged groups and
flatten the age profile of public pension benefits.
31
     For example Net Payment (II) of the age-85 cohort is lower than Net Payment (I) by 46%.



                                                        19
importance of the special treatment of capital income taxes is also demonstrated in the
changes of net payments for younger living cohorts. Net payment (II) for younger generations
is larger than net payment (I)32, since these groups hold little capital and will face many years
of somewhat higher marginal tax rates. Treating expenditure on education as a transfer to the
relevant age groups decreases net payments, especially for younger age groups33.
   A common feature of the three measures of the net payment is that the net payments for
younger cohorts are much larger than those for older generations. This primarily reflects the
fact that older generations, whose members typically expect a shorter period until retirement
than younger generations, can expect to pay relatively small amounts of taxes and social
insurance contributions over the rest of their lives, while receiving MI benefits, public
pensions benefits and other social welfare benefits, even though their amount is not very large
as of 2000. In addition, the net payments for males are larger than for females for most
cohorts, because of lower female economic participation rates, and the fact that many women
receives social insurance survivor’s benefits as dependents of the deceased and tend to receive
larger amount of the MI benefits and social transfer payments than men.
   Net payments are largest around age 20, because around this age people tend to join the
labor market and start to work. Therefore, they expect the longest economic participation
periods from this age. For example, the age-20 account (Net Payment (I) and Net Payment
(II)) is at least 25% higher than the age-0 account, for both males and females. In the case of
Net Payment (III), the difference is larger. The age-20 account is at least 100% higher than the
age-0 account. Net payments decline from age 20 onward. In particular, there is a sharp
decrease in net payments between age 50 and age 60, since around age 55 many workers tend
to retire and acquire eligibility for social welfare benefits, including public pension benefits.
However, the net payments of many older age groups are still positive because they pay
substantial amounts of consumption tax and tax on capital and the amount of social welfare
benefits is limited as of 2000.
   The bottom row of each table, labeled “Future Generations,” indicates the present value of
amounts that those born in 2001 will, on average, pay, assuming that subsequent generations
pay this same amount except for an adjustment for growth. The accounts (Net Payment (I)
and Net Payment (II)) for future generations for males, females, and combined cohorts are
about 115% larger than those for the aged 0. In the case of the Net Payment (III), the accounts
for the future generations are about 195% higher than those for the aged 034.

32
     For groups aged less than 20, Net Payment (II) is higher than Net Payment (I) by about 18%.
33
     For groups aged less than 20, Net Payment (III) is 59-84% of Net Payment (I).
34
   The difference in accounts between age-0 and future generations is much larger in the case of Net Payment
(III) since education services are concentrated among age groups below 20 (see Figure 20).



                                                        20
  This finding implies that the current fiscal policies are not sustainable and the substantial
amount of fiscal burden is shifted to the future generations. This finding can be contrasted
with the fact that for the last few years, we have observed the “surplus” of the consolidated
budget balance and positive government net wealth. Considering the conceptual problems of
the consolidated budget balance and government net wealth as indices for the fiscal
sustainability, the generational accounts will contribute to correct the fiscal illusions caused
by the consolidated budget.

4.2. Composition of Generational Accounts
   In Tables 4-6, the generational accounts are broken down into tax and transfer components.
For social insurance programs, the figures reflect present values of net payments. The
accounts for public pensions across age groups show irregular patterns, since public pensions
consist of two different systems: National Pension (NPS) and Occupational Pensions.
   In the case of the National Pension, net payments are most negative for those aged 35 to 55.
This means that these groups benefit the most from the NPS, and simply reflects the fact that
age groups 35-55 are the main participants of the system at this early stage of its introduction.
For older age groups, the net benefits are smaller, since the number of them covered by the
system is limited and thus the average level of benefits is low. Net benefits are smaller for
younger age groups, since they expect longer economic participation periods and have to pay
larger amounts of contributions for the rest of their lives, while benefits are more heavily
discounted than for older age groups. The lower values of net benefits also reflect the fact that
the replacement ratio has been lowered35 since the introduction of the system in order to
decrease the implicit debt of the system. The male generational accounts for the NPS are more
negative than the female accounts, since the NPS mainly covers income-earners and economic
participation rates for males are higher than for females. Because of generous benefits
compared with contributions, the budgetary burden will be shifted to the future generations.
For the future generations, the generational account of the NPS represents about 25% of the
Net Payment (I) or the Net Payment (II), and accounts for 31% of the Net Payment (III).
   The PCS turns out to be a much more generous pension scheme than the NPS. The
combined account of the PCS for those aged 0 is about 15.3% of the NPS for the same age
group while the number covered is only about 5.6% of the latter36. This means that the

35
   The 1998 revision of the NPS Act lowered the replacement ratio from 70% to 60% for the benefit recipients
with 40-year participation period. In the process of the NPS revisions, the government adopted a phase-out
scheme that, for the period before the revision, the replacement ratio under the old system is applied, while for
the period after the revision, the new pension benefit formula is employed for the calculation of benefits.
36
   The number of the participants in the NPS was 16.2 million as of December 2000, while that to the PCS was
about 909 thousand.



                                                       21
average per capita lifetime net benefit of participants to the PCS is about 2.7 times as large as
that of participants in the NPS.
   The difference in the magnitude of net benefits is primarily due to the difference in the
replacement ratio, the base income for benefits and contributions, the benefit entitlement age,
and the indexation method for benefits. The replacement ratio of the NPS for an average
income earner with 20 years of contribution is 30%, while that of the PCS is about 50%. The
base income for the NPS benefits is lifetime average income37 while the base income for the
PCS (and other Occupational Pension schemes) is the average wage income for the last three
years before the recipient’s retirement. The wage level around retirement is much higher than
the lifetime average income, since the wage structure of the government employees specifies
a higher level for one with a longer period of service. Furthermore, in the case of the NPS, an
upper bound for the base income is specified, in order to prevent it from providing excessive
benefits for high-income workers, while the PCS does not limit base income for high-income
workers. Another difference is that the benefits of the PCS are totally income-related while
the NPS benefit formula has a strong redistributive element. Finally, the differences in the
benefit entitlement age38 and indexing method further widen the gap of benefits between the
two pension plans. The entitlement age for the NPS is currently 60, while pension benefits of
the Occupational Pension schemes are paid immediately after retirement. For government
employees, private school employees and military personnel who joined the Occupational
pensions after 1995, the pension benefit entitlement age is 60, but those who joined before
1995 will receive pension benefits immediately after retirement. The method for maintaining
the real value of benefits is based on inflation indexing for the NPS while the Occupational
Pension schemes are indexed to wage growth. Thus, PCS benefits grow faster than prices,
given normal productivity growth.
   Compared with the NPS, the per capita net benefits of the PCS for older age groups are
larger. Unlike the NPS, which has limited coverage for those above age 60, the PCS covered
most of the older age groups owing to its earlier introduction (in 1960). For future
generations, the generational account of the PCS represents 31.6% of that of the NPS, which
is equivalent to 7.9% of Net Payment (I) or Net Payment (II) (or 9.8% of the Net payment
(III)). This means that the fiscal burden shifted to future generations per one participant of the
PCS is about 5.6 times as large as the value for the NPS39.

37
  The base income for the NPS benefits is the average of income during the participation period of each
participant. Henceforth, we denote this average income as lifetime average income.
38
  The difference in entitlement age further widens the gap of the benefit level between the two public pension
schemes, since the participants in the PCS expect a longer benefit-receiving period.
39
  In addition to more generous benefits of the PCS and larger net benefit of older age groups, a smaller pension
fund is another reason for the heavier fiscal burden of future generations caused by the PCS. The funds of the


                                                      22
   Comparing the net benefits across sex groups, it is found that males benefit much more
from the PCS than females, since the proportion of male government employees is much
higher than female employees. The proportion of male government employees is about 70%
as of 2000 and the proportion was much higher before 2000. It is also remarkable that for
groups aged more than 70 the net benefits for females are much smaller than for males, and
the age groups whose accounts are most negative are younger for females40. This reflects the
facts that the PCS has not covered many females in the past and that female government
employees tend to retire earlier than their males counterparts.
   The net benefit per participant of the Pension for Private School employees (PPS) is
smaller than that of the PCS, even though these two pension plans share the same formula for
contributions and benefits. The lifetime net benefit from the PPS under the current policy
regime, which is represented by the accounts for age 0, is about 7.9% that of the PCS, while
the number of participants of the former is 23.2% of the latter41. This is primarily due to the
expected future decrease in the number of students due to population aging and the shorter
duration of service of private school employees. In the financial projection models of the PCS
and the PPS, the numbers of new entrants of the two plans are assumed proportional to the
whole population and the population aged 0-24, respectively. The decrease in fertility rates
and death rates will decrease the proportion of the younger age groups, and this will reduce
the ratio of those covered by the PPS to those covered by the PCS. As of 2000, the average
lengths of continuous service of government employees and private school employees are
14.8 years and 11.3 years respectively. In particular, the average expected duration of service
of female private school employees is only 8.0 years, while that of males is 13.2 years. The
shorter expected period of participation for the PPS caused by the shorter expected duration of
service will lower the level of benefits. The fiscal burden shifted to future generations by the
PPS is much smaller than that of the PCS. The generational account of the PPS for the future
generations is only 12.9% of that of PCS, as opposed to the ratio of the number of participants
(23.2%). This implies that the fiscal burden per participant shifted to the future generations by
the PPS is about 55.6% of the value for the PCS. This is primarily due to the shorter history42
and larger magnitude of pension funds (4.0 trillion won as of 2000) as well as the shorter
duration of service. Because of the shorter history of the PPS, its coverage of older age groups
is narrower than that of the PCS and, as a result, the net benefits of older age groups from the

NPS and the PCS as of 2000 are 60.6 trillion won and 1.8 trillion won, respectively.
40
     The accounts are most negative between ages 45 and 70 for males, and between ages 30 and 65 for females.
41
  The number of the participants in the PPS was 211 thousand as of December 2000, while that in the PCS was
about 909 thousand.
42
     The PPS was introduced in 1975.



                                                        23
PPS are relatively small. Even though the number of the new female entrants to the PPS is
larger than that of new male entrants43, males benefit much more from the PPS than females,
since the expected duration of service for males is much longer than that of females.
   The fiscal burden of the future generations caused by public pensions is substantial. For
future generations, the account of the whole public pension system explains 34% of Net
Payment (I) or Net Payment (I), and accounts for 42% of Net Payment (III).
   The accounts of Medical Insurance (MI) for all the sex-age cohorts alive in 2000 show
negative values. This simply reflects the fact that Medical Insurance contributions fall short of
the benefit expenditure. As of 2000, MI contribution revenue is about 80% of MI benefits.
The current gap is explained primarily by the fact that government provides subsidies to the
self-employed in the form of contribution discounts44. The magnitude of the gap will not be
easily reduced. There are increasing pressures on MI expenditure because of the current low
level45: a pressure to widen the scope of medical treatments covered by MI to more expensive
medical cases46, a pressure to increase fees for medical services47, and population aging.
Experience over the past few years shows the difficulty of substantially increasing
contribution rates. Labor unions and non-governmental organizations have proposed to
increase government subsidies in order to recover the MI budget balance, which has
deteriorated due to the recent rapid increase in MI expenditure. Considering all these facts, we
assume that the government does not raise MI contribution rates.
   The generational accounts calculated based on these assumptions indicates that the fiscal
burden of future generations is quite heavy. The account of MI for the future generations
explains about 11.7% of Net Payment (I) or Net Payment (II), and about 14.5% of Net
Payment (III) for the future generations. In contrast to the heavy burden of future generations,
all age groups currently alive benefit from the MI. For example, the net benefit from MI for
age 0 individuals is about 65.6% of the value for the NPS. The net benefits from the MI are
quite high for older age cohorts, since older people are more susceptible to chronic and long-
term diseases. Comparing net benefits across the sexes, females benefit much more from the
MI than males.

43
   The numbers of newly-hired male and female private school employees in 2002 were 5,448 and 11,965,
respectively.
44
  The government also pays for the administrative cost of Medical Insurance, which is counted as government
consumption expenditure.
45
   The level of government expenditure for health is relatively low compared with that of other OECD
countries. The ratio of the expenditure to GDP for Korea is 2.98% as opposed to 5.94% for the OECD average.
46
     The scope of medical treatment covered by MI has been widened to chronic diseases and long-term treatment.
47
  Fees for medical treatment are quite low. This is the outcome of the government’s “small contribution plus
small expenditure” policy.



                                                       24
   The accounts for Employment Insurance (EI) and Industrial Accident Compensation
Insurance (IACI) indicate a relatively sound financial situation. The accounts of the EI and the
IACI for future generations are relatively small compared with those of public pensions or
Medical Insurance. This reflects the fact that the unemployment rate in Korea is relatively low
and the coverage of accidental events by the IACI is considered quite narrow. However, we
cannot preclude the possibility that expenditures of the EI and IACI will increase rapidly,
since unemployment is expected to rise in the future and the coverage of accidental events by
IACI is being extended. It is notable that the accounts of age groups classified as
economically inactive are not balanced, since the EI and the IACI also provide survivors’
benefits and some annuity-type benefits. Comparing the accounts across sexes, the accounts
of the IACI for females are smaller than for males, and the accounts are negative for all
female age groups. This is mainly due to survivor’s benefits that go more to females.
   The fiscal burden caused by the social welfare programs such as the Minimum Living
Standards Security (MLSS) system and other social welfare services and public assistance
(OSTP) will not be very heavy, since in the projection of their aggregates we make a very
conservative assumption about the income elasticity of social welfare expenditure (1.2),
which is applied until the ratio of the sum of expenditure on the MLSS, the OSTP, and
government expenditure on social welfare to GDP reaches the OECD average (4.12% of
GDP). The present value of benefits from these programs for age 0 is about 80.7% of the
value for the labor income tax. However, we cannot preclude the possibility that the
expenditure of the MLSS will increase more rapidly than we projected, considering the
reduction of work incentives caused by the MLSS.
   Another important feature of these programs is that, considering the age structure of the
MLSS and OSTP benefits, they redistribute resource form the young to the old. Thus,
population aging can impose an extra burden on future generations (see Figure 10). The
benefits of these programs are shown to provide more to females than to males, since females
are a large proportion of those in poverty.
  Tables 4-6 also report the present value, rest-of-life tax burdens by category. The largest
present value (for ages 0 and age 30) is the consumption tax, followed by the capital income
tax48, the tax on asset transactions, labor income tax, other taxes, and taxes on asset holdings.
Three important characteristics of the Korean tax system are: (i) the large share of
consumption taxes; (ii) the relative unimportance of labor income taxes; and (iii) the large
proportion accounted for by taxes on asset transactions. Among consumption taxes, Value
Added Tax (VAT) raises the largest revenue of all the taxes, and Special Excise Tax and

48
   Capital income tax (1) and (2) represent the capital income tax burden with and without the infra-marginal
income tax adjustment, respectively.



                                                     25
Transportation Tax also contribute substantially to tax revenue. The average effective labor
income tax rate is quite low, primarily due to the large proportion of tax-exempt workers,
about 46% in 2000. However, labor-tax progressivity is quite high, since most labor income
tax revenue is raised from relatively high-income workers. The large share of taxes on asset
transactions is due to the high frequency of asset transactions rather than high tax rates. The
circulation rate of equities in Korea is the highest in the world49, and the frequency of real
estate transactions is also very high50. Compared to revenues from taxes on asset transactions,
revenues from taxes on asset holding are very small. Taxing asset transactions, rather than
asset holding, relatively heavily is but one illustration of the efficiency and fairness problems
of Korea’s tax system.
  The present value tax burden on older age groups, relative to that on younger age groups, is
heaviest in the case of consumption taxes, followed by capital income taxes (1) (or capital
income taxes (2)), taxes on asset holding, taxes on asset transactions, and labor income taxes.
The age profile of accounts of the capital income tax is similar to that of the tax on asset
holding, since the age profile of corporation tax burden, which comprises a large proportion
of the capital income tax burden, is assumed to be the same as that of net wealth. It is
remarkable that the accounts for the tax on asset transactions are relatively high for the
younger age groups. This reflects the fact that securities (and owner-occupied housing)
transactions are performed by relatively young age groups (see Figure 17).

4.3. Establishing Generational Balance
   Tables 7 and 8 show that the magnitude of the adjustment of tax and social insurance
contributions (tax, hence forth) and transfer payments required to attain long-run government
budget balance is substantial51. Under the base case assumptions (g=1.5%, r=6.5%, medium
fertility), the required tax adjustment is a 56-59% increase in tax burden under if the
adjustment is made only for generations born in 2001 and thereafter. If the adjustment is made
to all cohorts alive in 2004 and later, the required tax adjustment represents a 19-20% increase
in tax burden. Delay in the tax adjustment raises its magnitude. For example, if we delay the
tax adjustment until 2030, the required tax adjustment reaches 37-39%. If the proportional
increase in the tax burden is accompanied with the same percentage decrease in transfer

49
     The rate is about 400% per year as of 2000.
50
  The frequency of real estate transactions is due primarily to expectations of appreciation. The rate of return on
real estate was much higher than that from financial assets for the past several decades. Therefore, speculation
in real estates markets was considered an effective way of accumulating wealth.
51
   Long-run budget balance is defined as the situation where the summation of current government net wealth
and the present value of present and future flows of taxes and social insurance contributions is equal to that of
transfer payments and government consumption.



                                                        26
payments to attain long-run government budget balance, the magnitude of the required
adjustment decreases to 34-39% (if the adjustment is made only for the generations born in
2001 and later years), 12-13% (if the adjustment is made to all the cohorts alive in 2004 and
later) and 21-22% (if we delay the tax adjustment until 2030).

4.4. Sensitivity Analysis
    Tables 9-13 report the results of sensitivity analyses under alternative assumptions about
the fertility rate, the growth rate of labor productivity (g), the discount rate (r), and the income
elasticity of the per capita level of MI benefits and social welfare expenditures (the MLSS and
the OSTP). The alternative assumptions do not change the qualitative results explained above,
even though the absolute levels of generational accounts are substantially affected by the
changes in assumptions.
    It is remarkable that increase in the labor productivity increases the ratio of accounts for
future generations to those for current generations (e.g. those for the age-0 cohort), which
implies that the higher the growth rate is, the more fiscal burden is shifted to the future
generations. This is due to the fact that the budgetary imbalance of public pensions and the MI
is worsened as the growth rate increases. Our calculation shows that the present value of
public pension benefits is more than double that of future contribution revenues52. Therefore,
the gap between benefits and contributions will increase faster than contributions with
productivity growth, since the benefits and contributions are proportionally related to the
income level of participants. The budgetary imbalance of the MI is primarily due to the
population aging. The population aging increases the ratio of benefits to contributions, if the
ratio of the per capita contributions to benefits of the relevant age groups remains constant,
since the ratio of the number of benefit recipients to that of contributors increases with
population aging. Therefore, the gap between the benefits and contributions will increase with
productivity growth, since the benefits and contributions are assumed exponentially related to
the income level. Figures 25 and 26 show that the budgetary gap of public pensions and the
MI become larger than contribution revenue starting around 2040, with the gap becoming
larger afterwards.
    The ratio of accounts for future generations to those for current generations is quite
sensitive to assumptions about the income elasticity of MI benefits and social welfare
expenditures, which implies that future social welfare policies might substantially affect the
long-run fiscal position of the Korean government. Under the high elasticity assumption

52
   The required adjustment to attain long-run budget balance of public pensions is estimated at about a 120%
increase in contributions if the adjustment is made beginning in 2004. If the adjustment is delayed until 2010
(2020), the required adjustment will increase to 135% (175%).



                                                     27
where the elasticities of MI benefits and social welfare expenditure are 1.73 and 1.53,
respectively, the ratio (for Net Payment (I)) of accounts for future generations to that for age-0
cohorts is about 265%, while under the low elasticity assumptions, where the elasticity for
both benefits is 1, the ratio is about 185%.

5. Conclusion
   This paper have reevaluated the long-term fiscal position using the Generational
Accounting, which is modified to reflect the special features of fiscal situation in Korea, such
as prospective change in the public pension benefit profiles and expected increase in social
welfare expenditure. The findings of this paper suggest that unless policy toward existing
generations in Korea is substantially altered, future generations will face excessively heavy
fiscal burden over the course of their lives. The magnitude of the adjustment of tax and social
insurance contributions burden required to attain the long-run government budget balance is
substantial and delays of the adjustment exponentially increases the magnitude of adjustment
required. It is also shown that a substantial part of fiscal burden on the future generations is
explained by the long-run budgetary imbalance of public pensions and Medical Insurance.
   To establish the generational balance, the structural reform of the public pensions is needed.
The imbalance between the benefit level and contributions should be removed. However, the
combination of the benefit decrease and the increase in contribution may provide another
distortion to the financial market and the economy, since the NPS fund is single fund operated
by the government. Projection of the NPC indicates that the NPS fund will reach 40% of GDP
early 2030’s, if the current NPS policy is maintained. A simple adjustment of benefit level and
contribution rate will deteriorate the situation of the financial market. Another issue related to
the public pension is the imbalance of net transfer between the NPS and the occupational
pensions. Therefore, we need more structural approach to the public pension reform, which
minimizes the distortion of the financial market and removes the inequity between the NPS
and the occupational pension participants.
   The imbalance between benefits and contribution of the Medical Insurance should be
removed, through the increase in the contribution rates and revision of the compensation
method for medical services under the Medical Insurance coverage, which provides the
incentives to save the medical expense to the insurants and medical service providers. The
revision of the MLSS is also needed. Even though the current expenditure by the MLSS is not
very large, reduction of work incentives caused by the MLSS may cause rapid increase in the
expenditure.
   In addition to the structural reforms of the social welfare policies, efforts to decrease the
government consumption are necessary, since there will be many factors, which will require


                                               28
the additional government increase, such as premature reunification and the default of the
government guaranteed bonds, which amount to 106.8 trillion won (19.6% of GDP), as of
2001.

References

Papers and Research Reports
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1991), “Generational
   Accounts: A Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting.” In D. Bradford, ed., Tax
   Policy and The Economy, vol. 5, pp. 55-110, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1992a), “Generational
   Accouning: A New Approach to Understanding the Effects of Fiscal Policy on Saving,”
   Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94(2), June, pp. 303-318.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1992b), “Social Security
   and Medicaid Policy from the Perspective of Generational Accounting,” In J. Poterba, ed.,
   Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 6, pp.129-145. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1994), “Generational
   Accounting: A Meaningful Way to Evaluate Fiscal Policy,” The Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, Winter, pp.73-94.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Harry ter Rele (1999), “Generational Accounts for the Netherlands:
   an Update,” paper prepared for 55th Congress of the International Institute of Public
   Finance on Public Finance and Transitions in Social Security, Moscow, August 23-26
Chun, Young Jun (2003), “The Growth and Distributional Effects of the Corporation Tax: A
   Computable General Equilibrium Approach, The Economic Analysis, The Bank of Korea,
   forth-coming.
Gerdtham, U-G (1991), Essays on International Comparison of Health Care Expenditure,
   Linkoping Studies in Arts and Science 66, Linkoping University
Gerdtham, U-G (1992), "Pooling International Health Care Expenditure Data, Health
   Economics 1, pp. 217-231
Gerdtham, U-G., F. Andersson, J. Sogaad and B. Jonsson (1988), Econometric Analysis of
   Health Care Expenditures: a cross-sectional study of the OECD countries," Center for
   Medical Technology Assessment (CMT), University of Linkoping, Sweden.
Gerdtham, U-G., F. Andersson, and J. Sogaad (1992), Econometric Analysis of Health Care
   Expenditures: a cross-sectional study of the OECD countries," in P. Zweifel and H. Frech
   ed., Health Economics Worldwide, Kluwer Academic Publishers.




                                            29
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1992), Generational Accounting−Knowing Who Pays, and When, for
   What We Spend. New York: Free Press.
Kotlikoff, Laurence and Willi Leibfritz (1999), "An International Comparison of
   Generational Accounts," Auerbach, Alan, Laurence Kotlikoff and Willi Leibfritz ed.,
   Generational Accounting Around the World, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kwack, Tae-Won, Depreciation Allowance and Capital Income Taxation, Korea Development
   Institute, 1985
Leu, R. E. (1986), "The Public-Private Mix and International Health Care Costs," in A. J.
   Culyer and B. Jonsson ed., Public and Private Health Services, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Leu, R. E. and T. Schaub (1983), "Does Smoking Increase Medical Care Expenditure?"
   Social Science of Medicine 17, pp.1907-1914
Moon, Hyung-Pyo (2000), “The Projection and Evaluation of Social Development
   Expenditure Level in Korea,” 2000 Government Budget and Policy Goals, Korea
   Development Institute.
Newhouse, J. P. (1977), "Medical Care Expenditure: a Cross-National Survey," Journal of
   Human Resources 12, pp.115-162
OECD (1993), OECD Health Systems: Facts and Trends 1960-1991, Health Policy Studies
   No. 3, Paris.
Pyo, Hak-Kil (2002), “Estimation of Capital Stock by industry and type of asset (1953-
   2000),” mimeo, Seoul National University

Statistical Yearbooks and Data Sets
Bank of Korea, Analysis of Private Enterprise Management, each year
Daewoo Economic Research Institute, The Korean Household Panel Study (Daewoo Panel),
   1993-1998.
Korea Institute of Labor, Korea Labor Panel Survey, 1999.
Korea Medical Insurance Corporation, Medical Insurance Statistical Yearbook, each year.
Ministry of Education, Statistical Yearbook of Educational Expenditure, each year.
Ministry of Finance and Economy, Summary of Budget for Fiscal Year, each year.
Ministry of Finance and Economy, Government Finance Statistics in Korea, each year.
Ministry of Finance and Economy, 2000 Tax Expenditure Report, 2000.
Ministry of Government Administration and Home Affairs, Annual Local Tax Statistics
   Report, each year.
Ministry of Government Administration and Home Affairs, Financial Yearbook of Local
   Government, each year
Ministry of Government Administration and Home Affairs, Statistical Yearbook of Ministry of


                                            30
   Government Administration and Home Affairs, each year
Ministry of Health and Welfare, Yearbook of Health and Welfare Statistics, each year.
Ministry of Health and Welfare, Summary of Budget for Fiscal Year, each year.
Ministry of Labor, Survey Report on Wage Structure, each year.
Ministry of Labor, Survey Report on Labor Conditions at Small Size Establishments, each
   year.
Ministry of Labor, Yearly Statistics of Employment Insurance, each year.
Ministry of Labor, Statistical Yearbook of Industrial Accident Compensation Insurance, each
   year.
National Pension Corporation, National Pension Statistical Yearbook, each year.
National Statistics Office, Family Income and Expenditure Survey, each year.
National Statistics Office, National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure, 1996
National Statistics Office, Annual Report on Economically Active Population Survey, each
   year
National Tax Administration, Statistical Yearbook of National Tax, each year.
Pension for Civil Servants Corporation, Statistical Yearbook for Pension for Civil Servants,
   each year.
Pension for Private School Teachers Cooperation, Statistical Yearbook for Pension for Private
   School Employees, each year.




                                             31
                Table 1. Consolidated Budget and Net Wealth of Korean Government
                                      (Unit: 1 trillion won (current prices), %)
                                                                                                           Growth Rate
                             1995       1996       1997       1998       1999       2000       2001
                                                                                                           (1995-2000)
                                          Consolidated Budget (CB)1)
                             71.6       84.4      100.3      115.4      121.0       129.3      136.8
      Expenditure                                                                                              12.7
                           (19.0)2)    (20.2)     (22.1)     (26.0)     (25.1)      (24.8)     (25.1)
       Revenue               72.8       85.5       93.4       96.7      107.9       135.8      144.0           13.5
                              1.2        1.1        -7.0      -18.8      -13.1        6.5        7.3
        Balance                                                                                                  -
                            (0.3)2)     (0.3)     (-1.5)     (-4.2)     (-2.7)       (1.3)      (1.3)
     NPS Balance              3.5        4.5         4.7       6.0        7.0        11.2       13.4             -
                             -2.2       13.4       -11.7      -24.7      -20.0       -4.7       -6.1
  CB excluding NPS                                                                                               -
                           (-0.6)2)    (-0.8)     (-2.6)     (-5.6)     (-4.1)      (-0.9)     (-1.1)
                             Composition of Central Government Expenditure
         Total               71.0       83.8       99.1       112.4      118.2      126.8     132.23)          12.4
General Public Service        3.0        3.4        4.2         5.0        4.4        6.7       -              19.1
        Defense              11.1       12.6       13.2       13.6       13.2        14.4       -               5.4
Public Order and Safety       3.9        4.5       4.8          5.4        5.9       5.8        -               8.2
       Education             12.8       14.4       16.2        16.7       17.7       19.4       -               8.8
      Health Care             0.5        0.7       0.8          1.0        1.1       0.9        -              13.9
  Social Security and
                              6.4        7.9        9.6         12.3     14.7       19.3         -             25.0
        Welfare
     Housing and
                              5.7        7.1        6.7         7.0       9.6        6.8         -              6.2
Community Amenities
Recreational, Cultural,
                              0.4        0.5        0.7         0.8       0.9        1.0         -             20.0
  Religious Activities
   Fuel and Energy            0.5        1.2        1.4         2.5       1.9        0.8         -             27.4
       Economic
                             11.1       14.3       12.6         16.1     19.0       18.5         -             12.1
     Development
  Transportation and
                              6.1        6.5       10.3         11.7     11.7       12.6         -             17.4
    Communication
   Other expenditure          9.5       10.9       18.6         20.4     18.3       20.5         -             19.3
                                         Government Wealth and Debt
        Wealth              124.4      131.2      139.7      150.4      163.1       175.9      188.3             -
                             35.6       36.8       50.5       71.4       89.7       100.9      113.1
         Debt                                                                                                    -
                            (9.4)2)     (8.8)     (11.1)     (16.1)     (18.6)      (19.3)     (20.8)
                             88.7       94.4       89.2       79.0       73.4        75.0       75.2
      Net Wealth                                                                                                 -
                           (23.5)2)    (22.6)     (19.7)     (17.8)     (15.2)      (14.4)     (13.8)
Note: 1) Includes the central government budget (general account, special account, public trust funds) and non-financial
       public enterprises.
      2) Ratio to GDP (%)
      3) The composition of government expenditure by function is not reported, since the composition is not comparable
       between 2000 and 2001. The government expenditure for each functional category in 2001 GFS of Korea is defined as
       the sum of government purchase and “lending”, while that reported in GFS of 2000 and earlier includes “net lending”
       rather than “lending”. The total government expenditure reported here is based on the 2000 definition.




                                                           32
Table 2. Assumptions on Fertility (unit: persons / 1,000 women)
                           Medium Fertility
Year      Low Fertility                         High Fertility
                             (base case)
2000          1.47              1.47                1.47
2005          1.35              1.38                1.43
2010          1.32              1.37                1.45
2015          1.31              1.37                1.50
2020          1.27              1.37                1.54
2025          1.21              1.38                1.61
2030          1.15              1.39                1.69
2040-         1.10              1.40                1.80




                               33
                                      Table 3. Data Sources for Generational Profile Calculation

  Classification     Programs                        Components                   Data Sources
                                                                                  - Long-Term Projection by National Pension Corporation
                                     National Pension (NPS)                        (NPC)
                                                                                  - National Pension Statistical Yearbook
                                     Pensions for Civil Servants (PCS)            - Statistical Yearbook for Pension for Civil Servants
                   Public Pensions                                                - Statistical Yearbook for Private School Employees
                                     Pension for Government Employees (PPS)       - Statistical Yearbook of Ministry of Government
                                                                                   Administration and Home Affairs
                                                                                  - Net transfer (= pension benefit – contribution) treated as
                                     Pension for Military Personnel (PMP)
                                                                                   government consumption
                   Medical
                                                              -                   - Medical Insurance Statistical Yearbook
                   Insurance (MI)
                                                                                  - Yearly Statistics of Employment Insurance
                                                                                  - Annual Report on Economically Active Population
                   Employment                                                      Survey
                                                              -
Social Welfare     Insurance (EI)                                                 - Survey Report on Wage Structure
System                                                                            - Survey Report on Labor Conditions at Small Size
                                                                                   Establishments
                                                                                  - Statistical Yearbook of Industrial Accident
                   Industrial                                                      Compensation Insurance
                   Accident                                                       - Annual Report on Economically Active Population
                   Compensation                               -                    Survey
                   Insurance                                                      - Survey Report on Wage Structure
                   (IACI)                                                         - Survey Report on Labor Conditions at Small Size
                                                                                   Establishments
                                     Minimum Living Standards Security System
                                                                                  - Daewoo Panel
                   Social Welfare    (MLSS)
                   Services and                                                   - Summary for Budget of Fiscal Year (each year)
                   Public                                                         - Yearbook of Health and Welfare Statistics
                                     Other Social Transfer Programs (OSTP)
                   Assistance                                                     - Annual Report on Economically Active Population
                                                                                   Survey



                                                                     34
                                                          Table 3, Continued


 Classification     Programs                        Components                                         Data Sources
                                   Wage and Salary Income Tax, Retirement
                  Labor Income     Income Tax, 60% of Global Income Tax, 60% of    - Daewoo Panel
                  Tax              Inhabitant Tax, Farmland Tax, 60% of Business   - Korea Labor Panel Survey
                                   Place Tax
                                   40% of Global Income Tax, Timber Income Tax,    - Daewoo Panel
                  Capital Income
                                   Interest and Dividend Tax, Corporation Tax,     - Korea Labor Panel Survey
                  Tax
                                   40% of Inhabitant Tax                           - Analysis of Private Enterprise Management
                                   Value Added Tax (VAT), Special Excise Tax,
                  Consumption      Liquor Tax, Stamp Tax, Transportation Tax,
                                                                                   - Family Income and Expenditure Survey
                  Tax              Local Transportation Tax, Race-Pari-Mutuel
                                   Tax, Tobacco Consumption Tax
Tax System
                                   Inheritance Tax, Gift Tax, License Tax,
                  Tax on Asset-    Community Facility Tax, Property Tax,           - Daewoo Panel
                  Holdings         Automobile Tax, Aggregate Land Tax, Urban       - Korea Labor Panel Survey
                                   Planning Tax, 40% of Business Place Tax
                  Tax on Asset-                                                    - Daewoo Panel
                                   Capital Gains Tax, Security Transactions Tax
                  Transactions                                                     - National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure
                                                                                   - Daewoo Panel
                                   Excess Profit Tax, Education Tax, Local
                                                                                   - Family Income and Expenditure Survey
                                   Education Tax, Special Tax for Rural
                  Other Taxes                                                      - Statistical Yearbook of National Tax
                                   Development, Regional Development Tax,
                                                                                   - Annual Local Tax Statistical Report
                                   Butchery Tax
                                                                                   - 2000 Tax Expenditure Report
Monetary Policy   Seigniorage                             -                        - Family Income and Expenditure Survey
                  Expenditure on                                                   - Statistical Yearbook of Educational Expenditure
                                                          -
                  Education                                                        - Financial Yearbook of Local Government
Government
                  Other                                                            - National Income and Product Account (NIPA)
Consumption
                  Government                              -                        - Summary of Budget for Fiscal Year
                  Consumption                                                      - Government Finance Statistics in Korea




                                                                   35
                             Table 4. Combined (Male and Female) Generational Accounts (base case) (unit: 1,000 won)

                    Net              Net             Net                                Public Pensions                            Medical    Employment
    Age           Payment         Payment          Payment                                                                                                 IACI
                                                                   Subtotal           NPS             PCS               PPS       Insurance   Insurance
                    (I)1)           (II)2)          (III)3)
          0         56,355          57,376           33,476          -9,216           -7,908          -1,212              -96       -5,187        -608      217
          5         62,733          63,830           37,260          -8,819           -7,546          -1,169             -104       -4,167        -696      254
        10          67,695          68,868           48,202          -9,072           -7,516          -1,425             -131       -3,748        -786      278
        15          67,811          69,080           56,936         -14,461          -12,804          -1,503             -153       -3,614        -885      295
        20          77,244          77,912           74,977         -11,311           -9,829          -1,325             -157       -3,659        -920      295
        25          73,719          74,100           73,655         -15,128          -13,389          -1,531             -208       -4,335        -791      271
        30          64,716          64,849           64,683         -17,993          -14,444          -3,154             -396       -5,145        -685      198
        35          39,299          39,566           39,268         -35,155          -29,544          -4,780             -832       -5,828        -611      174
        40          36,728          36,982           36,699         -27,779          -20,810          -5,860            -1,109      -6,723        -580       43
        45          32,384          32,195           32,357         -23,461          -15,055          -7,009            -1,397      -7,399        -504       11
        50          22,158          21,935           22,134         -22,865          -12,274          -9,091            -1,501      -7,914        -443       -6
        55          12,705          12,180           12,684         -21,361          -14,090          -5,802            -1,469      -8,097        -404       99
        60          14,277          13,819           14,259          -8,367           -1,977          -5,735             -655       -7,647        -318       18
        65           8,374           8,015            8,359          -6,314             -367          -5,892              -55       -6,753        -239       21
        70           6,356           5,786            6,344          -3,754             -325          -3,386              -42       -5,374        -228      -52
        75           5,813           5,218            5,803          -1,367             -296          -1,052              -19       -4,098        -176      -41
        80           2,831           2,451            2,823            -991             -243            -742                -6      -3,174        -132      -32
        85             569             309              563            -647             -159            -486                -2      -2,323         -95      -24
        90          -2,491           -2,530          -2,494            -341              -40            -300                -1      -1,579         -64      -17
        95          -1,281           -1,297          -1,284             -33              -24              -8                -1       -985          -40      -11
        99            -486            -502             -487             -10               -9                0                 0      -381          -15       -4
  Future
                  122,280          121,289           98,899          41,676          30,708            9,718            1,250      14,316        1,478     -487
Generations
Notes: 1) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Net Payment without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       3) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment (regarding education expenditure as transfer)



                                                                                        36
                                                                            Table 4, continued

                               Other          Labor         Capital       Capital                    Tax on       Tax on
                                                                                       Consumption                            Other                  Educational
   Age           MLSS          Social        Income        Income        Income                       Asset       Asset                Seigniorage
                                                                                           Tax                                Taxes                  Expenditure
                              Transfer         Tax         Tax (1)1)     Tax (2)2)                   Holding   Transactions
         0         -2,542        -3,342         7,288         12,806        13,828          37,755     3,926       8,727       6,224        172        -22,878
         5         -2,490        -3,334         8,168         14,778        15,875          38,382     4,378       9,488       6,522        193        -25,473
       10          -2,419        -3,215         8,975         16,839        18,012          38,830     4,829      10,148       6,785        216        -19,493
       15          -2,353        -3,146         9,810         19,155        20,424          39,481     5,342      10,846       7,087        244        -10,875
       20          -2,268        -3,118        10,610         22,389        23,057          40,010     5,922      11,632       7,387        274         -2,268
       25          -2,169        -3,085        10,777         23,464        23,845          38,951     6,177      11,860       7,465        262            -64
       30          -2,131        -3,034         9,941         23,022        23,155          36,284     6,156      10,802       7,046        256            -33
       35          -2,089        -2,904         9,527         21,937        22,204          32,915     5,910       8,873       6,314        237            -31
       40          -2,083        -2,807         7,756         20,814        21,069          29,451     5,541       7,253       5,609        234            -29
       45          -2,060        -2,690         6,165         19,963        19,775          25,987     5,291       5,909       4,962        209            -26
       50          -1,978        -2,564         4,031         17,185        16,962          22,701     4,662       4,883       4,271        196            -24
       55          -1,939        -2,445         1,983         15,111        14,585          19,115     3,803       3,235       3,432        173            -21
       60          -1,876        -2,351           587         11,226        10,768          15,681     2,934       1,597       2,630        161            -18
       65          -1,724        -2,257            54          8,523         8,164          12,538     2,062         392       1,941        128            -15
       70          -1,452        -1,860              0         6,276         5,706           9,767     1,502          38       1,386        107            -13
       75           -966         -1,465              0         4,069         3,474           7,878       898           0       1,009         73            -10
       80           -656         -1,122              0         2,223         1,844           5,395       560           0         698         61             -8
       85           -335           -846              0           969           709           3,179       231           0         417         41             -6
       90           -257           -593              0           126            87             51         31           0         121         32             -4
       95               0          -383              0            42            26             33          3           0          74         18             -3
       99               0          -150              0              25           10            13          1           0          29          6             -1
Notes: 1) Capital income tax burden with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Capital income tax burden without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment




                                                                                       37
                                              Table 5. Male Generational Accounts (base case) (unit: 1,000 won)

                    Net              Net             Net                                Public Pensions                            Medical    Employment
    Age           Payment         Payment          Payment                                                                                                 IACI
                                                                   Subtotal           NPS             PCS               PPS       Insurance   Insurance
                    (I)1)           (II)2)          (III)3)
          0         72,097          73,504           49,205         -11,451           -9,831          -1,524              -96       -3,423        -689       772
          5         80,530          82,023           55,046         -10,542           -8,994          -1,444             -104       -2,218        -789       858
        10          88,709          90,302           69,212          -9,652           -7,754          -1,765             -133       -1,618        -892       950
        15          89,255          90,983           78,376         -17,495          -15,452          -1,898             -145       -1,239       -1,009    1,056
        20        103,187          104,358         100,917          -12,874          -11,034          -1,689             -151        -960        -1,052    1,168
        25        101,526          102,320         101,463          -16,578          -14,568          -1,907             -103       -1,507        -913     1,210
        30          91,376          92,042           91,345         -21,584          -17,086          -4,138             -359       -2,411        -727     1,168
        35          54,361          54,683           54,332         -49,449          -42,209          -6,271             -970       -3,344        -571     1,110
        40          54,144          54,319           54,117         -36,901          -27,572          -7,751            -1,578      -4,435        -517       925
        45          43,905          43,807           43,881         -33,451          -21,944          -9,376            -2,131      -5,534        -474       747
        50          34,341          33,750           34,319         -29,510          -15,193         -11,997            -2,320      -6,506        -439       546
        55          18,920          18,382           18,901         -28,144          -18,226          -7,515            -2,403      -7,179        -420       448
        60          20,132          19,476           20,116         -12,420           -3,210          -8,081            -1,130      -7,216        -357       178
        65          11,962          11,114           11,949          -9,719             -614          -9,006              -99       -6,608        -289        64
        70           7,434           6,462            7,423          -6,385             -589          -5,710              -86       -5,467        -285       -40
        75           7,622           6,680            7,613          -2,582             -566          -1,983              -34       -4,332        -223       -32
        80           3,661           3,005            3,654          -2,032             -518          -1,502              -11       -3,322        -171       -24
        85             219            -142              214          -1,488             -414          -1,073                -1      -2,540        -130       -19
        90          -2,408           -2,594          -2,411            -911             -109            -801                -1      -1,792         -93       -13
        95          -1,273           -1,388          -1,275             -84              -83                0               -1      -1,243         -65         -9
        99            -453            -575             -454             -34              -34                0                 0      -501          -26         -4
  Future
Generations       157,048          155,992         146,322           51,959          38,306           12,264            1,248        9,403       1,678     -1,791
Notes: 1) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Net Payment without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       3) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment (regarding education expenditure as transfer)



                                                                                        38
                                                                            Table 5, continued

                               Other          Labor         Capital       Capital                    Tax on       Tax on
                                                                                       Consumption                            Other                  Educational
   Age           MLSS          Social        Income        Income        Income                       Asset       Asset                Seigniorage
                                                                                           Tax                                Taxes                  Expenditure
                              Transfer         Tax         Tax (1)1)     Tax (2)2)                   Holding   Transactions
         0         -2,459        -3,122        11,266         17,278        18,685          37,605     5,367      13,413       7,245        174        -22,892
         5         -2,420        -3,095        12,496         19,770        21,264          38,239     5,935      14,419       7,618        195        -25,483
       10          -2,363        -2,940        13,773         22,532        24,125          38,684     6,546      15,460       7,985        218        -19,497
       15          -2,310        -2,833        15,235         25,815        27,543          39,336     7,286      16,729       8,433        245        -10,879
       20          -2,238        -2,766        16,722         30,006        31,176          39,821     8,093      18,112       8,879        276         -2,271
       25          -2,134        -2,698        17,570         32,086        32,880          38,544     8,504      18,194       8,994        254            -63
       30          -2,040        -2,616        17,198         32,385        33,050          36,026     8,519      16,644       8,565        250            -31
       35          -1,968        -2,507        16,539         32,683        33,005          32,233     8,441      13,342       7,623        228            -29
       40          -1,916        -2,393        14,033         31,328        31,503          28,617     8,014      10,476       6,692        222            -27
       45          -1,897        -2,253        11,302         29,067        28,969          25,003     7,449       7,976       5,773        196            -24
       50          -1,822        -2,103         7,462         25,699        25,108          21,622     6,633       7,523       5,047        188            -22
       55          -1,732        -1,968         3,857         21,801        21,263          17,826     5,544       4,736       3,995        156            -19
       60          -1,714        -1,840         1,200         17,654        16,998          14,638     4,463       2,337       3,064        146            -16
       65          -1,605        -1,721           109         14,373        13,526          11,190     3,149         736       2,184         99            -13
       70          -1,414        -1,376              0         9,644         8,673           8,697     2,316          96       1,541        109            -11
       75           -967         -1,071              0         6,553         5,612           7,492     1,531           0       1,187         65             -8
       80           -641           -817              0         3,881         3,225           4,816     1,097           0         806         70             -6
       85           -173           -615              0         1,401         1,040           2,878       439           0         433         33             -5
       90               0          -436              0           600           413             45         47           0         103         44             -3
       95               0          -304              0           300           185             31         21           0          70         10             -2
       99               0          -123              0            198            76            13          9           0          29         -11            -1
Notes: 1) Capital income tax burden with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Capital income tax burden without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment




                                                                                       39
                                                  Table 6. Female Generational Accounts (base case) (unit: 1,000 won)

                      Net                 Net              Net                                     Public Pensions                        Medical    Employment
     Age            Payment            Payment           Payment                                                                                                  IACI
                                                                            Subtotal             NPS               PCS         PPS       Insurance   Insurance
                      (I)1)              (II)2)           (III)3)
           0          39,038             39,636            16,175             -6,757             -5,792                 -869     -96       -7,127        -519     -392
           5          42,409             43,053            16,948             -6,851             -5,892                 -856    -103       -6,394        -590     -436
         10           43,902             44,600            24,414             -8,415             -7,246            -1,040       -128       -6,160        -665     -481
         15           44,507             45,277            33,635            -11,164             -9,927            -1,075       -162       -6,196        -751     -532
         20           49,891             50,030            47,627             -9,664             -8,559                 -941    -164       -6,505        -782     -624
         25           43,721             43,656            43,657            -13,563           -12,117             -1,126       -320       -7,385        -659     -742
         30           37,346             36,932            37,312            -14,308           -11,731             -2,143       -433       -7,952        -643     -798
         35           23,264             23,472            23,232            -19,937           -16,060             -3,193       -685       -8,474        -654     -823
         40           18,920             19,256            18,890            -18,453           -13,897             -3,926       -630       -9,064        -645     -859
         45           20,718             20,439            20,690            -13,347             -8,081            -4,614       -653       -9,287        -535     -734
         50             9,755             9,907             9,729            -16,100             -9,302            -6,132       -666       -9,347        -448     -569
         55             6,320             5,809             6,298            -14,393             -9,841            -4,042       -509       -9,040        -388     -259
         60             8,868             8,592             8,848             -4,622               -838            -3,567       -217       -8,046        -282     -129
         65             5,465             5,501             5,448             -3,554               -167            -3,367        -20       -6,870        -198      -13
         70             5,644             5,340             5,631             -2,015               -151            -1,851        -12       -5,313        -190      -59
         75             4,749             4,358             4,738               -651               -138                 -503     -11       -3,960        -149      -46
         80             2,415             2,174             2,407               -469               -105                 -362      -3       -3,100        -113      -35
         85               695               472                689              -343                -67                 -274      -2       -2,244         -83      -26
         90            -2,513            -2,513             -2,517              -189                -21                 -166      -1       -1,523         -57      -18
         95            -1,283            -1,283             -1,285                -24               -14                   -9      -1        -943          -36      -11
         99              -491              -491               -492                 -6                -6                   0          0      -364          -14       -4
  Future
                      85,037             84,117            48,100             30,660            22,569              6,991      1,251      19,579        1,263      911
Generations
Notes: 1) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Net Payment without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       3) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment (regarding education expenditure as transfer)




                                                                                                   40
                                                                            Table 6, continued

                               Other          Labor         Capital       Capital                    Tax on       Tax on
                                                                                       Consumption                            Other                  Educational
   Age           MLSS          Social        Income        Income        Income                       Asset       Asset                Seigniorage
                                                                                           Tax                                Taxes                  Expenditure
                              Transfer         Tax         Tax (1)1)     Tax (2)2)                   Holding   Transactions
         0         -2,633        -3,585         2,911          7,886         8,484          37,919     2,340       3,573       5,101        170        -22,863
         5         -2,569        -3,607         3,226          9,077         9,720          38,545     2,599       3,857       5,271        191        -25,462
        10         -2,484        -3,525         3,542         10,393        11,091          38,995     2,884       4,134       5,427        214        -19,488
        15         -2,399        -3,487         3,914         11,918        12,688          39,638     3,231       4,452       5,625        241        -10,871
        20         -2,300        -3,489         4,167         14,358        14,497          40,208     3,633       4,800       5,814        272         -2,265
        25         -2,208        -3,503         3,449         14,164        14,098          39,391     3,667       5,026       5,814        271            -65
        30         -2,224        -3,463         2,491         13,410        12,997          36,549     3,730       4,804       5,488        262            -34
        35         -2,219        -3,326         2,062         10,496        10,704          33,640     3,215       4,115       4,921        247            -32
        40         -2,254        -3,231         1,338         10,064        10,400          30,304     3,013       3,958       4,502        246            -30
        45         -2,224        -3,132           964         10,746        10,466          26,983     3,107       3,817       4,140        223            -28
        50         -2,136        -3,034           537          8,517         8,669          23,799     2,656       2,196       3,481        204            -26
        55         -2,152        -2,935            58          8,237         7,726          20,439     2,015       1,693       2,854        190            -23
        60         -2,024        -2,823            21          5,288         5,012          16,645     1,521         914       2,229        175            -20
        65         -1,820        -2,692              8         3,780         3,816          13,632     1,182         114       1,744        151            -17
        70         -1,477        -2,179              0         4,051         3,746          10,474       965           0       1,283        105            -14
        75          -966         -1,697              0         2,607         2,216           8,105       525           0         904         77            -11
        80          -664         -1,275              0         1,393         1,151           5,686       291           0         644         57             -8
        85          -393           -929              0           813           589           3,288       156           0         412         44             -6
        90          -325           -635              0             0              0            52         26           0         126         29             -4
        95              0          -396              0             0              0            33          0           0          75         20             -3
        99              0          -154              0               0             0           13          0           0          29          9             -1
Notes: 1) Capital income tax burden with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Capital income tax burden without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment




                                                                                       41
                          Table 7. Required Tax Adjustment1) for Long-Term Government Budgetary Balance (unit: %)

              Labor
                                       g = 0%                                                      g = 1.5%                                     g = 3.0%
           productivity
          Discount rate   r = 5.5%    r = 6.5%     r = 7.5%    r = 5.5%                             r = 6.5%                    r = 7.5%   r = 6.5%   r =7.5%
                     2)
            Fertility
                            MF          MF           MF          MF           MF          LF         MF          HF      MF
             Welfare                                                                                                              MF         MF        MF
                            MW          MW           MW          MW           LW          MW         MW          MW      HW
          expenditure2)
           Current3)       26.1          13.5         5.6         61.7        35.0         24.6       26.4        29.3   35.0     12.8      100.7          29.7
             Future4)      75.8          59.7        35.5         66.3        77.7         65.2       58.7        51.4   77.7     45.9       54.2          48.3
  Net              5)
              2004         21.4          12.5         5.7         33.7        26.2         19.6       19.8        20.2   26.2      11.2      36.4          19.7
Payment
  (I)         20105)       25.2          15.5         7.4         36.7        30.0         22.7       22.8        22.9   30.0     13.5       38.3          22.1
                   5)
              2020         34.1          22.8        12.0         42.8        38.6         29.8       29.4        28.7   38.6     19.1       42.0          27.2
              20305)       47.3          34.7        19.9         50.5        51.0         40.3       38.6        36.5   51.0     27.6       46.2          33.9
             Current       25.4          13.1         5.6         59.4        33.9         23.5       25.3        28.3   33.9     12.2       95.7          28.1
              Future       73.6          58.1        35.0         63.8        75.4         62.4       56.4        49.6   75.4     43.9       51.5          45.7
  Net           2004       20.8          12.2         5.6         32.4        25.4         18.7       19.0        19.5   25.4     10.7       34.6          18.7
Payment
  (II)          2010       24.5          15.1         7.3         35.3        29.1         21.7       21.9        22.1   29.1     13.0       36.4          20.9
                2020       33.2          22.2        11.8         41.2        37.5         28.5       28.2        27.7   37.5     18.3       39.9          25.7
                2030       45.9          33.8        19.6         48.6        49.5         38.6       37.1        35.1   49.5     26.4       43.9          32.1
             Current       26.1          13.5         5.6         61.7        35.0         24.6       26.4        29.3   35.0     12.8      100.7          29.7
              Future       75.8          59.7        35.5         66.3        77.7         65.2       58.7        51.4   77.7     45.9       54.2          48.3
  Net           2004       21.4          12.5         5.7         33.7        26.2         19.6       19.8        20.2   26.2      11.6      36.4          19.7
Payment
  (III)         2010       25.2          15.5         7.4         36.7        30.0         22.7       22.8        22.9   30.0     13.5       38.3          22.1
                2020       34.1          22.8        12.0         42.8        38.6         29.8       29.4        28.7   38.6     19.1       42.0          27.2
                2030       47.3          34.7        19.9         50.5        51.0         40.3       38.6        36.5   51.0     27.6       46.2          33.9
Notes: 1) Percentage increase in tax burden to attain long-run budgetary balance
       2) LF: low fertility, MF: medium fertility, HF: high fertility
          LW: low welfare expenditure, MW: medium welfare expenditure, HW: high welfare expenditure
       3) Tax burden of current generations (as of 2000) is adjusted, while that of future generations not changed.
       4) Tax burden of future generations is adjusted, while that of current generations not changed.
       5) Adjust tax burden for all the age groups from the respective year.

                                                                                 42
                   Table 8. Required Tax and Benefits Adjustment1) for Long-Term Government Budgetary Balance (unit: %)

              Labor
                                      g = 0%                                                   g = 1.5%                                             g = 3.0%
           productivity
          Discount rate    r = 5.5%   r = 6.5%   r = 7.5%   r = 5.5%                          r = 6.5%                           r = 7.5%   r = 6.5%      r = 7.5%
                      2)
            Fertility
                            MF         MF          MF         MF          MF          LF        MF         HF          MF,           MF      MF                MF
             Welfare
                            MW         MW          MW         MW          LW          MW        MW         MW          HW            MW      MW                MW
          expenditure2)
           Current3)         16.8         9.1       4.0        38.9       13.2        16.3       17.5       19.5        22.3          8.8    65.9              20.3
           Future4)          49.9       42.3      26.4         39.7       30.7        42.8       38.8       34.4        49.7         32.5    32.7              32.1
  Net            5)
            2004             13.5         8.3       3.9        20.4        9.9        12.7       12.9       13.2        16.4          7.6    22.4              13.2
Payment
  (I)       20105)           15.3         9.8       4.9        21.7       11.1        14.2       14.4       14.6        18.2          8.9    23.2              14.4
                 5)          19.2       13.3        7.2        24.3       13.6        17.6       17.6       17.5        22.1         11.8    24.9              17.0
            2020
                 5)          24.8       18.7      10.9         27.7       17.2        22.4       21.9       21.3        27.7         16.1    26.9              20.5
            2030
            Current          16.3         8.8       3.9        37.4       12.4        15.6       16.8       18.8        21.7          8.4    62.6              19.2
            Future           48.5       41.1      26.0         38.2       29.0        40.9       37.3       33.1        48.2         31.1    31.1              30.4
  Net        2004            13.2         8.1       3.9        19.6        9.3        12.1       12.4       12.8        15.9          7.3    21.3              12.5
Payment
  (II)       2010            14.9         9.5       4.8        20.9       10.5        13.6       13.8       14.1        17.6          8.5    22.1              13.7
             2020            18.7       12.9        7.1        23.4       12.9        16.8       16.9       16.9        21.4         11.3    23.7              16.1
             2030            24.1       18.2      10.7         26.6       16.2        21.4       21.1       20.6        26.9         15.3    25.6              19.4
            Current          16.2         8.7       3.8        37.8       12.7        15.8       16.9       18.8        21.6          8.5    64.0              19.6
            Future           43.4       35.0      20.9         36.6       26.8        37.7       34.3       30.2        44.1         27.4    30.6              28.7
  Net        2004            12.8         7.8       3.7        19.4        9.3        12.0       12.1       12.4        15.5          7.2    21.2              12.4
Payment
  (III)      2010            14.5         9.3       4.6        20.7       10.4        13.5       13.6       13.7        17.3          8.4    22.1              13.6
             2020            18.4       12.7        6.8        23.3       12.9        16.9       16.7       16.5        21.1         11.2    23.7              16.2
             2030            23.8       17.9      10.5         26.5       16.4        21.6       21.0       20.2        26.6         15.3    25.7              19.5
Notes: 1) Percentage increase in tax burden and (the same) percentage decrease in benefits to attain long-run budgetary balance
       2) LF: low fertility, MF: medium fertility, HF: high fertility
          LW: low welfare expenditure, MW: medium welfare expenditure, HW: high welfare expenditure
       3) Tax burden and benefits of current generations (as of 2000) are adjusted, while those of future generations not changed.
       4) Tax burden and benefits of future generations are adjusted, while those of current generations not changed.
       5) Adjust tax burden and benefits for all the age groups from the respective year.

                                                                                 43
                                                  Table 9. Sensitivity Analysis I (r=6.5%, g=1.5%) (unit: 1,000 won)

                                        Net Payment (I)1)                                            Net Payment (II)2)                                    Net Payment (III)3)
      Age
                     Low Fertility          Base Case          High Fertility      Low Fertility         Base Case        High Fertility   Low Fertility       Base Case         High Fertility
         0              55,835              56,355                57,146              56,891               57,376           58,124           32,956             33,476             34,267
         5              62,207              62,733                63,544              63,329               63,830           64,607           36,734             37,260             38,070
       10               67,198              67,695                68,468              68,389               68,868           69,616           47,705             48,202             48,975
       15               67,361              67,811                68,509              68,642               69,080           69,761           56,486             56,936             57,633
       20               76,856              77,244                77,843              77,532               77,912           78,500           74,589             74,977             75,575
       25               73,395              73,719                74,214              73,780               74,100           74,587           73,331             73,655             74,150
       30               64,465              64,716                65,102              64,601               64,849           65,230           64,432             64,683             65,069
       35                39,110             39,299                39,594              39,378               39,566           39,859           39,079             39,268             39,564
       40               36,590              36,728                36,944              36,846               36,982           37,197           36,562             36,699             36,916
       45               32,288              32,384                32,536              32,100               32,195           32,348           32,262             32,357             32,510
       50               22,095              22,158                22,260              21,872               21,935           22,037           22,071             22,134             22,237
       55               12,666              12,705                12,770              12,141               12,180           12,245           12,645             12,684             12,750
       60               14,254              14,277                14,316              13,796               13,819           13,858           14,236             14,259             14,298
       65                 8,361               8,374                 8,396              8,002                8,015             8,037           8,346              8,359               8,381
       70                 6,349               6,356                 6,368              5,780                5,786             5,798           6,337              6,344               6,355
       75                 5,810               5,813                 5,818              5,215                5,218             5,224           5,800              5,803               5,808
       80                 2,830               2,831                 2,832              2,450                2,451             2,453           2,822              2,823               2,825
       85                   568                 569                   569                 309                 309               309             563                563                 563
       90                -2,490              -2,491                -2,491              -2,530              -2,530            -2,530           -2,494             -2,494             -2,494
       95                -1,281              -1,281                -1,281              -1,297              -1,297            -1,297           -1,284             -1,284             -1,284
      99                   -486                -486                  -486                -502                -502              -502            -487               -487                -487
    Future
                       127,282             122,280               115,473             126,085             121,289           114,721          104,026             98,899             92,006
  generations
Notes: 1) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Net Payment without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       3) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment (regarding education expenditure as transfer)




                                                                                                   44
                Table 10. Sensitivity Analysis II (Net Payment I, medium fertility) (unit: 1,000 won)

                            g = 0%                                    g = 1.5%                                g = 3.0%
   Age
              r = 5.5%     r = 6.5%      r = 7.5%       r = 5.5%      r = 6.5%      r = 7.5%      r = 6.5%               r = 7.5%
    0         46,596        38,414       30,836         67,610        56,355        45,075        86,694                 68,651
    5         52,927        44,827       37,052         73,549        62,733        51,652        91,724                 74,731
   10         58,097        50,932       43,554         76,732        67,695        57,719        93,704                 79,143
   15         57,855        54,528       49,358         70,863        67,811        61,530        88,158                 79,488
   20         67,839        64,324       59,403         81,275        77,244        71,067        96,500                 87,850
   25         63,916        63,325       60,623         74,286        73,719        70,340        89,480                 84,406
   30         55,074        56,019       54,946         63,997        64,716        63,040        77,919                 74,788
   35         26,822        34,213       38,105         31,321        39,299        43,295        48,290                 51,655
   40         26,922        31,000       33,196         32,995        36,728        38,495        44,797                 45,781
   45         25,274        27,277       28,381         30,909        32,384        32,992        38,768                 38,733
   50         17,210        18,503       19,299         21,186        22,158        22,643        26,471                 26,590
   55           9,280       10,307       11,028         11,872        12,705        13,238        15,435                 15,760
   60         13,297        12,902       12,508         14,762        14,277        13,792        15,791                 15,215
   65           7,798        7,641        7,470          8,556         8,374         8,173         9,155                  8,929
   70           6,066        5,961        5,846          6,463         6,356         6,236         6,740                  6,622
   75           5,737        5,651        5,561          5,890         5,813         5,729         5,944                  5,872
   80           2,820        2,839        2,850          2,800         2,831         2,853         2,797                  2,832
   85            597          664          725             491           569           638              457                 537
   90          -2,463       -2,406       -2,352          -2,551        -2,491        -2,433       -2,580                 -2,518
   95          -1,273       -1,256       -1,239          -1,299        -1,281        -1,264       -1,307                 -1,290
   99            -487         -486         -485           -487          -486          -485          -486                   -485
  Future
              116,919       77,435       47,871        187,758       122,280        80,186       236,083             137,499
generations




                                                          45
               Table 11. Sensitivity Analysis III (Net Payment II, medium fertility) (unit: 1,000 won)

                            g = 0%                                    g = 1.5%                               g = 3.0%
   Age
              r = 5.5%     r = 6.5%      r = 7.5%       r = 5.5%      r = 6.5%      r = 7.5%      r = 6.5%              r = 7.5%
    0         47,401        38,938       31,186         69,242        57,376        45,734        88,787                69,950
    5         53,815        45,435       37,480         75,212        63,830        52,396        93,801                76,088
   10         59,075        51,639       44,078         78,419        68,868        58,558        95,755                80,555
   15         58,943        55,359       50,009         72,590        69,080        62,489        90,200                80,973
   20         68,345        64,593       59,499         82,342        77,912        71,454        97,834                88,708
   25         64,152        63,346       60,483         75,012        74,100        70,470        90,431                84,953
   30         55,085        55,842       54,625         64,416        64,849        62,958        78,520                75,060
   35         26,984        34,212       37,976         31,826        39,566        43,378        48,942                52,038
   40         27,091        31,034       33,119         33,440        36,982        38,598        45,357                46,129
   45         25,018        26,912       27,926         30,868        32,195        32,684        38,815                38,618
   50         16,937        18,144       18,869         21,073        21,935        22,329        26,422                26,422
   55           8,718        9,684       10,352         11,424        12,180        12,647        15,031                15,273
   60         12,814        12,378       11,948         14,353        13,819        13,290        15,411                14,782
   65           7,423        7,240        7,046          8,227         8,015         7,786         8,843                 8,585
   70           5,488        5,368        5,240          5,910         5,786         5,651         6,196                 6,060
   75           5,138        5,045        4,949          5,303         5,218         5,127         5,361                 5,281
   80           2,439        2,455        2,463          2,423         2,451         2,470         2,421                 2,454
   85            337          403          464             232           309           378           198                   277
   90          -2,502       -2,446       -2,392          -2,590        -2,530        -2,472        -2,619               -2,558
   95          -1,289       -1,272       -1,256          -1,315        -1,297        -1,280        -1,324               -1,306
   99            -503         -502         -501           -503          -502          -501          -502                  -501
  Future
              116,126       77,104       48,060        186,605       121,289        79,593       235,118            136,373
generations




                                                          46
              Table 12. Sensitivity Analysis IV (Net Payment III, medium fertility) (unit: 1,000 won)

                            g = 0%                                   g = 1.5%                               g = 3.0%
   Age
              r = 5.5%    r = 6.5%      r = 7.5%       r = 5.5%      r = 6.5%      r = 7.5%      r = 6.5%              r = 7.5%
    0         25,105       19,277       13,743         41,841        33,476        24,701        59,287                44,318
    5         28,390       21,921       15,616         46,178        37,260        27,882        63,307                48,294
   10         39,072       32,738       26,128         56,311        48,202        39,081        72,781                59,176
   15         47,124       44,057       39,133         59,703        56,936        50,920        76,846                68,467
   20         65,598       62,130       57,252         78,954        74,977        68,847        94,150                85,555
   25         63,856       63,271       60,573         74,213        73,655        70,283        89,401                84,338
   30         55,045       55,994       54,925         63,956        64,683        63,013        77,872                74,752
   35         26,794       34,190       38,085         31,283        39,268        43,270        48,247                51,621
   40         26,896       30,978       33,176         32,961        36,699        38,471        44,759                45,750
   45         25,249       27,256       28,363         30,878        32,357        32,969        38,734                38,705
   50         17,188       18,483       19,282         21,158        22,134        22,623        26,441                26,564
   55          9,260       10,290       11,013         11,848        12,684        13,220        15,409                15,738
   60         13,280       12,887       12,494         14,741        14,259        13,776        15,769                15,196
   65          7,784        7,628        7,458          8,539         8,359         8,159         9,137                 8,913
   70          6,054        5,949        5,836          6,450         6,344         6,224         6,726                 6,609
   75          5,727        5,642        5,553          5,880         5,803         5,720         5,933                 5,862
   80          2,813        2,832        2,843          2,792         2,823         2,845         2,788                 2,825
   85            591         659          720             486           563           633           451                   531
   90          -2,467      -2,410       -2,356          -2,555       -2,494        -2,437        -2,584                -2,522
   95          -1,275      -1,258       -1,242          -1,301       -1,284        -1,267        -1,310                -1,292
   99           -488         -487         -486           -488          -487          -486          -487                  -486
  Future
              95,156       58,178       30,711        160,299        98,899        59,619       204,665            112,178
generations




                                                         47
                                    Table 13. Sensitivity Analysis V (r=6.5%, g=1.5%, Medium fertility) (unit: 1,000 won)

                                        Net Payment (I)1)                                             Net Payment (II)2)                                            Net Payment (III)3)
      Age            Low Welfare                                High Welfare       Low Welfare                                High Welfare         Low Welfare                                  High Welfare
                                            Base case                                                     Base case                                                       Base case
                     Expenditure4)                              Expenditure4)      Expenditure                                Expenditure          Expenditure                                  Expenditure
         0             59,680                56,355                53,478            60,702               57,376                54,500               36,802               33,476                   30,600
         5               66,026              62,733                59,758              67,122             63,830                 60,855               40,552              37,260                   34,285
       10                70,953              67,695                64,345              72,126             68,868                 65,519               51,460              48,202                   44,852
       15                71,050              67,811                63,810              72,319             69,080                 65,080               60,174              56,936                   52,935
       20                80,432              77,244                72,451              81,100             77,912                 73,119               78,164              74,977                   70,183
       25                76,809              73,719                68,161              77,190             74,100                 68,542               76,746              73,655                   68,097
       30                67,671              64,716                58,483              67,804             64,849                 58,616               67,638              64,683                   58,450
       35                42,052              39,299                32,703              42,319             39,566                 32,969               42,022              39,268                   32,672
       40                39,261              36,728                30,038              39,515             36,982                 30,293               39,232              36,699                   30,010
       45                34,644              32,384                26,015              34,456             32,195                 25,826               34,618              32,357                   25,988
       50                24,095              22,158                16,494              23,873             21,935                 16,271               24,072              22,134                   16,470
       55                14,283              12,705                  8,012             13,758             12,180                  7,487               14,262              12,684                    7,991
       60                15,493              14,277                10,660              15,034             13,819                 10,201               15,475              14,259                   10,642
       65                 9,245               8,374                  5,816               8,885              8,015                 5,456                9,230                8,359                   5,800
       70                 6,933               6,356                  4,703               6,363              5,786                 4,133                6,920                6,344                   4,690
       75                 6,167               5,813                  4,830               5,573              5,218                 4,235                6,158                5,803                   4,820
       80                 3,033               2,831                  2,286               2,654              2,451                 1,907                3,026                2,823                   2,279
       85                   675                 569                    291                 416                309                     31                 670                  563                     285
       90                -2,445              -2,491                 -2,607              -2,484             -2,530                -2,646               -2,448               -2,494                  -2,611
       95                -1,268              -1,281                 -1,316              -1,284             -1,297                -1,332               -1,270               -1,284                  -1,318
      99                   -486                -486                   -486                -502               -502                  -502                 -487                 -487                    -487
    Future
                       110,379             122,280                141,961             109,388            121,289               140,970                86,998              98,899                  118,579
  generations
Notes: 1) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       2) Net Payment without infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment
       3) Net Payment with infra-marginal capital income tax adjustment (regarding education expenditure as transfer)
       4) Income elasticities of MI benefits and social welfare expenditure are 1.75 and 1.53 respectively (1 and 1) under the high welfare expenditure (low welfare expenditure) assumption.




                                                                                                    48
          Fig.1 Public Pension Benefits (2000)                        Fig.2 Pension Contribution (2000)
                       (1,000 won)                                              (1,000 won)


900                                                         1,200
800
                                                            1,000
700
600                                                          800
500
                                                             600
400
300                                                          400
200
                                                             200
100
  0                                                               0
       0       10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                             0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                               age                                                          age

                        male           female                                         male           female



          Fig. 3 Public Pension Benefit (2080)                        Fig.4 Public Pension Benefit Profile
                       (1000 won)
                                                            45
300,000                                                     40
                                                            35
250,000
                                                            30
200,000                                                     25
                                                            20
150,000
                                                            15
100,000                                                     10
                                                             5
 50,000
                                                             0
           0                                                      0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                                            age
                                 age
                                                                              2000           2010        2030
                          male          female                                2050           2080



      Fig.5 Public Pension Contribution Profile                            Fig.6 MI Benefit (2000)
                                                                                 (1,000 won)
1.2
                                                            600
0.9                                                         500

                                                            400
0.6
                                                            300
0.3                                                         200

                                                            100
 0
      0        10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                     0
                               age                                0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                                                                                         age
                 male(2000)            female (2000)
                 male (2080)           female (2080)                                 male           female




                                                       49
             Fig.7 EI Benefit (2000)                               Fig.8 IACI Benefit (2000)
                  (1,000 won)                                             (1,000 won)


100                                                 120
 90
 80                                                 100
 70                                                  80
 60
 50                                                  60
 40
 30                                                  40
 20                                                  20
 10
  0                                                   0
      0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                      0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                          age                                                   age

                     male        female                                    male         female



      Fig.9 MI, EI, IACI Contribution (2000)                      Fig.10 MLSS Benefit (2000)
                   (1,000 won)                                           (1,000 won)


600                                                 160
                                                    140
500
                                                    120
400                                                 100
                                                     80
300
                                                     60
200                                                  40
                                                     20
100
                                                      0
  0                                                       0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
      0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                                            age

                     male        female                                    male         female



           Fig.11 OSTP Benefit (2000)                         Fig.12 Labor Income Tax (2000)
                  (1,000 won)                                          (1,000 won)


180                                                 1,200
160
                                                    1,000
140
120                                                  800
100
                                                     600
 80
 60                                                  400
 40
                                                     200
 20
  0                                                       0
      0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                          0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                          age                                                     age

                     male        female                                      male        female




                                               50
        Fig.13 Capital Income Tax (1) (2000)              Fig. 14 Capital Income Tax (2) (2000)
                    (1,000 won)                                        (1,000 won)


4,000                                               1,800
3,500                                               1,600
3,000                                               1,400
                                                    1,200
2,500
                                                    1,000
2,000
                                                      800
1,500
                                                      600
1,000                                                 400
 500                                                  200
   0                                                    0
         0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                        0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                            age                                                    age

                       male        female                                    male         female



          Fig.15 Consumption Tax (2000)                       Fig.16 Tax on Asset- Holding (2000)
                   (1,000 won)                                            (1,000 won)


1,600                                               450
1,400                                               400
1,200                                               350
                                                    300
1,000
                                                    250
 800
                                                    200
 600
                                                    150
 400                                                100
 200                                                 50
   0                                                  0
         0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                   0     10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                            age                                                 age

                       male        female                                   male         female



   Fig.17 Tax on Asset Transactions (2000)                         Fig.18 Other Taxes (2000)
                 (1,000 won)                                              (1,000 won)


1,000                                               400
  900                                               350
  800
                                                    300
  700
  600                                               250
  500                                               200
  400                                               150
  300
                                                    100
  200
  100                                                50
    0                                                 0
         0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                   0     10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                            age                                                 age

                       male        female                                   male         female




                                               51
               Fig.19 Seigniorage (2000)                             Fig.20 Educational Benefits (2000)
                      (1,000 won)                                              (1,000 won)


35                                                   2,500
30
                                                     2,000
25
20                                                   1,500

15                                                   1,000
10
                                                       500
 5
 0                                                           0
     0       10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                              0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                            age                                                          age

                        male         female                                          male and female



                Fig.21 Net Tax I (2000)                                    Fig.22 Net Tax II (2000)
                     (1,000 won)                                                 (1,000 won)


  9,000                                                7,000
  8,000                                                6,000
  7,000                                                5,000
  6,000
  5,000                                                4,000
  4,000                                                3,000
  3,000                                                2,000
  2,000                                                1,000
  1,000
                                                           0
      0
- 1,000                                              - 1,000
- 2,000                                              - 2,000
             0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                             0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
                               age                                                        age

                          male         female                                        male          female



                Fig.23 Net Tax III (2000)                Fig.24 Net Tax I Profile of selected years
                      (1,000 won)
                                                      1.5
10,000
                                                        1
 8,000
                                                      0.5
 6,000

 4,000                                                  0

 2,000                                               - 0.5
         0
                                                       -1
- 2,000                                                          0       10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
             0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                                               age
                               age
                                                                              2000          2010        2030
                          male         female                                 2050          2080




                                                52
   Fig.25 Aggregate Public Pension Benefits                          Fig.26 Aggregate MI Benefits and
              and Contributions                                          Contributions (% of GDP)
                 (% of GDP)
                                                             6%
18%
16%                                                          5%
14%
                                                             4%
12%
10%                                                          3%
 8%
 6%                                                          2%
 4%
                                                             1%
 2%
 0%                                                          0%
      2000    2020    2040   2060     2080   2100                 2000    2020     2040      2060    2080   2100

       pension benefits          pension contribution                       MI benefits         MI contributions



         Fig.27 Aggregatge MLSS, OSTP                               Fig.28 Aggregate Tax Revenue (% of
             Expenditure(% of GDP)                                                GDP)

1.8%                                                         10.0%
1.6%                                                          9.0%
1.4%                                                          8.0%
                                                              7.0%
1.2%                                                          6.0%
1.0%                                                          5.0%
0.8%                                                          4.0%
                                                              3.0%
0.6%
                                                              2.0%
0.4%                                                          1.0%
0.2%                                                          0.0%
0.0%                                                                 2000    2020     2040    2060   2080    2100
       2000   2020    2040   2060     2080    2100
                                                                   Labor Income Tax             Capital Income Tax
                          MLSS        OSTP                         Consumption Tax



          Fig.29 Aggregate Tax Revenue                                   Fig.30 Aggregate Government
                   (% of GDP)                                               Expenditure (% of GDP)


2.5%                                                         25%

2.0%                                                         20%
1.5%
                                                             15%
1.0%
                                                             10%
0.5%
                                                             5%
0.0%
       2000   2020    2040   2060     2080    2100           0%
                                                                   2000     2020    2040     2060    2080    2100
                     Tax on Asset Holding
                     Tax on Asset Transactions                                     Educational Expenditure
                     Other Taxes                                                   government Consumption




                                                        53
