                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A NEW METHOD OF ESTIMATING RISK AVERSION

                                              Raj Chetty

                                         Working Paper 9988
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9988


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2003




I thank George Akerlof, John Campbell, David Card, Keith Chen, David Cutler, John Friedman, Ed Glaeser,
Emir Kamenica, Louis Kaplow, Adam Looney, Greg Mankiw, Casey Mulligan, Mike Ostrovsky, Jesse
Shapiro, and especially Martin Feldstein, Gary Chamberlain, Larry Katz, and Caroline Hoxby for helpful
comments and discussions. Financial support from the National Science Foundation, National Bureau of
Economic Research, and Harvard University is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Raj Chetty. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion
Raj Chetty
NBER Working Paper No. 9988
September 2003
JEL No. D8, G12, J22

                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper develops a method of estimating the coefficient of relative risk aversion (() from
data on labor supply. The main result is that existing estimates of labor supply elasticities place a
tight bound on (, without any assumptions beyond those of expected utility theory. It is shown that
the curvature of the utility function is directly related to the ratio of the income elasticity of labor
supply to the wage elasticity, holding fixed the degree of complementarity between consumption
and leisure. The degree of complementarity can in turn be inferred from data on consumption
choices when employment is stochastic. Using a large set of existing estimates of wage and income
elasticities, I find a mean estimate of ( = 1. I also give a calibration argument showing that a
positive uncompensated wage elasticity, as found in most studies of labor supply, implies ( < 1.25.
The estimate of g changes by at most 0.25 over the range of plausible values for the complementarity
parameter.

Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
521 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu
       The curvature of utility over consumption, measured e.g. by the coeﬃcient of relative risk

aversion, is an important parameter for a broad set of economic problems. It is of obvious

relevance in calibrating models of risk-taking behavior such as portfolio choice, insurance, and

executive compensation. But the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion also enters into problems

that require cardinal utility but do not explicitly involve uncertainty.              It determines the

deadweight cost of taxation and the benefits of redistribution, which are needed to identify

optimal tax and welfare policies. In addition, if utility is time-separable, the curvature of

utility is related to the path of consumption, savings, and labor supply over a lifetime.

       Despite its importance, empirical estimates of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion

(γ) are limited and highly dispersed.          One possible reason is the lack of field data that

can be used to ascertain γ without making assumptions about agents’ beliefs and planning

horizons.1 In the absence of compelling empirical evidence, most economists believe based

on introspection that γ ∈ (1, 5) while others contend that higher values of γ are reasonable.2

       This paper proposes a new method of estimating risk aversion that uses widely available

   1
      Existing estimates of γ are highly dispersed. Estimates of γ from portfolio choice and equity premi-
ums exceed 10 (Mehra and Prescott 1985, Kocherlakota 1996). Estimates of γ using data on insurance
deductibles, premiums, and the fraction of insured assets range from 2 to 10 (Szpiro 1986, Dreze 1987). To
the extent that agents are myopic or ill-informed about insurance or portfolio choice, these estimates of γ
may be biased. A more recent literature uses experimental data and yields estimates of γ between 0 and 15
(see e.g. Wolf and Pohlman 1983, Barsky et. al. 1997, Metrick 1995). While these studies are informative,
it is diﬃcult to know whether individuals’ behavior in experimental or hypothetical realms is reflective of
their preferences in real life.
    2
      See e.g. Kandel and Stambaugh (1991), who argue that γ = 10 does not seem unreasonable when one
introspects about small gambles.



                                                    1
data on labor supply decisions. Surprisingly, existing estimates of labor supply elasticities

place a tight bound on γ, without making any assumptions beyond expected utility maxi-

mization. The central result is that γ is directly related to the ratio of the income elasticity

of labor supply to the price (substitution) elasticity of labor supply. To see why, recall that

        ucc
γ ∝     uc
              where uc denotes the first derivative of utility with respect to consumption, and

ucc denotes the second derivative. An agent’s labor supply response to a wage increase is

directly related to uc , the marginal utility of consumption: the larger the magnitude of uc ,

the greater the benefit of an additional dollar of income, and the more the agent will work

when w goes up. The labor supply response to an increase in income is related to how much

the marginal utility of consumption changes as income changes, ucc .                If ucc is large, the

marginal utility of consumption falls sharply as income rises, so the agent will reduce labor

supply significantly when his income rises. It follows that there is a connection between γ

and the ratio of income and price elasticities.

       Formalizing this connection requires an additional step.           Labor supply data cannot

be used in isolation to identify cardinal properties of the utility function because data on

certainty behavior only identify utility functions up to a monotonic transformation.3 The

cardinality of the utility function must be pinned down using information on risky decisions.

To see how this can be done, observe that for a fixed degree of complementarity between

   3
    In other words, identification of curvature requires a 1-1 map between observed choices and γ. In
the general labor-leisure model, such a map does not exist because any monotonic transformation of utility
generates the same labor supply choices.




                                                    2
consumption and leisure (ucl ), there is only one vN-M utility (up to aﬃne transformations)

that can be consistent with a given set of labor-leisure choices.                Hence, given a value of

ucl , labor supply data can be used to estimate risk aversion. I show that ucl can in turn

be inferred from data on consumption choices when employment is stochastic, e.g. when

individuals anticipate being laid oﬀ with some probability.4 Intuitively, the extent to which

an agent chooses to smooth consumption across states in which labor supply diﬀers (via an

insurance policy or saving) reveals the degree of complementarity between consumption and

leisure. Importantly, I find that the estimates of risk aversion are insensitive to the value

of ucl , implying that γ can be tightly bounded using data from only a simple static labor-

leisure choice setting, where the assumption that agents maximize utility and “get things

right” is likely to be most tenable.          Unlike prior estimates of γ, which hinge on rational

expectations and perfect foresight, the estimates of risk aversion using the method proposed

here are more robust to myopia and overconfidence in planning ahead for risky events such

as unemployment.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, I derive estima-

tors for γ in the standard labor supply model, generalizing the model in steps to simplify the

exposition. I begin by providing graphical intuition for the connection between labor supply

and risk aversion in a setting where the marginal disutility of labor is constant. I then derive

   4
     It is critical to have data on choices under uncertainty; barring additional assumptions, a cardinal value
for ucl cannot be inferred from the usual certainty settings in which we typically think about estimating the
degree of complementarity between consumption and leisure (e.g. timing-of-work, household production).




                                                      3
an estimator for γ when utility is known to be additive in consumption and leisure (ucl = 0).

The next subsection considers the general case of arbitrary ucl and derives an estimator for

γ that uses both labor supply data and information on consumption choices when agents

face unemployment risk. Finally, I discuss the implications of two assumptions made in all

of the preceding derivations — that all agents have identical preferences and are able to make

intensive labor supply choices. Not surprisingly, when risk preferences are heterogeneous,

the estimator yields a measure of average risk aversion in the population. When agents can

make only extensive labor supply choices, a corresponding formula for risk aversion based

on income and price elasticities for labor force participation is obtained.

   In Section 3, I implement these formulae using a large set of existing estimates of wage

and income elasticities. I begin with the case in which ucl = 0 and show that almost all

studies of labor supply imply γ ≈ 1 under this assumption. I then show that the estimate

of γ changes by at most 0.25 for plausible perturbations in the degree of complementarity

between consumption and leisure. The ability to estimate γ precisely from labor supply data

may be surprising given the lack of consensus about the magnitudes of these elasticities. To

clarify this point, I give a calibration argument showing that if the uncompensated labor

supply curve is upward sloping (as almost all studies of labor supply find), γ < 1.25. The

low estimate of γ is intuitive: since γ is related to the income eﬀect divided by the price

eﬀect, as long as income eﬀects are not too large relative to price eﬀects — which we know

they are not because the uncompensated supply curve is upward sloping — γ must be small.



                                              4
1         Labor Supply and Risk Aversion

(a) Intuition

        Consider an agent who has a vN-M utility function u(c, l) over consumption and labor.

                                                 e is obtained by taking an expectation over
This agent’s expected utility from a gamble (ce, l)

the vN-M utility function:

                                                  e = Eu(ce, l)
                                            U(ce, l)         e



The goal of this paper is to identify the curvature of the underlying cardinal utility over

outcomes, u(c, l).5

        This section illustrates the connection between risk aversion and labor supply graphi-

cally in the special case where the marginal disutility of labor is constant.                Let c denote

consumption, l labor supply, and w the wage. The agent’s utility over consumption is u(c);

assume that uc > 0 and ucc < 0. Let ψ denote the marginal disutility of labor. I first derive

an expression for compensated labor supply, lc (w), by solving an expenditure minimization

problem:

                                 min c + w(1 − l) s.t. u(c) − ψl ≥ v


At an interior optimum, lc (w) satisfies the first order condition


                                                                  ψ
                                         uc (u−1 (v + ψlc )) =
                                                                  w
    I focus on the curvature of utility over consumption γ = uuccc c here, but show below that deriving other
    5

curvature parameters of interest is straightforward once the value of γ is known.


                                                     5
This condition is intuitive: the individual chooses labor supply by equating the marginal

utility of an extra dollar of consumption with the marginal disutility of working to earn that
                                                                         ψ
dollar. These choices are depicted by the intersections of the uc and    w
                                                                             curves in Figure 1.

   Now consider the eﬀect of an increase in w from w0 to w1 on compensated labor supply.

As shown in Figure 1, a change in w shifts the flat marginal disutility of labor curve down-

ward. If the utility function is highly curved (case A), the marginal utility of consumption

(uc ) falls quickly as labor supply and income rise.    Consequently, the increase in w leads

                        c
to a small increase in lA . When the utility function is not very curved (case B), marginal

utility declines slowly as a function of wealth and the same ∆w leads to a larger increase

    c
in lB . Figure 1 therefore illustrates that the compensated wage (price) elasticity of labor

supply, εcl,w is inversely related to the curvature of utility over consumption.

   The intuition for this relationship is as follows. Following a compensated wage increase,

agents increase their labor supply up to the point where the marginal utility of an additional

dollar is oﬀset by the marginal disutility of the additional work necessary to earn that dollar.

If utility is very curved, this condition is met by a small increase in labor supply. If utility

is not very curved, the agent needs to increase l much more before his marginal utility of
                                           ψ
money falls suﬃciently to equal the new    w1
                                              .

   The preceding argument relies on the assumption that disutility of labor, ψ, does not vary

with l. When it does, the curvature of ψ(l) is confounded with the curvature of u and εcl,w is

no longer suﬃcient to recover γ. In this case, the elasticity of labor supply with respect to



                                                  6
                       u



                                        uc(u-1(v+ψl))




                                                   Case B: γ low

                                  Case A: γ high
                    ψ/w0
                    ∆w
                    ψ/w1




                                  ∆lA                              ∆lB   l




                           Figure 1: Recovering γ from Labor Supply

unearned income, εl,y is needed to separate the two curvature parameters. Abstractly, the

income and compensated wage elasticities are both functions of the two curvatures. One

can therefore back out γ and the curvature of ψ by solving a system of two equations and

two unknowns, while holding fixed the degree of complementarity between consumption and

leisure.

   The next section derives the relationship between γ and labor supply elasticities formally

in the more general case where the marginal disutility of labor varies with l. For simplicity

of exposition, I continue to focus on the case in which utility is additive in consumption and

labor (ucl = 0).




                                                        7
(b) Base Case: Additive Utility

   It is convenient to redefine u(c, l) as the agent’s utility over both consumption and labor.

Assume that uc > 0, ul < 0, ucc < 0, ull < 0. This section also assumes additivity: ucl = 0.6

   An agent with wage w and unearned income y chooses (Marshallian) labor supply l by

solving

                                           max u(y + wl, l)
                                             l



At an interior optimum, l satisfies the first order condition



                                   wuc (y + wl, l) = −ul (y + wl, l)                                  (1)



   Consider the eﬀects of increasing w and y on l:


                                         ∂l       wucc
                                            = − 2
                                        ∂y     w ucc + ull
                                        ∂l     uc + wlucc
                                            = − 2
                                        ∂w     w ucc + ull


                                                                              c
Using the Slutsky decomposition for compensated labor supply ( ∂l
                                                               ∂w
                                                                  )


                                           ∂lc   ∂l    ∂l
                                               =    −l                                                (2)
                                           ∂w    ∂w    ∂y
   6
     Note that this restriction is stronger than assuming that the utility function permits an additively
separable representation. For example, Cobb-Douglas utility is “additively separable” but does not satisfy
the additivity restriction (however, the log of a Cobb-Douglas utility does).




                                                    8
it follows that
                                        ∂l/∂y    wucc (y + wl, l)
                                          c
                                               =                                                    (3)
                                        ∂l /∂w    uc (y + wl, l)

The definition of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion at consumption c is


                                                  ∂uc (c) c     ucc (c)
                               γ(c) ≡ −εuc ,c =              =−         c                           (4)
                                                   ∂c uc (c)    uc (c)


which implies, using (3), that


                                        y + wl ∂l/∂y        wl εl,y
                        γ(y + wl) = −           c
                                                     = −(1 + )       (y, w, l)                      (5)
                                          w ∂l /∂w          y εlc ,w


where εl,y denotes the income elasticity, εlc ,w the compensated wage (price) elasticity, and

wl
y
     the ratio of earned to unearned income.7

         As in the graphical example, the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is inversely related

to the price elasticity.      In addition, when disutility of labor is not constant, γ is directly

related to the magnitude of the income elasticity. To see why the ratio of these elasticities

                                                  ucc
determines risk aversion, recall that γ ∝         uc
                                                        where uc denotes the first derivative of utility

with respect to consumption, and ucc denotes the second derivative.                   An agent’s labor

supply response to a wage increase is directly related to uc : the larger the magnitude of uc ,

the greater the benefit of an additional dollar of income, and the more the agent will work

     7
    Note that this estimator does not blow up as y → 0, because εl,y has y in the numerator; hence, this
formula can be applied to the typical household in the U.S. that has neglible unearned income.



                                                        9
when w goes up.       The labor supply response to an increase in income is related to how

much the marginal utility of consumption changes as income changes, ucc . A large income

eﬀect implies that the agent is willing to increase eﬀort significantly in order to recoup lost

income, which means that the marginal utility of consumption rises quickly as income falls,

i.e. the magnitude of ucc is large. The connection between γ and the ratio of income and

price elasticities follows from these two observations.

      The reader may be puzzled that we can identify a unique value for γ by observing only

labor supply. Since non-linear monotonic transformations of u(c, l) do not aﬀect the choice

of l, are there not infinitely many values of γ that could be associated with observed labor

supply behavior? While this is true in general, the key is to observe that any non-linear

transformation of u will change the value of ucl .           However, (5) was derived under the

assumption that u(c, l) is additive, i.e. ucl = 0.

      It should be emphasized that γ is the curvature of utility over consumption.8              When

labor supply is not fixed, γ will not necessarily equal the curvature of utility over wealth.

However, once we know γ, we have a complete map of the vN-M utility function, and can

calculate any curvature of interest.       For example, defining indirect utility over unearned

income as

                                    v(y) = u(y + wl(y)) − ψ(y)

  8
    This is the parameter estimated by most studies of choice under uncertainty, insofar as labor supply
is omitted from these analyses. More importantly, it is the relevant parameter for most models of risky
behavior (e.g. portfolio choice and optimal social insurance).




                                                  10
it is shown in the appendix that the curvature of utility over unearned income is


                                            vyy     y + wlεl,y
                                        −       y=γ            <γ
                                            vy        y + wl


Finally, one may worry that adjustment costs which prevent agents from reoptimizing fully

in response to perturbations in w and y will aﬀect the estimates of γ.                      This is not true

because the method is biased only by factors that aﬀect the price and income elasticities

diﬀerently. Status-quo biases that make some individuals reluctant to change their labor

supply or institutional constraints that make small adjustments in labor supply diﬃcult do

not aﬀect the estimate.9

       The preceding derivation hinges on the assumption that utility is additive (ucl = 0),

which turns out to be inconsequential for the estimates of risk aversion from labor supply.

The next section relaxes this assumption.

(c) Complementarity Between Labor and Consumption

       When ucl 6= 0, (3) becomes


                                       ∂l/∂y
                                               = wucc /uc + ucl /uc                                         (6)
                                       ∂lc /∂w
   9
    To see this formally, note that an adjustment cost or status quo bias can be modeled as a cost k(l, l0 ) of
changing labor supply to l from l0 . Since we make no assumptions about the way in which labor supply l
enters u(c, l), (5) still obtains. The reason is that curvature is identified from the ratio of income and price
eﬀects, and k > 0 attenuates both eﬀects.




                                                      11
which, after some rearrangement, implies that


                                               wl −εl,y       y
                          γ(y + wl) = (1 +       )      + (1 + )εuc ,l                      (7)
                                               y εlc ,w       wl


where εuc ,l denotes the elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption with respect to labor

supply. Note that labor supply data is suﬃcient to identify γ given any value of εuc ,l because

no non-linear transformation of u will leave εuc ,l unchanged.

   It remains to estimate εuc ,l from choices under uncertainty.         One way to do so is by

observing data on the consumption choices of individuals who face uncertainty in labor

supply. For example, if an agent chooses to keep consumption fairly constant across states

in which he is employed and unemployed, εuc ,l must be small.

   To derive the relationship between consumption choices when employment is stochastic

and εuc ,l formally, consider a world with two states. Agents supply l1 units of labor in state

1 and l2 units of labor in state 2.     Suppose that the agent can trade consumption fairly

between the two states by purchasing state-contingent commodities (e.g. using an insurance

policy). He chooses consumption in the two states by maximizing expected utility



                               max
                               c ,c
                                    pu(c1 , l1 ) + (1 − p)u(c2 , l2 )
                                1   2



                        s.t.   pc1 + (1 − p)c2 = pwl1 + (1 − p)wl2 ≡ W



The agent’s first-order condition for consumption is obtained by equating marginal utilities


                                                 12
across the two states:

                                   uc (c1 , l1 ) = uc (W − c1 , l2 )


   Now, suppose we observe data from the following experiment. Assume that the agent

starts out supplying a constant l1 = l2 = l units of labor in each state. Suppose there is

a balanced-budget change in labor supply, increasing state 1 labor supply by δ 1 units while

decreasing state 2 labor supply by δ 2 units to keep expected earnings fixed at W .           We

can think of this as a decision to increase work eﬀort in state 1 to compensate for (partial)

unemployment in state 2.

   Diﬀerentiating the first order condition with respect to l1 while holdings earnings fixed

at W yields the following identity:

                                           εuc ,l = γεc1 ,l1


   Here, εc1 ,l1 denotes the elasticity of consumption with respect to labor supply in state 1

(while labor supply in state 2 changes so that total income remains constant).          Plugging

this expression into (7) and solving gives an estimator for risk aversion in terms of εc1 ,l1 :


                                       wl −εl,y           y
                            γ = (1 +     )      /(1 − (1 + )εc1 ,l1 )                             (8)
                                       y εlc ,w           wl


   This formula reduces to (5) when utility is additive in labor and consumption (εc1 ,l1 = 0).

When consumption and labor are complements, εc1 ,l1 > 0, and the actual γ is higher relative




                                                  13
to the estimate obtained when additive utility over c and l is assumed.10

       While one can introspect about the magnitude of εc1 ,l1 , it is helpful to map existing

estimates of the consumption drop during unemployment into values of εc1 ,l1 .                      To do so,

normalize the agent’s labor supply to 1 when working and 0 when unemployed. Since we

are using a discrete change in labor supply to infer an elasticity, we must choose a functional

form for consumption in terms of labor supply. For simplicity, I assume a linear form:



                                                    c = a + bl


                                      b
In this case, εc1 ,l1 (l1 = 1) =     a+b
                                         ,   which is precisely the percentage drop in consumption

from the employed to unemployed state. Estimates of the consumption drop are small: for

                                              b
example, Gruber (1997) estimates             a+b
                                                   = 0.068 using data from the PSID.11 It should be

stressed that this estimate gives an upper bound for the true εc1 ,l1 if the agent does not

smooth consumption across states to the optimal level because of the inadequacy of avail-

able insurance policies, myopia, or overconfidence about the probability of unemployment.

Hence, the empirical evidence suggests that the departure from additivity (ucl = 0), if any, is

not large. Since ucl is the only parameter directly estimated from choices under uncertainty,

  10
      The sign of εc1 ,l1 is theoretically ambiguous. If consumption requires time, as in Becker (1965), leisure
and consumption are complements (εc1 ,l1 < 0). On the other hand, work-related expenses can make labor
and consumption complementary (εc1 ,l1 > 0). I show below that regardless of the sign of εc1 ,l1 , the estimates
of γ are not very sensitive to its magnitude.
   11
      Similarly, Browning and Crossley (2001) use data from the Canadian Out of Employment Panel to show
that the consumption drop is not statistically distinguishable from zero for households that have positive
liquid assets before their unemployment spell.



                                                       14
it follows that the labor supply method of estimating risk aversion relies primarily on the as-

sumption that agents make static labor-leisure choices by maximizing utility. The estimates

of risk aversion in this paper are therefore more likely to be robust to myopia or ill-informed

planning for risky events than existing estimates from domains such as insurance purchases

or portfolio choice.

    That concludes the analysis of risk aversion and labor supply in the standard labor-leisure

choice model. The final two subsections explore the implications of relaxing two assumptions

of this model: (1) homogeneous preferences and (2) the ability to make intensive labor supply

decisions.

(d) Extension 1: Unobservable Heterogeneity in Preferences

    How should the estimators (5) and (8) be interpreted in a world with unobserved het-

erogeneity in preferences? To answer this question, suppose there are N types of agents,

who have utilities u1 (c, l), u2 (c, l), ..., un (c, l).      To simplify the exposition, assume that all

the utilities are additive in c and l. Let αi denote the fraction of type i agents.

    Let us define a utility function u(c) for a representative agent by taking a weighted

average of the individual utilities as follows:


                                                        J
                                                        X
                                            u(c, l) =         ω i ui (c, l)
                                                        i=1




                                                        15
where the weights
                                               αi /(w2 uicc + uill )
                                       ω i = PJ           2 i        i
                                              i=1 αi /(w ucc + ull )


for i = 1, ..., J sum to 1. Note that in general, the representative agent’s utility will diﬀer

depending on the values of (y, w, l).

       It is shown in the appendix that in a heterogenous population, the estimate γb (y + wl)

equals the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion (γ u ) for the representative agent with utility

u:12
                                                             ucc
                                         γ u = −(y + wl)         = γb
                                                             uc

       Hence, in a heterogeneous economy, the estimator γb (y + wl) can be interpreted as a

weighted average of the risk aversions of agents in the marginal group at (y, w, l).13                     The

marginal group consists of those who change their labor supply in response to perturbations

in w and y. The preferences of those who are constrained and cannot make such changes

could be quite diﬀerent.

(e) Extension 2: Extensive Labor Supply Decisions

       Many individuals are unable to choose the number of hours they work.                        They face

the narrower choice of either working for a fixed number of hours or not working at all.14

  12
     In general, γ u is not equal to the weighted average of each type’s γ because coeﬃcients of relative risk
aversion do not aggregate linearly.
  13
     Note that we can observe many diﬀerent marginal groups by estimating γ    b at various levels of (y, w, l).
  14
     The purpose of this section is to show that inferences about curvature can be made even when changes
in labor supply are lumpy. The nature of the lumpiness itself (e.g. whether there are restrictions on hours
worked in a week or weeks worked in a year) is not important.




                                                      16
To model these extensive labor supply decisions, assume that the agent makes a binary

decision to work and supply 1 unit of labor or not work. As above, let y denote unearned

income and w the income earned by working.             Returning temporarily to additive utility

over consumption and leisure, redefine u(c) as the utility from consumption. Let ψ denote

disutility of supplying 1 unit of labor. The agent chooses labor supply by solving



                                       max u(y + wl) − ψl
                                      l∈{0,1}




He works if his disutility of labor is less than the utility of an additional w units of consump-

tion, i.e. if



                                    b
                                ψ < ψ(y, w) ≡ u(y + w) − u(y)



    Let us model the heterogeneity of disutility of labor in the economy by a smooth density

f (ψ). Then the fraction of workers who participate in the labor force is


                                                Z ψ
                                                  b(y,w)
                                    θ(y, w) =              f (ψ)dψ                           (9)
                                                 0




    It follows that
                                    ∂θ/∂y   uc (y) − uc (y + w)
                                −         =                                                 (10)
                                    ∂θ/∂w        uc (y + w)

This expression shows that the percent change in marginal utility of wealth from y to y + w

                                                 17
is equal to the ratio of the income and wage eﬀects on labor supply. In the intensive labor

supply model, we could compute γ(c) at any level c without making any functional form

assumptions because we could observe how marginal utility changes for small changes in

income.      In a world with extensive labor supply decisions, we observe only the change in

marginal utility between y and y + w. Consequently, we need to make a functional form

assumption for u(c) to translate the change in marginal utilities into a coeﬃcient of relative

risk aversion. I assume CRRA utility:15


                                                         c1−γ
                                                u(c) =
                                                         1−γ


       Under this assumption, (10) implies


                                          ∂θ/∂y   y −γ − (y + w)−γ
                                      −         =
                                          ∂θ/∂w       (y + w)−γ


Solving for γ yields
                                                            εθ,y w
                                                  log[1 −   εθ,w y
                                                                   ]
                                            γ=                w                                            (11)
                                                    log[1 + y ]

       Finally, a model of unemployment analogous to that above can be used to derive an

  15
    If γ(c) actually varies with c, this method yields the best constant-γ fit of the data, which can be loosely
interpreted as the average γ(c) in the region c ∈ [y, y + w].




                                                      18
estimator for γ when utility is not additive:

                                                             εθ,y w
                                                  log[1 −    εθ,w y
                                                                    ]
                                        γ=                 ∆c           w                                       (12)
                                              log[(1 −      c
                                                              )(1   + y )]


          ∆c
where     c
               denotes the consumption drop associated with unemployment.

       This concludes the theoretical portion of the paper. The next section implements the

formulae derived above using existing estimates of labor supply elasticities.




2        Empirical Implementation

A large number of studies have estimated “static” wage and income elasticities using ex-

ogenous variation in unearned income and wages such as tax changes, cross-sectional diﬀer-

ences, or lottery winnings.16 The traditional literature, summarized by Pencavel (1986) and

Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), defines labor supply as hours worked or work participation.

More recently, Feldstein (1995) emphasizes that hours worked is only one component of la-

bor supply and that other margins such as eﬀort or training might adjust as well. When a

multi-dimensional definition of labor supply in incorporated into the model above, (5) still
                                                εl,y                           εLI,y
obtains except that the elasticity ratio       εlc ,w
                                                        is replaced by       εLI c ,1−τ
                                                                                        ,   where LI is labor income

and 1 − τ the net-of-tax rate. This result follows the lines of Feldstein (1999), who shows

  16
     Of course, these estimates are obtained from a world in which consumers make dynamic choices. How-
ever, a wide variety of empirical strategies have been designed to identify precisely the relevant elasticities
for a static model. Moreover, the calibration arguments given below suggest that even if the estimates are
not very precise, the main result of the paper — that γ is quite low — still goes through.


                                                        19
that the elasticity of taxable labor income with respect to the net-of-tax rate captures all

margins on which taxable income can be adjusted. The reason is that the relative prices of

each mechanism of adjustment remain fixed when tax rates change.

       Table 1 presents a set of income and wage elasticities for three definitions of labor supply:

(A) Hours worked, (B) Participation, and (C) Earned income.17 To get a sense of the plau-

sible range for γ that is consistent with labor supply behavior, I include elasticity estimates

for a wide range of groups, such as prime age males, married women, retired individuals,

and low income families.         In addition, I consider studies with many diﬀerent approaches

to estimating the elasticities, such as welfare reforms, tax changes, cross-sectional variation,

and lottery payouts. The inclusion of a diverse set of studies yields a substantial amount

of variation in the elasticities, ranging from 0.035 to 1.0 for the compensated wage elasticity

and -0.08 to -0.3 for the income elasticity. In general, elasticity estimates for groups who

are not as attached to the labor force (married women and older individuals) tend to be

higher than the elasticity estimates for groups with greater labor force attachment (prime

age men). Despite this variation in the estimates, the implied range for γ ends up being

quite tight, largely because the ratios of the unearned income to wage elasticities are actually

fairly stable across studies.

       To estimate γ, I first consider the additive utility case and apply (5) and (11). Column

  17
    In part (C) of the table, it is important to distinguish between taxable labor income and total labor
income. In the calculation of γ, we are interested in changes in total earned income, irrespective of the form
of compensation. The measure of income used in the table (AGI) may not capture forms of compensation
that are not reported on tax returns such as oﬃce perks.



                                                     20
                                                                     y
(6) of Table 1 reports estimates of γ at the average value of        w
                                                                         and l in each study.18 Rather

than attempting to discern the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion at specific income levels, I

group all the estimates together to identify a representative agent’s average γ across a broad

range of incomes.        The (unweighted) mean γ is 1.0 using hours, 0.29 using participation,

and 1.19 using earned income elasticities.         The overall mean estimate of γ = 1.01, which

implies that a 10% increase in consumption reduces the marginal utility of consumption by

10%.

       Despite the lack of a consensus among labor economists about the magnitudes of income

and wage elasticities, every study except one implies γ < 1.5. This similarity of the estimates

of γ despite the use of diﬀerent methodologies, definitions of labor supply, and groups of the

population is striking. The following calibration exercise sheds some light on the source of

this consensus. Rewriting the Slutsky equation for compensated labor supply (2) in terms

of elasticities yields
                                                           lw
                                         εlc ,w = εl,w −      εl,y
                                                            y

       Most studies of labor supply find that uncompensated labor supply curves are weakly

upward sloping (εl,w ≥ 0). This places a lower bound on εlc ,w of − lw ε which implies using
                                                                     y l,y


(5) that
                                                        y
                                              γ <1+
                                                        wl
  18
    Following Hausman (1985), y is defined as “virtual” unearned income to account for the progressivity
of the U.S. tax system. Since the earned income estimates combine diﬀerent studies, they are evaluated at
 y    1
wl = 4 , which reflects the median value of unearned to earned income in the US (see below).




                                                   21
The ratio of unearned income to earned income varies across the population, but in the

                                                                                     1
aggregate it equals the ratio of capital income to labor income, which is            2
                                                                                         in the U.S. This

places an upper bound of γ = 1.5 for a representative agent whose utility is an income-

weighted average of individual utilities. Since capital income is highly concentrated, if we

are interested in the curvature of an hours-weighted average of utilities, the relevant value
     y
of   wl
          is much lower; a reasonable estimate is 14 .19 In this case, εl,w > 0 implies γ < 1.25.

In fact, to generate γ > 2 with an income elasticity of −0.1, we must have εl,w < −0.15.

Almost every existing study of labor supply finds εl,w > −0.15.20 These calibration results

are important because they show that the estimates of risk aversion derived in this paper

are unaﬀected by the ongoing debate among labor economists about appropriate methods

of estimating labor supply elasticities.21

       Taking complementarity between labor and consumption into account does not change

these results significantly.     Column (7) of Table 1 reports estimates that account for the

                                                                                               ∆c
degree of complementarity implied by an unemployment consumption drop of                       c
                                                                                                    = 10%.

This adjustment increases the average estimate of γ to 1.24.               As noted above, if some of

this drop in consumption reflects inadequate consumption smoothing across states rather

  19
     Tabulations by the US Census Bureau (1999, Table E) adjusted for the progressivity of the income tax
                y
indicate that wl  ≈ 14 for the median family in the U.S., which has an income of approximately $40,000.
  20
     Pencavel (1986), Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), and Gruber and Saez (2000) summarize more than sixty
studies with an array of methodologies. All find uncompensated wage elasticities greater than −0.15.
  21
     For instance, one may be concerned that existing empirical strategies do not properly identify “static”
elasticities because income and wage shocks may be perceived as transitory. However, the results of this
paper still go through if one agrees that a permanent upward shift in an agent’s wage profile is unlikely to
sharply reduce his lifetime labor supply.




                                                    22
                                       ∆c
than optimal behavior, the observed    c
                                            overstates the degree of complementarity between

consumption and labor. In this case, the estimates in column (7) give an upper bound for

                                                                      ∆c
γ. In fact, generating a mean estimate of γ > 2 requires εc1 ,l1 =    c
                                                                           > 0.25, which seems

implausibly large. Therefore, the band for γ remains narrow even though our estimate of

εuc ,l may be imprecise and possibly biased by myopia or inadequate planning for the risk

of job loss. The estimate of γ < 1.25 thus relies primarily on the assumption that agents

properly maximize utility in making static labor-leisure choices, and is robust to deviations

from optimal behavior in more complicated domains.




3     Conclusion

This paper has shown that labor supply elasticities can be used to place a tight bound on risk

aversion in an expected utility framework without making assumptions about the probability

distributions that govern gambles or agents’ beliefs in risky situations.     The key result is

that risk aversion is directly related to the ratio of the income elasticity of labor supply to

the price elasticity, holding fixed the degree of complementarity between consumption and

leisure. The degree of complementarity can in turn be estimated from consumption choices

when labor supply is stochastic.

    Using a broad array of existing estimates of income and wage elasticities, I find an

(unweighted) mean estimate of γ ≈ 1 and show that the estimates of almost every study

of labor supply imply γ < 1.25.       The estimate of γ changes by at most 0.25 over the

                                               23
range of plausible values for the complementarity parameter. Consequently, we are able to

bound γ quite tightly despite the lack of consensus about the magnitudes of labor supply

elasticities and the limited amount of evidence on the complementarity parameter.                     The

intuition underlying the low coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is clear when one thinks

about the labor supply behavior we would observe if γ were high. If γ were high, the

marginal utility of money would deteriorate quickly with income, and labor supply would

diminish significantly as income rises. But existing empirical evidence strongly rejects this

hypothesis.

       Two caveats deserve mention: First, this estimate applies only to the range of incomes

over which the relevant elasticities are estimated (roughly $10,000-$200,000). Second, the

estimate only reflects the curvature of the utility function for agents who are able to freely

adjust their labor supply and consumption decisions in response to wage and income changes.

Many people do not have such flexibility because of prior commitments, and it would be

useful to identify the curvature of their utilities over wealth.22

  22
     Chetty (2002) uses data on unemployment durations to show that the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion
is an order of magnitude larger when individuals are constrained by prior commitments.




                                                    24
   References
    Auten, Gerald and Robert Carroll, “The Eﬀect of Income Taxes on Household Behavior,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 81 (1999), 681-693.
    Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, “Pref-
erence Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 537-580.
    Becker, Gary, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75 (1965), 493-
517.
    Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy, “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Ap-
proaches,” in Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics 3
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1999).
    Browning, Martin and Timothy Crossley, “Unemployment Insurance Benefit Levels and
Consumption Changes,” Journal of Public Economics, 80 (2001), 1-23.
    Chetty, Raj. “Consumption Commitments, Unemployment Durations, and Local Risk
Aversion,” Harvard University Mimeograph (2002).
    Dreze, Jacques, Essays on Economic Decisions Under Uncertainty (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1987).
    Eissa, Nada and Hoynes, Hillary, “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor Supply
of Married Couples,” NBER Working Paper 6856 (1998).
    Feldstein, Martin, “The Eﬀect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study
of the 1986 Tax Reform Act,” Journal of Political Economy, 103 (1995), 551-572.
    Feldstein, Martin, “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 81 (1999), 674-680.
    Friedberg, Leoria, “The Labor Supply Eﬀects of the Social Security Earnings Test,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 82 (2000), 48-63.
    Gertner, Robert, “Game Shows and Economic Behavior: Risk-Taking on ‘Card Sharks’,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (1993), 507-22.
    Gruber, Jonathan, “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
American Economic Review, 87 (1997), 192-205.
    Gruber, Jonathan and Emmanuel Saez, “The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and
Implications,” NBER Working Paper 7512 (2000).
    Hausman, Jerry, “Taxes and Labor Supply,” in Feldstein, Martin and Alan Auerbach,
eds., Handbook of Public Economics 1 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1985).
    Imbens, Guido, Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote, “Estimating the Eﬀect of
Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey
of Lottery Players,” American Economic Review, 91 (2001), 778-794.
    Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin, “Back to Bentham? Explo-
rations of Experienced Utility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 375-405.



                                           25
    Kandel, Shmuel and Robert F. Stambaugh, “Asset Returns and Intertemporal Prefer-
ences,” Journal of Monetary Econmics, 27 (1991), 39-71.
    Kocherlakota, Narayana, “The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 24 (1996), 42-71.
    MaCurdy, Thomas, David Green, and Harry Paarsh, “Assessing Empirical Approaches
for Analyzing Taxes and Labor Supply,” Journal of Human Resources, 25 (1990), 415-90.
    Machina, Mark, “Choice Under Uncertainty: Problems Solved and Unsolved,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 1 (1987), 121-154.
    Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 15 (1985), 145-161.
    Metrick, Andrew, “A Natural Experiment in Jeopardy!,” American Economic Review,
85 (1995), 240-253.
    Pencavel, John, “Labor Supply of Men: A Survey” in Ashenfelter, Orley and Richard
Layard, eds, Handbook of Labor Economics 1 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986).
    Prelec, Drazen, “The Probability Weighting Function,” Econometrica, 66 (1998), 497-
527.
    Rabin, Matthew, “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem,”
Econometrica, 68 (2000), 1281-1292.
    Saez, Emmanuel, “The Eﬀect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel Study of
‘Bracket Creep’,” NBER Working Paper 7367 (1999).
    Szpiro, George, “Measuring Risk Aversion: An Alternative Approach,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 68 (1986), 156-159.
    Tversky, Amos and Craig Fox, “Weighting Risk and Uncertainty,” Psychological Review,
102 (1994), 269-283.
    U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports P60-209. Money Income in the United
States (1999).
    Wolf, Charles and Larry Pohlman, “The Recovery of Risk Preferences from Actual
Choices,” Econometrica, 51 (1983), 843-850.
    Wu, George and Richard Gonzalez, “Curvature of the Probability Weighting Function,”
Management Science, 42 (1996), 1676-1690.




                                           26
   Appendix
   (a) Curvature of utility over unearned income
   The Envelope theorem implies that

                                   vy (y) = uc (c(y), l(y))

and it follows that
                                            vyy     ucc ∂c
                                  γy = −        y=−        y
                                            vy      uc ∂y
Recognizing that ∂c/∂y = 1 + w∂l/∂y, we obtain

                                            γ y = γεc,y

where εc,y denotes the income elasticity of consumption. Finally, observe that

                                               y + wlεl,y
                                      εc,y =
                                                 y + wl
where εl,y is the income elasticity of labor supply.
   Note that εc,y < 1 implies γ y < γ c . If utility over consumption is not very curved
(γ = 1), utility over wealth must be even less curved.
   (b) Heterogeneity in Preferences
   Assume that the first J types supply exactly l units of labor when they have unearned
income y and wage w. The aggregate income and compensated wage eﬀects at (y, w, l) are

                                    J                    J
                                    X                    X           wuicc
                        ∂l/∂y =           αi ∂li /∂y =       αi
                                    i=1                  i=1      w2 uicc + uill
                                     J                      J
                                    X                      X              wuic
                       ∂lc /∂w =          αi ∂lc,i /∂w =         αi
                                    i=1                    i=1        w2 uicc + uill

which implies that the estimator in (5) is
                                                        J         wuccP                i

                                 y + wl ∂l/∂y    y + wl i=1 αi w2 uicc +uill
                 γb (y + wl) = −              =−
                                   w ∂lc /∂w       w PJi=1 αi 2 ui ic i
                                                                                w ucc +ull


   It follows that                                           P
                                                     J         i
                       u            ucc              i=1 ω i ucc
                      γ = −(y + wl)     = −(y + wl) PJ          i
                                                                  = γb
                                    uc                i=1 ω i uc



                                                27
                                                                   TABLE 1
                                      Labor Supply Elasticities and Implied Coefficients of Relative Risk Aversion

                                                                                               Income        Compensated          γ           γ
                Study                          Sample                     Identification       Elasticity   Wage Elasticitya   Additive   ∆c/c=0.1
                 (1)                             (2)                           (3)                (4)            (5)             (6)         (7)

A. Hours

Blundell and MaCurdy (1999)b       Men                             Various                      -0.120           0.567          1.06       1.21
MaCurdy et al (1990)               Married Men                     Cross Section                -0.010           0.035          1.47       1.68
Eissa and Hoynes (1998)            Married Men, Inc < 30K          EITC Expansions              -0.030           0.192          0.88       1.01
                                   Married Women, Inc < 30K        EITC Expansions              -0.040           0.088          0.64       0.98
Friedberg (2000)                   Older Men (63-71)               Soc. Sec. Earnings Test      -0.297           0.545          0.93       1.23
Average                                                                                                                         1.00       1.22

B. Participation c

Eissa and Hoynes (1998)            Married Men, Inc < 30K          EITC Expansions              -0.008           0.033          0.44       0.50
                                   Married Women, Inc < 30K        EITC Expansions              -0.038           0.288          0.15       0.45
Average                                                                                                                         0.29       0.48


C. Earned Income d

Imbens et al (2001)                    Lottery Players in MA           Lottery Winnings               -0.110
Feldstein (1995)                       Married, Inc > 30K              TRA 1986                                   1.040         0.53       0.60
Auten and Carroll (1997)               Single and Married, Inc>15K TRA 1986                                       0.660         0.83       0.95
Saez (1999)                            NBER Tax Panel 1979-81          Tax Bracket Creep                          0.250         2.20       2.51
Average                                                                                                                         1.19       1.36
Overall Average                                                                                                                 1.01       1.24
 a
   In part (C), this column gives the elasticity of earned income with respect to the net-of-tax rate
 b
   This row uses an average of the 20 elasticities reported in Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) and assumes y/wl=1/4
 c
  Participation elasticities assume CRRA utility
 d
   Since studies on earned income do not estimate income elasticties, I use the Imbens et. al. estimate in each case




                                                                            28
