                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INSTITUTIONAL AND NON-INSTITUTIONAL
                        EXPLANATIONS OF ECONOMIC DIFFERENCES

                                           Stanley L. Engerman
                                           Kenneth L. Sokoloff

                                           Working Paper 9989
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9989


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




We would like to express deep appreciation for the research assistance of Elisa Mariscal, Patricia Juarez, and
Luis Zegarra. We have also benefited from discussions with Daron Acemoglu, Lance Davis, David Dollar,
David Eltis, Jeff Frieden, Avner Greif, Stephen Haber, Karla Hoff, Daniel Kaufmann, Zorina Khan, Naomi
Lamoreaux, Frank Lewis, Peter Lindert, John Majewski, Douglass North, James Robinson, Jean-Laurent
Rosenthal, Mary Shirley, Joel Slemrod, Peter Temin, John Wallis, and Jeffrey Williamson. We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support we have received from the National Science Foundation, as well as from
the Academic Senate at the University of California, Los Angeles. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Institutional and Non-Institutional Explanations of Economic Differences
Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 9989
September 2003
JEL No. N10

                                             ABSTRACT


        Although we cannot conceive of processes of economic growth that do not involve
institutional change, in this essay we outline some reasons why one should be cautious about
grounding a theory of growth on institutions. We emphasize how very different institutional
structures have often been found to be reasonable substitutes for each other, both in dissimilar as
well as similar contexts. The historical record, therefore, does not seem to support the notion that
any particular institution, narrowly defined, is indispensable for growth. Moreover, we discuss how
the evidence that there are systematic patterns to the ways institutions evolve undercuts the idea that
exogenous change in institutions is what powers growth. Institutions matter, but our thinking of how
they matter should recognize that they are profoundly influenced by the political and economic
environment, and that if any aspect of institutions is crucial for growth, it is that institutions change
over time as circumstances change.

Stanley L. Engerman
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
enge@troi.cc.rochester.edu

Kenneth L. Sokoloff
Department of Economics
U.C.L.A
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sokoloff@ucla.edu
       Economists have long been concerned with the explanation of differences across

countries in levels of national income, population, and per capita incomes, as well as in

their rates of growth. Because many of the processes of economic development are

presumed to operate over long periods of time, those studying the sources of these

differences have quite naturally turned to the historical record for relevant evidence.

Their concern with economic history thus comes not only from a desire to achieve a

better understanding of the past, but also from by a belief that such knowledge can serve

as a guide for policymakers striving to improve the economic and social conditions of

currently less developed nations. Many scholars have set about making contributions to

knowledge through detailed investigations of the processes of growth in individual

countries. Others have sought to discern what factors were crucial through comparative

studies, focusing on issues such as why nations differed with regard to the timing of the

onset of growth or how and why their records of achieved rates of growth varied over a

long period of time.

       Recently considerable attention has been given to the question of why European

nations and some of their overseas offshoots expanded more rapidly than did the

economies of Asia, Africa, and Latin America after the eighteenth century, either

generating new gaps in levels of income and rates of growth, or else greatly widening

whatever differentials may have previously existed (see Table 1).1 Previously the

principal focus of historians examining the basis for differences in long-term economic

performance had been with what led Great Britain to accomplish an Industrial Revolution

sometime after the middle of the eighteenth century, and ahead of its European rivals (see

Table 2).2 Given the greater similarity of economic, political, and social structures




                                                                                        2
among the European nations than those between Europe and the rest of the world, the

factors highlighted in the discussions of the development of the Industrial Revolution are

rather different from those generally featured in the broader geographic comparisons. In

both cases, however, what the economists and economic historians are seeking to explain

is why some nations in today’s world remain poor, relatively and absolutely, and what

conditions can be changed in order to achieve success in spurring growth and improving

the welfare of the respective populations. It is this problem that the recent study of

institutions has sought to help resolve and that probably represents its most significant

contribution.

       It is not necessary here to attempt to catalogue the full set of explanations that

have been given for differences in economic development, since many books and articles,

published and forthcoming, have already done that. For present purposes, however, we

highlight a transition over the last few decades from a concentration on the role of

narrowly-defined economic factors to a focus on the significance of various social

structures and culture in providing the conditions conducive to economic development.3

Arguments based on conditions such as favorable natural resources (including accessible

coal and iron, in the case of Britain), high rates of capital formation, and extensive

markets or other circumstances that encourage a faster pace of technological change,

which had long been central to our understanding of why some economies enjoyed better

performance, have been replaced (or supplemented) by arguments concerned with how

differences across societies in political and cultural institutions arose, and how they

influence the processes of growth.4      Although we cannot conceive of processes of

economic growth that do not involve institutional change, in this essay we outline some




                                                                                        3
reasons why one should be cautious about grounding a theory of growth on institutions.

We emphasize how very different institutional structures have often been found to be

reasonable substitutes for each other, both in dissimilar as well as similar contexts. The

historical record, therefore, does not seem to support the notion that any particular

institution, narrowly defined, is indispensable for growth. Moreover, we discuss how the

evidence that there are systematic patterns to the ways institutions evolve undercuts the

idea that exogenous change in institutions is what powers growth. Institutions matter, but

our thinking of how they matter should recognize that they are profoundly influenced by

the political and economic environment, and that if any aspect of institutions is crucial for

growth, it is that institutions must change over time as circumstances change.



                                                II.

       A basic categorization of explanations for economic growth would include

economic, cultural, political, and institutional factors. The import of economic factors

was much discussed in the ancient world, and amongst the numerous economic factors

that have been considered since that time are: natural resources, such as the supplies of

coal and iron; the opportunity to trade at low cost with other regions or nations, which

provides markets that encourage specialization in producing goods in which the economy

has a comparative advantage (and perhaps stimulating more rapid technical progress) as

well as serves as a source of imports that a nation may be incapable of producing;

climate, which can influence productivity through a variety of mechanisms; colonial

empire, which might be associated with especially high private or social returns to

investment; and the role of population change. Some contend, for example, that rapid



                                                                                           4
population growth has sometimes proved beneficial, fostering lower labor costs or the

advantages in scale effects that come from higher total demand; others argue for the

benefits of relatively slow growth in population, on the grounds that lower population

density encourages higher per capita incomes and higher rates of capital formation.

These, and other so-called economic explanations, say little explicitly about non-

economic factors and institutions, although this does not mean that the latter are not

implicit in the analysis.

        Discussions of the role of non-economic factors (encompassing the cultural,

political, and institutional) in accounting for differences across societies in economic

development can also be traced back many centuries. Several of the classic theories for

the rise of European capitalism and the onset of modern economic growth are based on

conditions that clearly fall outside of the conventional economic sphere, such as the

spread of particular religious beliefs, be it the Protestantism pointed to by Max Weber,

the Judaism highlighted by Werner Sombart, or shifts in the orientation of dominant

religions.5 Other arguments stress the important contributions of the advance of scientific

and rational thought, or the impact of changing tastes for consumer goods and the effects

on choices between work and leisure on the supply and intensity of labor during early

industrialization.6 Changes in legal systems, in degrees of trust and the extent of social

capital, and in the nature of political organization and the extent of democracy, have more

recently been advocated as critical factors explaining differentials or shifts in economic

performance.7 Although changes in these kinds of circumstances, such as in religion, are

generally treated as exogenous to the economy, the nature of the interaction between

economic and so-called “non-economic” factors may be complex. The contrast in views




                                                                                         5
between Weber and of R.H. Tawney on the relationship between religious changes and

the rise of capitalism in Britain, and in northern Europe more generally, for example,

corresponds to similar debates over the sources of change in many other purportedly non-

economic conditions relevant to economic growth.8 Moreover, the implications of the

very slow diffusion of cultural change (and of institutional change more generally) and

economic growth around the world represent a puzzle for those who believe that

introducing exogenous changes in these facets should have significant, favorable effects

and constitute a viable instrument of economic policy.9

       Quite a wide range of non-economic conditions relevant for growth have featured

in the debates over why Britain was the first industrial nation. Many can be subsumed in

the blanket category of culture, where cultural factors are understood to include: religion,

particularly the impact of non-conformists in the development of technology and

entrepreneurship in British economy; the scientific spirit and the expansion of

knowledge, including a willingness to search out new methods and technologies; and the

emergence of an educational system that permitted a wide diffusion of information and

skills among the population. Culture has also been defined to include family and kinship

patterns; tastes and preferences regarding work versus leisure; time preferences

determining the levels of savings and consumption, and the development of a wide-

spread desire to financially profit-maximize or pursue material gain more generally.

Proponents of the view that cultural change was responsible for economic change

generally point to their coincidence in 18th century Britain, and presume that culture

consists of behaviors and values that are determined independently of economic factors.

This may, however, be an artificial distinction, because the economic effects of cultural




                                                                                          6
factors, if not the cultural beliefs themselves, are often greatly influenced by the relative

costs of different patterns of behavior and the amounts of income that people are willing

to forgo to obtain chosen ends. 10

       The recent work on the significance of institutions for understanding why Britain

industrialized first, and for understanding differences in economic performance more

generally, gives relatively little attention to the role of culture per se. In emphasizing

property rights and other aspects of the British legal framework, it breaks sharply from

the previous stream of work on institutions by economists who emphasized culture in

treating the evolution of economies, as part of a critique of classical economic theory.11

Current thinking about institutions instead follows the pioneering approach of Douglass

North in grounding the analysis of the causes and consequences of institutions and

institutional change on theory.12 This perspective defines institutions, though difficult to

do with precision, as encompassing the specific organizations or rules that constrain and

influence human behavior. A key aspect of these humanly-devised rules is that they

structure human actions by providing incentives that shape economic and political

organization. Formal rules, plus the informal constraints that develop, influence the costs

of production and of transaction within society. Among the institutions that are most

important for economic performance are those involving the definition and enforcement

of property rights, between the government and private parties and between the

individuals within a society. The link between appropriate institutions and economic

growth is that institutions reduce the costs of production and distribution, allowing

private agents more scope to benefit from specialization, investment, and trade.

Institutions, as human-imposed constraints, are not the only constraints that society or




                                                                                           7
private actors confront, since there are others due to the state of technological knowledge,

demographic forces, nature (including climate and topography), as well as other features

of the environment that may also have implications for the patterns of economic

activity.13

        Institutions, as described, play several roles in the economy. They influence the

beliefs and behaviors of individuals and groups, and thus the preferences and priorities

expressed through both private and public decisions.           Another important role of

institutions is providing for efficient property rights, trust, and effective incentives, and

thus facilitating the organization and conduct of appropriate and constructive transactions

and interactions among individuals and firms. Indeed it is claimed, by North and others,

that it was sound property rights and incentive schemes made possible by its distinctive

institutions that were key to Britain industrializing first.14 No economic development is

possible without secure property rights. The specification of formal rights is only one

part of society’s problem however.       The nature of the enforcement of institutional

provisions, both as to accepted legitimacy and effectiveness, is critical to the success of

whatever institutions exist. Similarly, the nature of legislative decisions and judicial

rulings will influence outcomes, whether or not consistent with the circumstances of the

adoption of particular institutions.      Enforcement is sometimes bilateral, between

individuals, with no government role to ensure compliance, but in other cases

enforcement requires governmental participation and action.

        Although those who stress the importance of the institutional framework have

somewhat different concerns than those who highlight the significance of culture, the two

perspectives share an emphasis on the extent to which “non-economic” variables evolve




                                                                                           8
independently of the processes of economic growth. Indeed, proponents of both views

champion how the appreciation of this pattern, as well as of the impacts of those variables

on the economy, constitute a salient intellectual advance over the earlier (circa 1950s

through 1970s) literature on economic development, which focused primarily on

economic variables, such as natural resources, physical capital, human capital (mainly

education), exchange rates, and technical change.         That generation of economists

certainly accepted the importance of institutions, culture, or political stability, but

presumed either that the appropriate institutions and beliefs existed already, or else that

they would evolve in constructive directions relatively easily when the economic factors

that could generate economic growth were in place. Since economic forces obviously do

not operate in a vacuum, it may have been difficult for them to conceive of a non-

institutional interpretation of economic growth.

       Even as a purely logical construct, a wholly non-institutional (or anti-institutional)

explanation of economic growth seems implausible (as would an explanation that takes

no account of real economic factors), but as discussed below, debate on the relative

importance of institutional and non-institutional forces has continued.15 The essential

questions, thus, seem to us to be empirical. How much of the variation in economic

performance over country and time can be attributed to differences in institutions, with

pure economic factors constant or endogenous with respect to institutions, and how much

is due to differences in the economic variables, with institutions constant or endogenous?

What are the processes that govern the ways specific institutions evolve, and under what

circumstances can the introduction of exogenous institutional changes be considered

viable economic policies?




                                                                                           9
                                             III.

       Although in principle these questions can be framed as empirical issues, it is far

from easy to clearly distinguish between, or gauge the relative power of, the institutional

and non-institutional explanations of economic differences. No one would claim that

there is a general answer, and indeed few, if any, individual cases seem not to allow some

role for each type of explanation. There has been considerable interest in recent years,

however, in a manner of posing the problem that might appear to make the empirical

work more tractable: are the key elements in determining institutions exogenous or

endogenous? This distinction has been with us a long time, as in the debates over the

superiority of British institutions, but has figured prominently in the study of how the

various economies established as colonies by Europeans (or others) developed over time.

Even in the absence of a substantial indigenous population in the area of settlement, the

presence of one group in the colony, arriving from the metropolis, and another remaining

in the metropolis, means that there were different circumstances for institutional

development. In principle, therefore, a researcher could evaluate just how much of an

impact the different circumstances had on the ways the institutions evolved. That many

of the European countries established multiple colonies, in very different environments,

further enhances the quality of the information arising from the natural experiment.

        If the institutions in the colonies were, or remained, the same as those of the

metropolitan nation (or perhaps the same as those of the indigenous societies that

predated the arrival of the Europeans), they might be regarded as exogenous. In such a

case, the institutions could be reasonably interpreted as evolving independently of the

conditions in the respective colonial economies, and systematic patterns in subsequent



                                                                                        10
differences in economic performance across the economies could, after controlling for the

purely economic factors, be attributed to institutions. If, however, the institutions in the

colony diverged in ways that could be explained as adaptations by the respective

population to the different environment, natural or human, then it would support the view

that institutions were endogenous with respect to circumstances. Because institutions are

human-fashioned structures that presumably reflect the efforts of populations trying to

make the best of the opportunities and problems they face, most observers would be

surprised if they were not at least partially endogenous. Indeed, most scholars feel that

the institutions that emerged across the colonies established by the Europeans do seem to

have varied systematically with aspects of the environment such as climate, land type,

and natural resources. Some would go even further and suggest that the direction of

institutional change is often endogenous to the growth process, as changes in technology

and in incomes generate changes in tastes, changes in the returns to organizing

production and transactions in various ways, and changes in patterns of behavior more

generally.

       To acknowledge that there is some endogeneity to institutions does not imply that

institutions are unimportant, or that they have only a limited impact on economic

performance.    Endogenous institutions, once in place, can prove as crucial as if they

were exogenous, and they might persist for as long or even longer. The key difference

between those who contend that institutions are exogenous and those who argue they are

endogenous is not with their impact and influence, but instead with where institutions

come from and with the extent to which they are -- or might be expected to -- be revised

over time.




                                                                                         11
       It is widely recognized that it is sometimes useful to fix some types of institutions

over time. Credible commitment to property rights is perhaps the classic example of the

value of certainty about policy action.16       More generally, however, allowing some

flexibility in institutions, such that they can be altered to make it easier for private or

public agents to take fuller advantage of the new opportunities that arise as technology or

the environment changes, would normally be expected to foster better economic

performance and more rapid growth. Among the many such innovations in institutions

that could be cited to illustrate the utility of institutions changing as conditions change are

those underlying the modern patent system, those providing for public provision of

education, those responsible for the organization of corporations where shareholders are

protected because they have limited liability, and those responsible for the establishment

of central or quasi-central banks such as the Federal Reserve or the Bank of England.

Determining the optimum degree of flexibility in, and designing mechanisms well suited

to respond constructively to ever-changing circumstances with institutional change, are

complex issues. While some see the role of constitutional provisions as a means of

ensuring stability in the decision-making process and institutions more generally, most

constitutions do have provisions for amendments, and allow some degree of legislative

and governmental flexibility in setting the legal structure. Allowance for modifications

to the laws need not harm the potential for growth, nor even yield instability, particularly

given that the voting and other costs of implementing changes are typically high.17

Indeed, there are likely more cases of how nations and economies suffered from

inflexible institutions than from excessive flexibility.18




                                                                                            12
       Perhaps the most important elements of institutional structures are those that

ensure an ability to adapt to different conditions and to adjust to new circumstances as

seems necessary, rather than those that entail the retention and maintenance of any

specific set of policies. The capability for adaptation, based in part on the population’s

education and their political liberties, may ultimately be more significant for economic

growth than the continuation of any particular set of beliefs, rules, or behavior. This was

likely significant in the case of European expansion, where there was geographic

movement to different environments, with new sorts of climates, soil types, natural

resources, and economic problems to grapple with. As shall be discussed below, even if

there were some specific cultural carryovers from Europe to the Americas, and these did

play a role early in the settlement process, it is not clear that these factors were

immutable or remained unchanged for long periods. The confrontation with a new

environment that offered rich opportunities, but in unfamiliar contexts, led to some

adaptations, adjustments, and innovations in institutions in the interests of economic

improvement.

       Another issue that is central to understanding how institutions matter for growth

concerns the likelihood that no one particular narrowly-specified institution is required,

as there are often alternative institutional forms or structures that are reasonable

substitutes for each other and may achieve similar economic performance.       Those who

hold this view that non-optimal institutions may still be consistent with high rates of

economic growth, though perhaps not the highest rate that was possible, often point to the

stark contrasts across industrialized countries in the importance of banks relative to

securities markets in financial intermediation, in the reliance on common or civil law, in




                                                                                        13
how bankruptcy laws balance the rights of creditors and debtors, in systems and levels of

taxation, and in the division of power between the executive, the legislature, and political

party structures. These and many other examples, historical and contemporary, suggest

the usefulness of institutions generally in helping societies take advantage of the

opportunities the environment offers them, but support the idea that no single institutional

solution is crucial. In this way, the role of institutions might be considered analogous to

the role of technology, in that the processes of change are important but no single method

of accomplishing a goal is indispensable.19

       A perhaps more serious issue is that among the feasible set of institutional

solutions to a general problem, different approaches may have different implications for

different segments of the population. Depending upon the manner in which institutions

evolve, or are designed, in a society, they may develop to favor the interests of more

powerful groups at the expense of others, or even of the population at large.            For

example, elites might prefer policies that raise their share of national income, even if they

reduce long-run rates of growth. The nature of the political power structure in society is

critical in determining which institutions are adopted. The suffrage, or the distribution of

political influence more generally, may be rather broad and inclusive, with a relatively

large share of the population able to vote.20 Or, alternatively, the franchise may be

limited, by requirements of literacy, wealth, nationality, age, and gender, with only a

small minority of the population able to vote and to directly influence policy. When the

suffrage is restricted, many members of society have only very limited political influence

and no direct voice in establishing the institutional framework. Even a very small

segment of the population, but one with highly disproportionate political power, would be




                                                                                          14
able to establish institutions, legal codes, and property rights regimes that serve their own

interests, and be able to exclude other members of society from benefits.21 Thus, there

could well be a well- defined and enforced set of property rights, but one coincident with

a large component of the population being outsiders to decision-making in society.22

       Slave societies in the Americas often had well-defined institutions and property

rights, and were capable of rapid economic growth, but part of their population had no

rights and no means to obtain any. They provide a powerful example, albeit an extreme

one, of how the determination of the size and nature of the elite groups, by political,

economic, and/or military means, is critical to the establishment of institutions. Being

excluded from voting does not necessarily mean a failure to benefit from economic

change, nor that there will not be subsequent improvements in the rights to suffrage, but

the limited nature of the decision-making group still raises important issues for our

understanding of the distribution of rewards from economic activity. More generally, the

observation that societies vary in how much influence different segments of the

population can exert in shaping institutions implies that there may be systematic patterns

in how flexible they are in adapting (or innovating) their institutions to enhance their the

ability of their populations to take advantage of new opportunities created by changes in

the environment.

                                                IV.

       To better understand the role of institutions in economic growth it will be useful

to examine some historical examples in which different institutions have impacted on the

economy. It is no doubt easier to isolate the effect of institutions if we believe that they

are exogenously determined by the forces of past history or by forces outside of the



                                                                                           15
current economy. Among the factors that have sometimes been suggested as playing this

role are: externally generated changes in mentalité due to change in religious belief or

secular attitudes; the outcome of a military conflict, either due to externally generated

changes in the power structure or of internal revolutionary actions that altered the balance

of political power; the non-military introduction of new foreign influence and contacts,

reflecting, in part, improvements in transportation and communication; and, as shall be

discussed in more detail below, the settling of new areas by people from a distant

metropolis, whose institutions could be regarded as exogenous to the new area of

settlement. In this context we consider non-institutional explanations to be not an absence

of institutions (since that is not possible), but the presence of institutions regarded as

endogenous to the socio-economic process, even when the circumstances giving rise to

the institutions are themselves exogenous to the economy (as, e.g., climate and natural

resources).

       In evaluating whether institutions are endogenous, there are several approaches

that could be taken. One concerns the impact of resources and natural and human

endowments upon institutions. A number of scholars have recently argued that there

were systematic patterns in the types of institutions that evolved as settlers in European

colonies adjusted to conditions that differed from those of the metropolis in terms of

disease environments and economic opportunities.23 Subjecting this notion to empirical

testing is complicated by the enormous range of institutions that attention could be

directed at, some of which reflect metropolitan carryovers, others of which developed

very differently in the colonies than they did in the metropolis. Metropolitan institutions

did not necessarily disappear in the process of settlement, but many were modified




                                                                                             16
depending on the conditions of the particular settlement. Thus English New World

colonies may have employed English law, and French colonies continued French legal

institutions, but English and French temperate zone colonies differed in many important

regards from the respective Caribbean colonies. French and English Caribbean colonies

had greater similarities than they did with either their mainland counterparts or the

metropolis. And, while the initial controls over free white labor may have been much the

same in all of the colonies, only some English colonies and only some French colonies
                                                  24
came to rely on free, rather than slave, labor.        Climate and resources were the most

powerful determinants of the geographic incidence of slave labor, irrespective of the

metropolitan institutional structure. Slavery was legal in all the British colonies until the

Revolutionary War, and differences in legal circumstances did not account for the

significant differences in the relative importance of slavery in New England and the

South.25

       Another approach to the question of whether institutions are endogenous to the

process of economic change, is to consider whether economic growth itself influences

people’s attitudes, and the nature of the economy’s institutions. Does the economy itself

contain the seeds of its own limitations, whether due to its failure or its successes? Karl

Marx is certainly the most prominent of historical economists that have posited a

sequence of self-generated endogenous changes in society, from feudalism to capitalism

to socialism, with each of the first two stages being successful at first but then failing due

to internal contradictions. Joseph Schumpeter claimed that the declining belief in the

value of capitalism, which developed with economic growth, weakened capitalism’s

survival power, and he expected the “march into socialism” to occur based upon the




                                                                                           17
economy’s success. Mancur Olson argued that as economies develop over time, vested

interests operating in their own self-interest emerge and cause a reduction in the future

growth of the economy through their success at rent seeking.        Other causes of self-

generated changes in the economy and economic structures include the growth of large

industry and the development of bureaucracies in business and government, both of

which can force institutional changes.

       Scholars interested in how institutions evolve have recently devoted much

attention to the contrasts between colonial and metropolitan influences on institutions in

newly settled areas. A long-standing disagreement, tracing back centuries, regarding the

thirteen colonies that became the United States has been the causes of North-South

differences in economic and demographic structures, including the explanation of the

differences in the relative importance of slavery. Did those settling in different parts of

the mainland arrive with rather different cultural patterns from Britain, differences that

persisted after settlement, or did the various colonists from Britain arrive with basically

similar cultural beliefs, but then adjusted their institutions once established in the New

World and confronted with a rather different set of conditions?26 The evidence to date

seems to favor the latter view. Not only has recent work demonstrated that even the

Puritans were deeply influenced by the environment in selecting institutions for their two

New World colonies, but studies of those Englishmen who came to populate the various

settlements in the Americas emphasize how they were drawn from roughly the same

social classes.27 In the words of Edward Channing:

        “Historical writers have been altogether too prone to draw a hard and fast line of
       demarcation between the settlers of the Southern colonies and those who founded
       colonies north of the fortieth parallel … It is sometimes said that the Northern
       colonist came to the New World for conscience sake and the Southern planters



                                                                                        18
       sought wealth alone; but no such generalization can truthfully be made.
       Moreover, it is oftentimes the custom to point out some mysterious differences
       between the Virginian and the New Englander, which can be expressed by the
       words ‘cavalier’ and ‘Puritan’ … No such characterization is possible.” 28


       This perspective receives strong support from the record of slavery in the

Americas. The basis for the success (to the owners) of slave labor in one area, and its

failure in another, depended less on the initial attitudes of most settlers than upon the

influence of climate and soil resources on the nature of those crops which could be grown

and the technology and scales of efficient crop production. Wherever the soils and

climates were suitable for growing sugar, the most valuable commodity in world trade

during the 17th and 18th centuries and a crop that could be produced at lowest cost on

large slave plantations (under the gang labor system, which allowed owners to achieve

very high labor intensity), slavery became the dominant institution of labor (and those of

African descent a dominant share of the population).        Elsewhere, where soils and

climates favored agricultural products, such as grains and hays, where the gang labor

system and slave labor offered no particular advantages, landowners had to rely more on

free (often their own) labor, as the productivity of slaves in such settings would not

warrant the high prices for slaves that prevailed on world markets. The populations of

these settlements accordingly came to be much more homogeneous in wealth, human

capital, ethnicity, and other dimensions.   Thus, the factor endowments in the various

colonies had a major impact on determining which labor institutions were dominant, the

distribution of rewards between laborers and landowners, and the nature of political

participation and decision-making. Because slavery was legal in all of the European

colonies in the Americas, it is evident that not only did these natural forces lead to




                                                                                       19
differences in institutions, but they also led to different outcomes from similar

institutions. Although the Old World background was surely important, it is difficult to

explain the extreme differences among the various areas within each colonial empire

without reference to the effects of the New World circumstances.

        The early history of the New World colonies established by the European nations

permits one to examine some of the implications of focusing on exogenous factors in

institutional development, as opposed to viewing institutions as largely endogenous. The

locations of settlements were themselves subject to some choice, based on the

demographic and economic characteristics of different locations. Moreover, the pattern of

initial settlement was modified over time, as settlers learned more about prospects in

different areas. In the settlement of the Caribbean by the British and the French, for

example, the adjustments in terms of crops and labor institutions that took place over the

first half-century of settlement were rather different from those that were to emerge in

subsequent years. The problems that arise from selection by the colonizing powers

notwithstanding, the natural experiment arising from the variety of settling metropolises –

including Spain, Portugal, Britain, France, and Holland – and the extreme diversity of

environments found among the colonies makes for a wonderful laboratory in which to

study the relationships between factor endowments, institutions, and economic growth. It

should not be surprising that many scholars have been attracted to work in this

laboratory. Their work, of course, does not amount to a comparison of institutional and

non-institutional factors in economic growth, since everyone agrees on the importance of

institutions.   Rather the work has sought to determine whether institutions can be

understood as exogenous to the circumstances or economic system, or whether the




                                                                                        20
environment or circumstances more broadly exert a powerful influence on how

institutions emerge and evolve over time. Put simply, where do institutions come from?

       A key economic question is the explanation for the post-1900 differences in levels

of per capita income between the countries of mainland North America and those of Latin

America (Table 3), differences that were much smaller during the colonial period. A

closely related issue is why Latin America is the region of the world today with the most

extreme inequality in income. Since the nations of South and Central America had been

settled mainly by the Spanish (the Portuguese settled Brazil), and the United States and

Canada mainly by the British (pre-1763 Canada by the French and pre-1664 New York

by the Dutch, among the relatively less dominant settling nations), the traditional, and

still popular, explanation holds that the different cultures, religions, and institutions of

Britain and Spain could alone explain the divergent paths of economic development.

Since there were sharp contrasts between the home countries of Britain and Spain in

terms of economic and political structures, it is argued that the transfer of Old World

institutions established the behavior of the economies and societies of the colonies in the

New World, as differences in property rights determination and enforcement, legal

frameworks more generally, economic goals, and in religions beliefs were thought to

have been carried over, with little or no modification, into the new areas of settlement.

The institutions that failed to generate sustained economic growth on the Iberian

peninsula likewise failed to do so in the New World, whereas the institutions that had

evolved over centuries in Britain worked on both sides of the Atlantic. The logic is that

either the political elites of the metropolis were carried over into the colonies, providing

the political and legal framework for the successful carryover of institutions, or that the




                                                                                         21
elites in the New World, though different from those of the metropolis, were able to use

the same institutional structures to achieve similar ends by similar means.29

       An alternative explanation, one that has gained an increasing number of adherents

of late, focuses on the economic and geographic circumstances in the area of settlement,

and their influence on the determination of institutions in the new areas. As with the

previous argument, there is a long literature on the role of climate and resources in

influencing institutions and economic development. While a most detailed examination

was provided by Montesquieu in the 1740’s, a similar argument was made considerably

earlier by Plato.30   The links include the nature of the effects of climate upon the

willingness to work, the desire to emigrate or immigrate, the role played by slavery in

society, and related economic concerns. Whether seen as the basic cause of the specific

set of institutions, or as a reason to modify some pre-existing set of exogenous

institutions, settlement societies can be argued to have been significantly influenced by

factors other than some unchanged metropolitan institutions. Indeed most settlements

made dramatic changes in their institutions after they were first established, in the search

for ways to enhance their profitability and survivability. The impact of climate and

resources can also help to explain why the different areas settled by the same

metropolitan power had rather different economic structures and performances (as, e.g.,

New England and the British West Indies), and why geographically contiguous and

resource-similar areas settled by different metropolitan powers (as the British and French

in the West Indies, as well as the Spanish, Danish, and Dutch there) came to resemble

each other in many important ways.         Indeed, recent scholarship has found strong

evidence of the systematic effects of initial factor endowments on the types of institutions




                                                                                         22
(including institutions involving suffrage and the conduct of elections, schooling, finance,

the disposition of public lands, property rights, and intellectual property) that evolved in

different colonies (and on long-term economic performance in these colonies), both in the

Americas and elsewhere, and highlighted how limited is the explanatory power of

national heritage.31

       A specific example of how institutions can be altered to fit changing

circumstances, and of how the distribution of power (both political and economic) as well

as the environment influence outcomes, is provided by the adjustments in the societies of

the Americas to the abolition of slavery.32 This most dramatic institutional change of the

19th century was, almost everywhere, imposed on a resistant slaveholding class in the

aftermath of armed conflict or by a government elected by a population dominated by

non-slaveholders (including European parliaments). All New World societies ended

slavery between 1777 and 1888, and the nature of the abolitions were similar with most

providing some form of compensation, in cash, bonds, or labor time to the slaveowners,

with very little or nothing going to the former slaves.33 Nevertheless there were some

striking differences in the range of post-emancipation responses. In the British West

Indies, for example, slavery was abolished by 1834 and all colonial governments had the

same basic goal of inducing labor to work on plantations and imposed legislation to try to

accomplish this end. Different environments led to different outcomes, however, as

evident in the corresponding variation with the ratio of land to labor (see Table 4).34

Areas of high population density such as Barbados maintained plantation systems and

high sugar output, while those with low population density, with abundant frontier land,

initially saw the end of the plantation system and a decline in sugar output. In those cases




                                                                                         23
where the islands had been relatively unproductive, sugar output continued to decline and

the plantation system was never re-introduced. However, in those areas where land was

highly productive and which had been growing rapidly before emancipation (such as

Trinidad and British Guiana), plantation systems returned in several decades, but ones

based on indentured labor drawn mainly from India, and not on ex-slaves. Thus the

elite’s ability to achieve their desired end, extracting the returns to the land they owned,

was influenced by various other conditions, including resource endowments, and their

efforts to achieve their goals, subject to the dissimilar constraints they faced, led to

differences in institutional development.

       Another example of how the evolution of institutions across New World societies

reflected adjustments to different or changed circumstances is provided by the history of

how broadly the franchise was extended over time and what fractions of respective

populations actually voted in elections. Since most of the societies in the Americas had

achieved independence from their colonial masters, and were at least nominal

democracies, by the middle of the 19th century, suffrage institutions had a direct bearing

on the extent to which elites based largely on wealth, human capital, and gender held

disproportionate political power in their respective countries, and on their ability to shape

government policies. The ability and inclination of the elites to maintain disproportionate

political influence through the formal rules associated with the electoral process varied

with a variety of circumstances. Among these circumstances was the extent of inequality

in wealth, human capital, and political influence that existed at the time of independence,

when there were generally conventions held to draw up constitutions for the new nations.

Presumably, the greater the disparity in resources (which we have argued in other work




                                                                                            24
was due to factor endowments during initial colonization), the greater was the ability of

an elite to frame the rules in such a way as to preserve their relative political power.35

Among the other factors that appear to have had significant effects on the way institutions

evolved, however, was the relative scarcity of labor. Although elites may generally be

reluctant to share their access to political influence and economic opportunity with other

segments of the population, they should be more likely to do so in settings where they

would benefit from attracting or retaining a scarce resource – labor.

       The evidence on the evolution of suffrage institutions in the New World is quite

consistent with this view. Summary information on how the right to vote was restricted

across New World societies in the 19th and early 20th centuries is reported in Table 5. The

estimates reveal that the United States and Canada were the clear leaders in doing away

with restrictions based on wealth and literacy and introducing the secret ballot, and much

higher fractions of the populations voted in these countries than anywhere else in the

Americas. These societies were distinguished for their relative equality, population

homogeneity, and scarcity of labor, and it is notable that others of British heritage, such

as Barbados, generally retained stringent restrictions on the franchise well into the 20th

century. Moreover, it is striking that the leaders in extending the suffrage in South and

Central America, such as Uruguay, Argentina, and Costa Rica, are generally regarded as

having been historically the most egalitarian of Latin American societies, and having

initial factor endowments most closely resembling those of the United States and Canada.

       The contrast between North and South America in the application of binding

restrictions on the franchise was not so evident at the outset. Despite the sentiments

popularly attributed to the Founding Fathers, voting in the United States was largely a




                                                                                             25
privilege reserved for white men with significant amounts of property until early in the

nineteenth century. By 1815, only four states had adopted universal white male suffrage,

but as the movement to do away with political inequality gained strength, the rest of the

country followed suit: virtually all new entrants to the Union extended voting rights to all

white men (with explicit racial restrictions generally introduced in the same state

constitutions that did away with economic requirements), and older states revised their

laws in the wake of protracted political debates (see Table 6). The key states of New

York and Massachusetts made the break with wealth restrictions in the 1820s, and the

shift to full white adult male suffrage was largely complete by the late 1850s (with Rhode

Island, Virginia, and North Carolina being the laggards). The relatively more egalitarian

populations of the western states, which were anxious to increase their populations, were

the clear leaders in the movement. The rapid extension of access to the franchise in these

areas not coincidentally paralleled liberal policies toward public schools and access to

land, as well as other policies that were expected to be attractive to potential migrants.

The frontier states in the West continued to be labor scarce, with low female to male

ratios, and it is perhaps not surprising that late in the 19th century they were the leaders in

extending suffrage to women, as well as in greatly strengthening the property rights

available to married women.

       Similar political movements with similar outcomes followed with a short lag in

the various Canadian provinces, but the analogous developments did not occur in Latin

America until the twentieth century. As a result, through 1940 the United States and

Canada routinely had proportions voting that were 50 to 100 percent higher than their

most progressive neighbors to the South, three times higher than Mexico, and up to five




                                                                                             26
to ten times higher than countries such as Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador, and even Chile. It is

remarkable that as late as 1900, none of the countries in Latin America had the secret

ballot or more than a miniscule fraction of the population casting votes. The great

majority of European nations, as well as the United States and Canada, achieved secrecy

in balloting and universal adult male suffrage long before other countries in the western

hemisphere, and the proportions of the populations voting in the former were always

higher, often four to five times higher, than those in the latter. Although many factors

may have contributed to the low levels of participation in South America and the

Caribbean, wealth and literacy requirements were serious binding constraints.

       What accounts for this pattern of diffusion of universal male suffrage across New

World societies? One obvious explanation is that differences in the degrees of inequality

in wealth, human capital, and political influence were related to the likelihood of

adopting such an institutional change. The cross-sectional patterns, as well as the

histories indicating that the attainment of universal male suffrage and of the secret ballot

was often the product of a long series of hard fought political battles, with the elites more

likely to be opposed to liberalizing the franchise, are certainly consistent with this view.36

Another important factor, however, was the desire to attract immigrants. It is striking that

pioneers in extending suffrage, such as new (those after the original thirteen) states in the

United States, Argentina, and Uruguay, did so during periods in which they hoped to

attract migrants, such that the rights to suffrage formed part of a package of policies

thought to be potentially attractive to those contemplating relocation. When elites -- such

as large holders of land or other assets -- desire common men to locate in the polity, they

thus may choose to extend access to privileges and opportunities without threat of civil




                                                                                           27
disorder; indeed, a polity (or one set of elites) may find itself competing with another to

attract the labor or whatever else is desired. Alternative explanations, such as the

importance of national heritage, are not very useful in identifying why Argentina,

Uruguay, and Costa Rica pulled so far ahead of their Latin American neighbors, or why

other British colonies in the New World lagged behind Canada.37



                                              V.

        There are always institutions present, and we cannot conceive of a framework for

making sense of the processes of economic development that does not include a role for

them. There is, moreover, no doubt that for any given society some institutions may limit

the extent to which it realizes its potential economic output, while alternatives might do

better. That being said, however, it is unclear how firmly theories of economic growth

can be grounded on institutions. Economists do not have a very good understanding of

where institutions come from, or why some societies have institutions that seem

conducive to growth, while others are burdened by institutions less favorable for

economic performance. Until they do, it will be quite difficult to specify the precise role

of institutions in processes of growth.

       As we have sought to highlight in this essay, what little we presently know about

the evolution of institutions suggests caution about making strong claims about their

relationship to growth. First, it is clear that very different institutional structures often

seem to be reasonable substitutes in being conducive to growth, both in dissimilar as well

as in similar contexts. Narrow definitions of institutional requirements for growth do not,

accordingly, seem appropriate. Second, the case for attributing growth to institutions is



                                                                                          28
weaker if institutions are endogenous rather than exogenous, and the evidence that there

are systematic patterns to the ways institutions evolve makes the latter view problematic.

The recent studies of the natural experiment in institutional development provided by the

European colonization of the Americas (and of many other parts of the globe), for

example, imply that the broad environment (reflecting factor endowments, social

arrangements, or technology) had powerful effects on the sorts of institutions that

evolved in respective colonies. Institutions obviously matter for growth, but the way we

understand how they matter will be somewhat different if the agents and other forces

shaping institutions are responsive to the conditions they face than if institutions develop

independently of (or could be imposed in any) context.

       The recognitions that the institutional structure appropriate for one environment

may not be appropriate for another, and that the history of institutions in high-performing

societies is one of change over time in response to changing circumstances, suggest a

different perspective on the relation between institutions and growth. Although we all

understand that there are favorable aspects to governments making credible commitments

to various obligations or arrangements they enter into, such as enforcement of property

rights, it is also clear that in theory one would want institutions to vary over time and

place with the environment, technology, and values. One might, therefore, think of

societies with institutions conducive for growth as being those that have exhibited greater

institutional flexibility -- where by institutional flexibility we mean the ease with which

institutional adaptations that respond constructively to changes in circumstances are

innovated and/or diffused.     Societies with good institutions would, therefore, have

institutions well adapted for economic performance in their specific settings because they




                                                                                         29
had implemented a series of institutional modifications or innovations (public and

private) that cumulatively generated improvements in welfare.          Societies with bad

institutions are those with institutional inflexibility, whose institutions did not respond

constructively to take advantage of the opportunities created by their environment and

state of knowledge.     Such a framework would encourage scholars interested in the

relation between institutions and growth to devote more attention to the factors

influencing the rate and direction of institutional change, and rather less attention to the

quest for a set of institutional structures that would be universally effective at promoting

growth.




                                                                                         30
                                              ENDNOTES




1
 Among a vast literature, see North and Thomas 1973; North 1981; Rosenberg and Birdzell 1986; Jones
1987; Landes 1998; Engerman and Sokoloff 1997 and 2002; Pomeranz 2000; Acemoglu , Johnson, and
Robinson 2001 and 2002; and Easterly and Levine 2003. For even earlier discussions, see Weber 1958 and
1961; and Sombart 1969.
2
    See, for example, Hartwell 1971.
3
  Early 20th century scholars, such as Weber (1958 and 1961), emphasized the role of culture, but the focus
turned to real economic factors by the second half of the century. For a more extensive discussion of how
thinking changed over time, see Arndt 1978 and 1987.
4
 On the role of coal, see Kindleberger 1961, and the discussion by Parker in the same volume. Although
attention to the significance of coal waned, it has recently revived with Wrigley 1988 and Pomeranz 2000.
For discussion of the relative importance of changes in savings rates, or in investment opportunities, see
Postan 1935. For discussions of how the pace of technological change was responsive to economic factors,
such as the extent of, or access to, markets, see Landes 1969 and Sokoloff 1988.
5
 See the discussion of non-conformists in Britain in Weber 1958; Sombart 1969; McClelland 1961; and
Fogel 2000.
6
    See Steuart 1767; Gilboy 1932; Nef 1958; deVries 1994; and Jacob 1997.
7
    See, the discussions of different views in Berman 1983; Putnam 2002; and O’Brien 1988.
8
 Whereas Weber is well known for his theory of how the content of Protestant thought may have
encouraged believers to behave in ways we associate with capitalism, Tawney highlighted how economic
change supported change in religious beliefs. See Weber 1958 and Tawney 1926.
9
 For a recent restatement of how the immutability of culture can explain continued backwardness, see
Landes 1998.
10
  For the linkage between morality and economics, see the discussion of Quakers and slavery in Smith
1979. Also see Fogel 1989.
11
  See the discussion of institutions, and the approaches of the British and Germans, in Cunningham 1890-
1892.
12
 See North 1981, 1988, and 1990; North and Thomas 1973; North and Weingast 1989; and Davis and
North 1971.
13
  For a classic treatment of how factor endowments can help to shape culture and institutions, see
Tocqueville 1835. For interesting discussions of the influences of factor endowments and political forces,
see Brenner 1985; Engerman and Sokoloff 1997 and 2002; North 1981 and 1990; and North, Weingast, and
Summerhill 2000.




                                                                                                        31
14
   A major concern of the property rights literature is with private agents being secure from expropriation
by the state. See North 1981; North and Weingast 1989; Knack and Keefer 1997; Acemoglu and Robinson
2000; and Haber, Razo, and Maurer 2003.
15
  Even Weber’s discussion of the role of Calvinism points out that the relation “was true only when some
possibility of capitalistic development in the areas in question was present.” See Weber 1958, p. 190.
16
     North and Weingast 1989.
17
  In some cases of change there may be required compensation to be paid to those whose condition is
weakened, requiring increased taxation of other members of the population. Nearly all serf and slavery
systems that ended during the 19th century did so with compensation paid to property holders, not laborers,
but there was no compensation of losers when the slave trade was ended.
18
     See the discussions in Elbaum and Lazonick 1986.
19
   Thus, as suggested by Lance Davis and North, evaluating institutional change may be subject to the
same type of benefit-cost analysis as are other economic factors. See Davis and North 1971.
20
 See the discussions of the evolution of restrictions on suffrage in Engerman and Sokoloff 2001; and
Keyssar 2000.
21
   Of course, other conditions matter as well. Where there is extreme economic inequality, for example, an
elite might be able to leverage its wealth into disproportionate political influence through informal
channels. Another example of context mattering is where labor is scarce, such as on a frontier. The desire
of an elite, even one with a monopoly on political voice, to attract migrants might lead to policies that
groups that have no formal representation value. For a discussion of how this might have operated on the
U.S. frontier, see Engerman and Sokoloff 2001.
22
   In most cases, we would expect that groups with no formal political influence would have quite
circumscribed access to scarce resources. This limited access might be due to the laws explicitly favoring
the dominant groups, even if the property rights allowed the “outsiders” were enforceable. A de facto
limited access might, however, arise if the outside group lacked the financial or other resources necessary
to take advantage of an opportunity they had a de jure legal right too. Thus, even though all citizens might
be entitled to bring civil suits to enforce contracts, the poor may find themselves less able to act on this
right. The case of married women is an interesting one to consider in this regard, as in the United States
(and many other countries) the law allowed them only very limited rights as to owning property or entering
into contracts as compared to those allowed men or single women, until the second half of the 19th century.
See Khan 1996.
23
  See Engerman and Sokoloff 1997 and 2002; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001 and 2002; and
Easterly and Levine 2003.
24
     For an interesting analysis of adjustments to the laws governing slavery, see Cottrell 2001.
25
  For a discussion of the fascinating case of how a colony established with a prohibition on slavery came to
have it lifted, see Wood 1984.
26
     See, for example, Greene 1988, 1993, and 2002; and Fischer 1989.
27
     Kupperman 1993.
28
     Channing 1926, pp. 145-146.




                                                                                                         32
29
  It may be, however, that the distance between colony and homeland weakens the ability of the metropolis
to control the settlers, weakening the nature of any transfer of political structure. See Greene 1988 and
2002. For the argument that the institutional heritage that British colonies drew on was more conducive to
long-run growth than that the Spanish colonies worked from, see North 1988.
30
     See Montesquieu 1949; and Plato 1980, book five, section nine.
31
  There is some question of what the comparison of institutions would indicate if some different dates were
used for the evaluation. Spain arrived in America earlier than the British, went to areas with greater wealth
and resources, and it took about another hundred years before the British arrived and were forced to go to
areas that they regarded as clearly less promising for economic growth. For a comparison based on the
year 1700 we would find the Spanish position seemingly more favorable that that of the British, reflecting
the early economic advantages of the areas of Spanish settlement, and, as pointed out by John TePaske, the
Spanish had three successful centuries in the Americans, and the British only two. See Te Paske 2002.
Also see Engerman and Sokoloff 1997 and 2002; Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson 2002; and Easterly and
Levine 2003.
32
  The recent literature on the role of institutions in economic growth has raised important questions as to
the extent to which political power is independent of economic power, and to the relative significance of
political inequality and economic inequality for how institutions evolve. A full discussion of these issues is
beyond the scope of this essay, but we would argue that although they are clearly related, and there is
certainly an association across societies (or over time) between political power and economic power, the
correlation is far from perfect and it is not all that uncommon for them to diverge. Their relative weight in
the processes of institutional development likely varies with context. Moreover, some institutions may be
more sensitive to political inequality, while others depend more on the extent of economic inequality. For
example, the distribution of political influence would generally be expected to have a greater impact on
public institutions, such as laws, and the distribution of wealth matter relatively more for the kinds of
private institutions -- such as financial institutions – that evolve.
33
  The United States, in 1865, was the one nation to free its slaves without any form of compensation
provided in the form of cash, apprenticeship, or a “law of the free womb”, which required the free-born
offspring of slaves to labor for the mother’s master into their late teens or twenties. Even Haiti agreed to
pay compensation to the French after 1825, as a condition for the right to engage in trade with France.
34
  See Engerman 1982 and 1996. For a classic treatment of the relationship between the land to labor ratio
and institutions, see Domar 1970.
35
  For discussions of how factor endowments are the principal source of the differences in inequality, see
Engerman and Sokoloff 1997 and 2002.
36
  The achievements of a broadening of the formal requirements for suffrage, as well as of the more
administrative procedures governing the conduct of elections, tend to overstate the reduction in the extent
of political inequality. Economic elites always enjoy disproportionate informal political influence, and
there is likely more scope for them to bypass formal procedures and channels in contexts where there is
extreme inequality. Hence, it may not be so surprising that the outcomes did not improve more than they
did after the extension of the suffrage in many of the Latin American societies.
37
  For a fuller discussion of the issues involved in the evolution of suffrage institutions in the New World,
see Engerman and Sokoloff 2001. Also see Acemoglu and Robinson 2000, for treatment of the somewhat
different pattern in Europe.




                                                                                                           33
                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did Western Europe Extend the
Franchise? Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (Nov.): 1167-1199.

Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic
Review 91 (Dec.): 1369-1401.

________________. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the
Making of the Modern World Income Distribution, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117
(Nov.): 1231-1294.

Arndt, H.W. 1978. The Rise and Fall of Economic Growth: A Study in Contemporary
Thought. Melbourne: Longman Cheshire.

_____________. 1987. Economic Development: The History of an Idea. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Berman, Harold J. 1983. Law and Revolution: The Formulation of the Western Legal
Tradition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Brenner, Robert. 1985. “Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-
Industrial Europe.” In T.H. Aston and C.H.E. Philpin, eds., The Brenner Debate:
Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Channing, Edward. 1926. A History of the United States: Volume I. New York:
Macmillan.

Cottrell, Robert J. 2001. “The Long Lingering Shadow: Law, Liberalism, and Cultures of
Racial Hierarchy and Identity in the Americas.” Tulane Law Review 76 (1): 11-79.

Cunningham, William. 1890-1892 [1882]. The Growth of English Industry and
Commerce. 2 vols. Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, Lance E. and Douglass C. North. 1971. Institutional Change and American
Economic Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

De Vries, Jan. 1994. “The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution.” Journal
of Economic History 54 (June): 249-270.

Domar, Evsey D. 1970. “The Causes of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis.” Journal of
Economic History 30 (March): 18-32.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2003. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: The Role of
Endowments in Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (Jan): 3-
39.
Elbaum, Bernard and William Lazonick. 1986. The Decline of the British Economy.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Engerman, Stanley L. 1982. “Economic Adjustments to Emancipation in the United
States and the British West Indies.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 12 (Autumn):
191-220.

_______________. 1996. “The Land and Labour Problem at the Time of the Legal
Emancipation of the West Indian Slaves.” In Roderick A. McDonald, ed., West Indies
Accounts: Essays in the History of the British Caribbean and the Atlantic Economy in
Honor of Richard Sheridan. Kingston: University of West Indies Press.

Engerman, Stanley L., Stephen Haber, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2000. “Inequality,
Institutions, and Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies.” In Claude
Menard, ed., Institutions, Contracts, and Organizations. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutions,
and Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from
Economic Historians of the United States.” In Stephen Haber, ed., How Latin America
Fell Behind. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

___________. 2001. “The Evolution of Suffrage Institutions in the Americas.” Working
Paper 8512. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

___________. 2002. “Factor Endowments, Inequality and Paths of Development Among
New World Economies.” Economia 3 (Fall): 41-109.

Fischer, David Hacket. 1989. Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Fogel, Robert William. 1989. Without Consent or Contract. New York: W. W. Norton.

___________. 2000. The Fourth Great Awakening & The Future of Egalitarianism.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gilboy, Elizabeth. 1932. “Demand As a Factor in the Industrial Revolution.” In Facts and
Factors in Economic History: Articles by Former Students of Edwin Francis Gay.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Greene, Jack P. 1988. Pursuits of Happiness. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press.
____________. 1993. The Intellectual Construction of America: Exceptionalism and
Identity from 1492 to 1800. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
____________. 2002. “Transatlantic Colonization and the Redefinition of Empire in the
Early Modern Era: The British-America Experience.” In Christine Daniels and Michael
V. Kennedy, eds., Negotiated Empires: Centers and Peripheries in the Americas, 1500-
1820. New York: Routledge.
Haber, Stephen, Armando Razo, and Noel Maurer. 2003. The Politics of Property
Rights. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


                                                                                         35
Hartwell, R.M. 1971. The Industrial Revolution and Economic Growth. London:
Methuen.
Jacob, Margaret C. 1997. Scientific Culture and the Making of the Industrial West. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Jones, E. L.. 1987. The European Miracle: Environments, Economics, and Geopolitics in
the History of Europe and Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Keyssar, Alexander. 2000. The Right To Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in
the United States. New York: Basic Books.

Khan, B. Zorina. 1996. “Married Women’s Property Laws and Female Commercial
Activity.” Journal of Economic History 56 (June): 356-388.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1961. “International Trade and Investment and Resource Use in
Economic Growth” and William N. Parker, “Comment.” In Joseph J. Spengler, ed.,
National Resources and Economic Growth. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer. 1997. “Does Social Capital Have an Economic
Payoff.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (Nov.): 1251-1288.

Kupperman, Karen Ordahl. 1993. Providence Island. 1630-1641: The Other Puritan
Colony. Cambridge.

Landes, David S. 1969. The Unbound Prometheus. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

_____________. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich
and Others So Poor. New York: W.W. Norton.

McClelland, David C. 1961. The Achieving Society. Princeton: Van Nostrand.

Maddison, Angus. 2001. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD.

Merton, Robert K. 1970 [1938]. Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth
Century England. New York: Harper & Row.

Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, baron de. 1949 [1748]. The Spirit of the Laws. New
York: Hafner Press.

Nef, John U. 1958. Cultural Foundations of Industrial Civilization. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York.

______________. 1988. “Institutions, Economic Growth and Freedom: An Historical
Introduction.” In Michael Walker, ed., Freedom, Democracy, and Economic Welfare.
Vancouver.

______________. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



                                                                                     36
North, Douglass C. and Robert P. Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World: A
New Economic History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. and Barry Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England.”
Journal of Economic History 49 (December): 803-832.

North, Douglass C., William Summerhill, and Barry Weingast. 2000. “Order, Disorder,
and Economic Change: Latin America Versus North America.” In Bruce Bueno de
Mesquita and Hilton L. Root, eds., Governing for Prosperity. New Haven: Yale
University Press.

O’Brien, Patrick K. 1988. “The Political Economy of British Taxation, 1660-1815”.
Economic History Review 41 (February): 1-32.

Plato. 1980. Laws. New York: Basic Books.

Pomeranz, Kenneth. 2000. The Great Divergence: Europe, China, and the Making of the
Modern World Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Postan, M.M. 1935. “Recent Trends in the Accumulation of Capital.” Economic History
Review 6 (October): 1-12.

Putnam, Robert D., ed., 2002. Democracies in Flux: The Evolution of Social Capital in
Contemporary Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Rosenberg, Nathan and L.E. Birdzell, Jr. 1986. How the West Grew Rich: The Economic
Transformation of the Industrial World. New York: Basic Books.

Smith, Adam. 1979 [1776]. Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L. 1988. "Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence
from Patent Records, 1790-1846." Journal of Economic History 48 (Dec.): 813-850.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and Stanley L. Engerman. 2000. “Institutions, Factor Endowments,
and Paths of Development in the New World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14
(Summer 2000): 217-232.

Sombart, Werner. 1969 [1913]. The Jews and Modern Capitalism. New York: Burt
Franklin.

Steuart, James Sir. 1767. An Inquiry Into the Principles of Political Economy. London:
A. Millar and T. Cadell.

Tawney, R. H. 1926. Religion and the Rise of Capitalism: A Historical Study. New York:
Harcourt, Brace and World.




                                                                                         37
TePaske, John Jay. 2002. “The Vital Peripheries of Colonial South America.” In
Christine Daniels and Michael V. Kennedy, eds., Negotiated Empires: Centers and
Peripheries in the Americas, 1500-1820. New York: Routledge.

Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1969 [1835]. Democracy in America. Translated by George
Lawrence and Edited by J.P. Mayer. Garden City: Doubleday.

Weber, Max. 1958 [1905-6]. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. New
York: Scribner’s.

______________. 1961 [1927]. General Economic History. New York: Collier Books.

Wood, Betty. 1984. Slavery in Colonial Georgia, 1730-1775. Athens.

Wrigley, E.A. 1988. Continuity, Chance, and Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.




                                                                                    38
                                                       Table 1

                           Levels Of Per Capita GDP And Interregional Differences, 1500-1998

                                           (1990 international dollars)
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                        1500        1820         1870           1913    1950        1973        1998

Western Europe          774          1232           1974          3473           4594          11534   17921

Western Offshoots       400          1201           2431          5257           9288          16172   26146

Japan                   500           669            737          1387           1926          11439   20413

Asia (excl. Japan)      572           575            543           640            635          1231    2936

Latin America           416           665            698          1511           2554           4531    5795

Eastern Europe          483           667            917          1501           2601           5729    4354

Africa                  400           418            444           585            852           1365    1368

World                   565           667            867          1510           2114           4104    5709


Interregional Spreads   2:1            3:1           5:1           9:1           15:1           13:1   19:1

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Source: Maddison 2001.
                                                   TABLE 2

                                   Per Capita GDP In Western Europe, 1500-1998

                                           (1990 international dollars)
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
                        1500        1600         1700           1820    1870         1913       1998

Austria                 707         837           993          1218          1863   3465       18905
Belgium                 875         976          1144          1319          2697   4220       19442
Denmark                 738         875          1039          1274          2003   3912       22123
Finland                 453         538           638           781          1140   2111       18324
France                  727         841           986          1230          1876   3485       19558
Germany                 676         777           894          1058          1821   3648       17799
Italy                  1100        1100          1100          1117          1499   2564       17759
Netherlands             754        1368          2110          1821          2753   4049       20224
Norway                  640         760           900          1104          1432   2501       23660
Portugal                632         773           854           963           997   1244       12929
Spain                   698         900           900          1063          1376   2255       14227
Sweden                  695         824           977          1198          1664   3096       18685
Switzerland             742         880          1044          1280          2202   4266       21367
United Kingdom          714         974          1250          1707          3191   4921       18714

Total Western Europe    774         894          1024          1232          1974   3473       17921

World                   565         593          615         667        867         1510        5709
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Source: Maddison 2001.




                                                                                                          40
                                             TABLE 3

  Per Capita Gross Domestic Product In Selected New World Economies, 1700–1997



                                                                     (i) GDP per
                                                                     capita relative
                                                                     to the United
                                                                     States
       Country                    1700                1800   1900         1997
       Argentina                   —                   102    52           35
       Barbados                   150                  —      —            51
        Brazil                     —                    50    10           22
         Chile                     —                   46     38           42
         Cuba                     167                 112     —            —
        Mexico                     89                  50     35           28
         Peru                      —                   41     20           15
        Canada                     —                    —     67           76

     United Statesa               550                 807    3,859       20,230
Source: Sokoloff and Engerman (2000).
a. U.S. per capita GDP is measured in 1985 dollars.
                                                   TABLE 4

             Land/Labor Ratios, Changes In Sugar Production In The British
Slaves Colonies Prior To And After Emancipation, And Contract Labor Immigration


                              Land/Labor
                               % Change     Ratio of Sugar Contract Labor
                                Ratio1
                               in Annual    Production in    Immigration
                               Sugar Prod.   1887-96 to       1834-1918
                               1824-33 to     1839-46       (gross inflow)
                               1839-46
_______________________________________________________________________

Antigua                           3.1                +8.7%                 1.5                 2,600
Barbados                          1.7                +5.5                  3.5                   --
St. Kitts2                        2.9                +3.8                  2.7                 2,900
                                                                           (2)                   (2)
Nevis                             5.0               -43.1
Trinidad                         47.7              +21.73                  3.0              157,700
British Guiana                 832.4               - 43.0                  3.4              301,000
Mauritius                         8.0              +54.3                   3.1              451,800
Dominica                         16.3               - 6.4                  0.7                 6,000
St. Lucia                        15.5              -21.8                   1.7                 5,200
Montserrat                        4.6              -43.7                   2.5                   --
St. Vincent                       5.7              -47.5                   0.7                 5,600
Tobago                            8.8              -47.5                   (3)                   ( )
                                                                                                 3

Jamaica                          12.2              -51.2                   0.6                53,900
Grenada                           6.3              -55.9                   0.0                 6,200
______________________________________________________________________
Source: Engerman 1996.


1
    Square Miles per thousand total population, just prior to abolition.
2
    Nevis data merged with St. Kitts after 1882.

3
 Trinidad output did decline slightly after abolition, and it was not until 1845 that the 1834 level of output
was regained. Tobago data merged with Trinidad after 1891. The 1877-86 level of sugar production in
Tobago was about one-third less than it was in 1824-33.




                                                                                                            42
                                        TABLE 5

                 Laws Governing the Franchise and the Extent of Voting
                     in Selected New World Countries, 1840–1940


                    Year     Lack of Secrecy      Wealth      Literacy     Proportion of
                                in Voting      Requirement Requirement for Population
                                               For Franchise Franchise        Voting


1840–80                                                                         —
 Chile              1869           No              Yes            Yes           1.6
                    1878           No              No             Noa           —
 Costa Rica         1890           Yes             Yes            Yes           —
 Ecuador            1848           Yes             Yes            Yes           0.0
                    1856           Yes             Yes            Yes           0.1
 Mexico             1840           Yes             Yes            Yes           —
 Peru               1875           Yes             Yes            Yes           —
 Uruguay            1840           Yes             Yes            Yes           —
                    1880           Yes             Yes            Yes           —
 Venezuela          1840           Yes             Yes            Yes           —
                    1880           Yes             Yes            Yes           —

 Canada             1867           Yes             Yes            No             7.7
                    1878           No              Yes            No            12.9
 United States      1850           No              No             No            12.9
                    1880           No              No             No            18.3

1881–1920
 Argentina          1896           Yes             Yes            Yes           1.8b
                    1916           No              No             No             9.0
 Brazil             1894           Yes             Yes            Yes            2.2
                    1914           Yes             Yes            Yes            2.4
 Chile              1881           No              No             No             3.1
                    1920           No              No             Yes            4.4
 Colombia           1918c          No              No             No             6.9
 Costa Rica         1912           Yes             Yes            Yes            —
                    1919           Yes             No             No            10.6
 Ecuador            1888           No              Yes            Yes            2.8
                    1894           No              No             Yes            3.3
 Mexico             1920           No              No             No             8.6
 Peru               1920           Yes             Yes            Yes            —
 Uruguay            1900           Yes             Yes            Yes            —
                    1920           No              No             No            13.8
 Venezuela          1920           Yes             Yes            Yes            —

 Canada             1911           No              No            No             18.1
                    1917           No              No            No             20.5
 United States      1900           No              No            Yesd           18.4
                    1920           No              No            Yes            25.1


                                                                                  43
1921–40
 Argentina                  1928              No                  No                 No                 12.8
                            1937              No                  No                 No                 15.0
 Bolivia                    1951               -                  Yes                Yes                 4.1
 Brazil                     1930              Yes                 Yes                Yes                 5.7
 Colombia                   1930              No                  No                 No                 11.1
                            1936              No                  No                 No                  5.9
 Chile                      1920              No                  No                 Yes                 4.4
                            1931              No                  No                 Yes                 6.5
                            1938              No                  No                 Yes                 9.4
Costa Rica                  1940              No                  No                 No                 17.6
Ecuador                     1940              No                  No                 Yes                 3.3
Mexico                      1940              No                  No                 No                 11.8
Peru                        1940              No                  No                 Yes                 —
Uruguay                     1940              No                  No                 No                 19.7
Venezuela                   1940              No                  Yes                Yes                 —


Canada                      1940               No                 No                 No                 41.1
United States               1940               No                 No                 Yes                37.8


  Source: Engerman, Haber, and Sokoloff (2000).
  a. After having eliminated wealth and education requirements in 1878, Chile instituted a literacy
requirement in 1887, which seems to have been responsible for a sharp decline in the proportion of the
population that was registered to vote.
  b. This figure is for the city of Buenos Aires, and it likely overstates the proportion who voted at the
national level.
  c. The information on restrictions refers to national law. The 1863 Constitution empowered provincial
state governments to regulate electoral affairs. Afterward, elections became restricted (in terms of the
franchise for adult males) and indirect in some states. It was not until 1948 that a national law established
universal adult male suffrage throughout the country. This pattern was followed in other Latin American
countries, as it was in the United States and Canada to a lesser extent.
  d. Eighteen states introduced literacy requirements between 1890 and 1926.




                                                                                                           44
                                      TABLE 6

                 Summary Of Economic-Based Qualifications For Suffrage

                          Across The United States, 1787-1860
________________________________________________________________________

                        Qualification in 1787 Year Economic Qualifications
                           or Year of Entry     Ended, or Qualif. in 1860___
________________________________________________________________________

Original Thirteen

New Hampshire                       Tax                   1792
Massachusetts                       Property              1821 (prop), tax req. in 1860
Rhode Island                        Property              1842 (prop), tax req. in 1860
Connecticut                         Property              1818 (prop), 1845 (tax)
New York                            Property              1821 (prop), 1826 (tax)
New Jersey                          Property              1807 (prop), 1844 (tax)
Pennsylvania                        Tax                               tax req. in 1860
Delaware                            Property              1792 (prop), tax req. in 1860
Maryland                            Property              1802
Virginia                            Property              1850
North Carolina                      Property              1856 (prop), tax req. in 1860
South Carolina                      Tax                   1810 (tax)
Georgia                             Property              1789 (prop), 1798 (tax)


New States

Vermont                             none (1791)
Kentucky                            none (1792)
Tennessee                           none (1796)
Ohio                                Tax (1803)            1851 (tax)
Louisiana                           Tax (1812)            1845 (tax)
Indiana                             none (1816)
Mississippi                         Tax (1817)            1832 (tax)
Illinois                            none (1818)
Maine                               none (1819)
Alabama                             none (1819)
Missouri                            none (1820)


________________________________________________________________________
Sources and Notes: Engerman and Sokoloff 2001.




                                                                                     45
