                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               ARE FACULTY CRITICAL?
                    THEIR ROLE IN UNIVERSITY-INDUSTRY LICENSING

                                           Jerry G. Thursby
                                           Marie C. Thursby

                                          Working Paper 9991
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9991


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Jerry G. Thursby and Marie C. Thursby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Are Faculty Critical? Their Role in University-Industry Licensing
Jerry G. Thursby and Marie C. Thursby
NBER Working Paper No. 9991
September 2003
JEL No. J0, O31

                                           ABSTRACT



       Understanding the nature of the involvement of faculty in university licensing is im-portant
for understanding how technology is transferred through licensing as well as more controversial
issues, such as the need for university licensing. Using data from a survey of firms that actively
license-in from universities we explore the importance of faculty in the licensing and development
of inventions, as well as how and why they are used and how the use of faculty relates to
characteristics of firms. In particular we find that the use of faculty through sponsored research in
lieu of a license is closely related to the amount of basic research conducted by firms whereas the
use of faculty within the terms of a license is related to the prevalence of personal contacts between
industry R&D researchers and university faculty.


Jerry G. Thursby                               Marie C. Thursby
Emory University                               DuPree College of Management
jthursb@emory.edu                              Georgia Institute of Technology
                                               800 West Peachtree Street NW
                                               Atlanta, GA 30332-0520
                                               and NBER
                                               marie.thursby@dupree.gatech.edu
                            ARE FACULTY CRITICAL?
  THEIR ROLE IN UNIVERSITY-INDUSTRY LICENSING *
                    JERRY G. THURSBY and MARIE C. THURSBY


        ABSTRACT: Understanding the nature of the involvement of faculty in university licens-

        ing is important for understanding how technology is transferred through licensing as

        well as more controversial issues, such as the need for university licensing. Using data

        from a survey of firms that actively license-in from universities we explore the impor-

        tance of faculty in the licensing and development of inventions, as well as how and why

        they are used and how the use of faculty relates to characteristics of firms. In particular

        we find that the use of faculty through sponsored research in lieu of a license is closely

        related to the amount of basic research conducted by firms whereas the use of faculty

        within the terms of a license is related to the prevalence of personal contacts between in-

        dustry R&D researchers and university faculty.


                                          I. INTRODUCTION


        Are faculty critical to university-industry licensing? The short answer is, of course, yes since

without faculty there would be no university inventions to license. To stop here, however, would be short

sighted, as recent research points to faculty involvement well beyond simply disclosing research, with

faculty often identifying licensees as well as working with licensees in further development (see, for ex-

ample, Agrawal and Henderson 2001, Colyvas et al. 2002, Jensen and Thursby 2001, Lowe 2002,

Thursby et al. 2001, and Thursby and Thursby 2002).
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                                2


           Understanding the nature of this involvement is important for understanding how technology is

transferred through licensing as well as more controversial issues, such as the need for university licens-

ing. Some critics of university licensing argue that licensing is unnecessary. The argument is that to the

extent faculty disseminate their research through publication, the staff of R&D intensive companies can

pick up and use inventions without licensing. To the extent that faculty know-how is important in devel-

opment, then a simple reading of the relevant literature is not always sufficient for commercialization of

university research.

           A second controversial issue related to faculty stems from the rate at which licensing has in-

creased. The Association of University Technology Managers conducts an annual survey of licensing ac-

tivity at US universities. Based on the 84 institutions that reported licenses executed in both 1991 and

2000, the number of licenses executed increased 161%. With such an increase, some critics question

whether faculty have been diverted from their basic research mission.1 Again, the extent and nature of

faculty activity is at the heart of the controversy.

           It is not surprising, therefore, that the role of faculty has been the focus of recent research on uni-

versity-industry technology transfer. Thursby et al. (2001) provide evidence from a survey of university

technology transfer personnel to suggest that the majority of inventions licensed are so embryonic that

successful commercialization depends critically on faculty participation in further development. Jensen

and Thursby (2001) examine the incentive problems associated with obtaining faculty participation. If

faculty have a taste for academic research, as is suggested by Levin and Stephan (1991), Jensen and

Thursby (2003), and Jensen et al. (2003), then license payments tied to commercial success, such as roy-

alties or equity, are important to attract them to work on commercial development. Similarly, Lach and

Schankerman (2003) provide empirical support for the view that faculty disclosure of inventions is posi-

tively related to their share of license revenue from their inventions.

           Unfortunately the data underlying this work largely comes from universities, which may well

overestimate the extent of faculty involvement, and may overlook important reasons that firms work with

universities. In this paper we present the results of a survey of businesses that license-in university tech-
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                            3


nologies. We use these data to examine the extent to which licensees use faculty input, not only in identi-

fying inventions of interest, but also in further development (either through sponsored research or accord-

ing to terms of the license itself). These data also allow us to examine the extent to which the nature of

faculty research is a factor in the business’s interaction with universities. Our results reinforce and add to

those from earlier university surveys. Businesses in our sample report that the overwhelming majority of

university inventions they license are no more than a lab scale prototype, and that for early stage tech-

nologies they often employ faculty assistance in further development. Our data also show that when in-

ventions are too embryonic to license, firms often pursue the invention by sponsoring faculty research in

lieu of a license.

           We then present several econometric models that relate firm use of faculty either by sponsoring

research or in the terms of the license contract, not only to invention characteristics, but also business

characteristics such as “absorptive capacity.” Cohen and Levinthal (1989, 1990) introduced the notion of

absorptive capacity as a firm’s ability to utilize university research and they have argued that this capacity

is related to prior R&D. We use the portion of the firm’s research that is basic as a measure of absorptive

capacity. To the extent that faculty research is a substitute for firm R&D, one might expect firms with

higher absorptive capacity to rely less on faculty. Alternatively, recent work shows that industry scientists

often conduct research and publish jointly with university faculty (Cockburn and Henderson 1998, and

Zucker and Darby 1995). In this case, we might expect faculty and industry basic research to be comple-

mentary, and our results support this hypothesis. Further, we argue here, and results support our claim,

that absorptive capacity also allows a firm to more closely monitor faculty efforts. Such monitoring is

more important with sponsored research agreements than with licenses since license agreements can and

do include payment types that are linked to faculty effort (see Jensen and Thursby, 2001).

           We also examine faculty participation in further development as a function of the extent to which

firms use personal contacts of their R&D staff to identify inventions. We interpret the importance of fac-

ulty contacts as a measure of connectedness, which is a concept introduced by Cockburn and Henderson

(1998) and Lim (2000), to reflect the extent to which firms augment their internal capacity with faculty
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                               4


contacts. We find that our measure of connectedness is negatively related to sponsored research which

may be a function of the fact that some survey respondents cited “establishing relationships with faculty”

as a reason for sponsoring research.

           These results contribute not only to the literature on university licensing, but also to the extensive

literature on faculty collaboration with industry. The bulk of this literature abstracts from licensing and

the role of faculty in the license process (See, for example, Mansfield, 1995; Mansfield and Lee, 1996;

Zucker, Darby and Armstrong, 1998; and Zucker, Darby and Brewer, 1998). Two exceptions are Adams

(2001) and Cohen et al. (1998). Licensing and consulting are two means of knowledge transfer consid-

ered by Adams in his study of localization of industrial learning from academic research. Cohen et al.

(1998) found that while R&D lab managers viewed public channels (e.g., publications and conferences)

as their most important means for accessing university research, they tended to complement these chan-

nels with person-to-person interaction. Our results contribute to this literature by suggesting a comple-

mentary relation between private channels of transfer such as licensing and personal contacts.

           In Section II, we characterize survey respondents. Section III gives the reasons respondents who

increased their licensing from universities gave for the change, including the extent to which it was the

result of changes in faculty research orientation Section IV focuses on the nature of inventions licensed-

in, including their stage of development. As shown in our later modeling, this turns out to be an important

determinant of faculty involvement. Section V presents summary statistics concerning the nature of fac-

ulty involvement in licensing while in Section VI we present the econometric models that relate business

and invention characteristics to faculty participation in further development of their invention. Section VII

concludes.

           Throughout the paper, we report survey results in a common table format. Each table states the

relevant survey question and then reports the number of respondents answering a particular question (“#

Resp.”), the simple average based on those responses (“Mean”) and, for most of the questions, the aver-

age response weighted by the number of university licenses the firm had executed over the period 1993-

97 (“Wgt. Mean”). Since the number of executed licenses was not provided by all respondents, the
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                         5


weighted average is typically based on a subset of those responding to the question; on average, the num-

ber of respondents for the weighted mean is about 80% of the number of respondents for the simple aver-

age. The weighted mean is given by

                                                  n        n
                                  Wgt. Mean = ∑ wi Xi / ∑ wi
                                                 i =1     i =1




where n = number of respondents, wi = number of university licenses executed by the ith business unit,

and Xi = response of the ith business unit. The weighted mean gives a higher (lower) weight to those

business units that executed large (small) numbers of university licenses over the period 1993-97 relative

to other respondents. Further, we use paired t tests to test for significant differences in responses. The

tests are based only on the un-weighted responses and they are two-tailed 5% tests. Below each table are

results of the t tests.

                           II. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESPONDENTS

           The survey questionnaire was designed to be answered by individuals actively engaged in execut-

ing licenses, options, and/or sponsored research agreements with universities between 1993-1997. We

received responses from 112 business units that had licensed-in university inventions. The majority of

these units were firms, and hereafter will be referred to as such. As described in the Appendix, firms in

our sample accounted for at least 15% of the license agreements and 17% of sponsored research agree-

ments reported by AUTM in 1997. Seventy-nine firms in the sample responded to a question on the top

five universities with whom they had contractual agreements. The 85 universities mentioned include 35 of

the top 50 universities in terms of industry sponsored research and 40 of the top 50 licensing universities

in the 1997 AUTM Survey.

           The majority of respondents were employed by small firms, with 46% answering for firms with

less than one-hundred employees and 17% for firms with more than one hundred but less than five hun-

dred employees. In terms of industry segments, 31% of the respondents identified pharmaceuticals as the

main industry in which their firm operated, 36% indicated biotechnology and medical devices as their
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                             6


main industry, and 33% indicated other industries. Ninety-one percent of the sample conducted some

R&D in-house. On average, 37% of the R&D conducted in-house was basic or discovery research, 44%

was development of new products, and 18% was for process improvement.



                    III. THE ROLE OF FACULTY IN THE GROWTH OF LICENSING

           The annual AUTM surveys of university licensing offices show substantial growth in university

licensing over the years of the 90s. Firms in our sample generally follow this pattern. We asked respon-

dents whether their contractual agreements (license, option and/or research agreements) with universities

had increased, decreased or stayed about the same over the 5-year period preceding our survey (1993-97).

Of the 106 answering this question, 50% indicated an increase while only 16% indicated a decrease; the

remaining 34% said there had been no change in contractual agreements. For those indicating an increase,

license agreements had increased by 86% in 1997 compared to the average of the preceding 4 years, and

their research funding to universities doubled. On average, each of these firms executed 13 licenses per

year over the period 1993-97 and provided $13.2Mil in sponsored research with U.S. universities.

           We then asked respondents about the reasons for the changes, if any. Since there are so few firms

indicating a decrease (only 17 firms so indicated), we concentrate on the firms who noted increasing con-

tractual arrangements. Respondents were given five reasons for increasing contracts (in addition to an

“other” category) and were asked to indicate importance using a 5-point Likert scale from “Extremely

important," which we coded as a 1, to “Not important," which we coded as a 5; a "Don't know" response

was permitted. Results are in Table 1. The first three reasons relate to university characteristics, including

the nature of faculty research, while the last two relate to changes in corporate R&D. What stands out is

the greater importance attached to university receptivity than either costs or faculty research orientation;

three times as many respondents recorded a 1 for “universities’ receptivity” as recorded a 1 for “costs” or

for “faculty orientation.” Further, a change in “reliance on external R&D” is more important then either

“costs” or “faculty orientation.” 2 Of course, the firm’s “reliance on external R&D” could change for rea-

sons other than internal factors; for example, it could relate to in universities. To examine this possibility,
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                            7


we computed the simple correlation between individual respondent answers to the “reliance on external

R&D” question and the “costs,” “faculty orientation” and “universities’ receptivity” responses. The only

significant correlation is between R&D and “costs;” the correlation is 0.49 suggesting that, to the extent

that reliance on external R&D is related to university characteristics, it is the cost of university research

that is important.

           In our introduction we noted concerns that the recent growth in university licensing might well

signal a change in the direction of university research; such a change is viewed by many as problematic to

the extent that it signals a move away from basic research. Our results indicate that the major cause from

the perspective of industry lies with university receptivity rather than faculty research orientation. None-

theless, one can argue that the number who noted the importance of a change in faculty orientation signals

a problem. For more on this issue see Thursby and Thursby (2003)



                                  IV. INVENTION CHARACTERISTICS

           A key to understanding the nature of faculty involvement in licensing is an appreciation of the na-

ture of licensed university inventions. In this Section, we report survey results that characterize inventions

in terms of the reasons they are licensed-in, importance to the firm, and the stage of development when

the firm considered licensing them.

           As shown in Table 2, 52% of the university inventions licensed-in were used in new product de-

velopment and only 9% used for process improvement. Twenty-four percent of licenses were used as a

research tool, and 18% were licenses for platform (or core) technologies. Interestingly, few respondents

indicated that the licenses were to prevent a rival company from licensing the technology. The latter fig-

ure follows, we believe, from the fact that university technologies are so embryonic that few firms show

interest in a given technology. In our survey of university technology transfer offices (Jensen and Thursby

(2001) and Thursby et al. (2001)) we asked about the frequency of bidding on a technology by more than

one firm. Forty-four percent said this occurred rarely or never and 51% indicated that it only occurred
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                          8


sometimes. Since it is rare that more than one firm shows an interest in a particular technology, it should

follow that few firms license in order to prevent a rival from licensing that technology.

           To get a sense of how important licensed university inventions are to firms, we asked respondents

for the percentage of the time that universities had been critical to the development of new products or

processes. Our definition of critical is the same as that used by Mansfield (1995) -- the product or process

could not have been developed without substantial delay. Results are in Table 3. The average response for

patents licensed-in from universities was 24%, for non-patentable technology it was 8% and sponsored

research was 14%. By way of comparison, in-house patents were critical 49% of the time. When we

weight these percentages by the number of licenses executed, the picture changes substantially. The per-

centage of in-house patents that is critical falls to 35%, and the percentage of non-patentable technology

licensed from universities rises to 29%, while the percentage of patentable university inventions that is

critical changes little. To the extent that in-house R&D is directed towards the firm’s core competencies,

it is not surprising that in-house patents are more important than university patents. What we find striking

is that the importance of university patents is so close to that of in-house patents. This could follow from

the basic nature of university research, so that university inventions may be more fundamental and less

incremental than industry inventions. Hence, while the firms R&D is more directed at the firm’s needs,

university research, when applicable to the needs of the firm, is more fundamental.

           Table 4 shows the percentage of time licensed-in technologies were in various stages of develop-

ment. Only 7% of licensed-in technologies were deemed ready for practical or commercial use whereas

40% were simply a proof of concept (the earliest listed stage of development).3 We also asked respon-

dents about the failure rate of university inventions licensed-in. Forty-two percent of the firms who li-

censed-in university inventions indicated that these inventions had a higher failure than non-university

licensed-in technologies (while only 11% reported a lower rate).4 Those who noted a higher failure rate

reported, on average, that 48% of their university licenses were for technologies that were only a proof of

concept; all others reported only 31% to be in a proof of concept stage (these percentages are significantly

different at a 5% level). Further, the correlation between the reported failure rate and the fraction of li-
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                            9


censes that are in a proof of concept stage is 0.31 (significant at a 1% level) while the correlation with the

fraction that are ready for practical or commercial use is –0.23 (significant at the 10% level).

           Failure of a technology is associated with stage of development. In Table 5 we report on the rea-

sons for failure of a technology. The first two reasons, failure of the technology and longer lag time than

expected, are more closely associated with early than with late stage technologies. On average 47% of the

time the reason was failure of the technology and 26% of the time the reason was a longer time to market

than had been expected. Note that 18% of the time respondents felt that it was a failure of the faculty that

was associated with failure of the licensed technology.

           We compared the purpose of university technologies (reported in Table 2) with the fraction of

university licenses in various stages of development. Of particular note is the relationship between tech-

nologies for process improvement and stage of development. Process improvement is negatively and sig-

nificantly related to proof of concept (-0.178, significant at the 10% level) while it is positively and sig-

nificantly related both to manufacturing feasibility known (0.324, significant at the 1% level) and to ready

for practical or commercial use (0.18, significant at the 10% level). In other words, process improvement

tends to be late stage. Other purposes of university inventions are not correlated with stage of develop-

ment.

           Finally, we asked about problems significant enough that the firm chooses not to license-in early

stage technologies. Results are in Table 6. The first, and most important, reason relates to the firm’s mar-

ket niche. The next two reasons relate to funding problems, and internal funding problems are cited as

being of greater importance than are external funding problems. We considered whether external funding

problems were cited by small companies more often than for large companies. We used an employee size

of 100 as our cut point, but we found no significant difference. The final choices relate necessary scien-

tific expertise from either in-house staff or from faculty; neither issue was of substantial importance to our

respondents.
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                           10


                                      V. FACULTY INVOLVEMENT

           As noted in the introduction, recent research on university licensing shows that faculty are often

involved in the license process well beyond disclosure. Respondents to our survey of university technol-

ogy transfer offices estimated that 71% of the inventions they licensed could not be successfully commer-

cialized without faculty cooperation in further development. One of the problems with this information is

that it is based on the perceptions of TTO personnel. Moreover, one might expect university personnel to

overstate the importance of faculty in the process.

           In the current survey, we are able not only to discern whether businesses that license from univer-

sities agree on the need for faculty involvement, but also to examine faculty involvement in a broader

context. To the extent that faculty are viewed as critical in the process, we explore the reasons for their

involvement. We find that, in addition to the well cited role of faculty in further development of licensed

inventions and sponsored research, respondents rely heavily on personal contacts in order to identify the

inventions they license.

A. Identifying Inventions

           How do potential licensees go about identifying university technologies? Using a five point

Likert scale, we asked respondents about the importance of six methods for identifying university tech-

nologies. The question, methods and responses are found in Table 7. A “Don’t know” category was in-

cluded in our question but is excluded from the table. Note a similarity in responses across the questions

concerning publications, patent searches and presentations at professional meetings; at any conventional

level of significance the responses are not significantly different, however each is significantly different

from each of the remaining three responses. Further, responses to “Marketing efforts …” and “canvass

universities …” are not significantly different at conventional levels of significance.

           What stands out is the extreme importance of personal contacts between the firm’s R&D staff and

university personnel. These responses are significantly different at all conventional levels from the re-

sponses for each of the other sources. Since the most likely university contacts are faculty inventors, this

result underscores the central role that faculty, who are the ones most familiar with the technology, play
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                           11


in the transfer of technology after an invention is made.5 We argue that this pivotal role of the faculty fol-

lows in large part because of the embryonic nature of most university technologies; the potential markets

for embryonic technologies are unclear as are the identities of firms who might profit from licensing those

inventions.

           We can characterize the results in Table 7 as suggesting that mechanisms for identifying tech-

nologies fall into three categories: (1) reading journal publications, making patent searches and attending

scientific presentations, which are indirect efforts in that they do not involve any personal contact with

university personnel; (2) direct efforts either by the university technology transfer office via marketing or

firms via routine canvassing, and (3) one-on-one approaches based on personnel contacts. The latter ef-

forts are the most important with indirect efforts second in importance.

B. Faculty Involvement and Stage of Development

           The common reason stated for faculty involvement in further development is the early stage in

which most university inventions are licensed (Colyvas et al. 2002, Jensen and Thursby 2001, Thursby et

al. 2001). In this survey we were able to investigate this in more detail by asking respondents the percent-

age of time that faculty are involved in further development for licensed inventions in each stage of de-

velopment at the time of license. Results are in Table 8. For technologies in the earliest stages of devel-

opment (proof of concept, prototype, and preclinical), respondents indicated frequent faculty involve-

ment, whereas they noted less involvement for the latest stage technologies (manufacturing feasibility

known and ready for use). Using the weighted mean figures in Table 8 in conjunction with the weighted

mean figures in Table 5 indicating the percentage of inventions licensed in various stages of development,

we can estimate that roughly 40% of all licenses require faculty involvement.6

           In cases where respondents viewed faculty as important for further development, we asked them

why they viewed them as such. The results are in Table 9. The most important reason given is specialized

knowledge of faculty; note, however, the relative unimportance of the cost of faculty development com-

pared to in-house costs. We computed the simple correlations of responses to our question about stage of
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                          12


development with responses to why faculty are important and found no association of stage of develop-

ment of licensed-in technologies with reasons why faculty are important.

           Table 10 gives the percentage of time that consulting and/or sponsored research agreements are

used to obtain faculty assistance. Note that we separate consulting contracts into those negotiated directly

with the university and those negotiated directly with the faculty member. The most common mechanism

is a consulting arrangement. We calculated simple correlations of stage of development answers with

mechanisms for obtaining help, but no significant associations were found.

C. Sponsored Research Agreements

           Finally, when a decision is made not to license-in a technology, a firm might nonetheless decide

to sign a sponsored research agreement for further development of the technology. In Table 11 are re-

sponses to our question regarding such decisions and the stage of development of the technology. As is

clear from the table, it is a common practice, particularly for early stage technologies, to sign a sponsored

research agreement in lieu of a license.

                                      VI. ECONOMETRIC MODEL

           The previous section focused on three means by which businesses use faculty in the process of

transferring in university research: (1) identification of inventions, (2) further development when inven-

tions are licensed, and (3) further research when inventions are not licensed. In this section, we examine

the latter two mechanisms in econometric models that relate these mechanisms to firm and invention

characteristics.

           For each econometric model the dependent variable is the percentage of time that faculty are used

in further development (either via cooperation within a license agreement or via a sponsored research

agreement in lieu of a license). We weight the license data with the fraction of licensed-in agreements that

are in various stages of development (see Table 4). Comparable weighting variables for the sponsored

research variable are not available. The dependent variables are formed by “stacking” responses to the

questions in Tables 8 and 11, so that each respondent can potentially provide six values of the dependent

variable; one for each of the six stages of development.
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                            13


           As there are a large number of zero values and given that each respondent can appear in the data

multiple times we use a random effects Tobit estimator. The random effects model assumes that each ob-

servation has, in addition to the “usual” disturbance, a respondent specific disturbance. After deleting

missing observations we have 286 observations in the sponsored research equation and 188 are censored

at zero. In the license equation there are 201 observations of which 49 are censored. Independent vari-

ables include indicator variables for stage of development, industry indicator variables and the employ-

ment size of the firm. In our survey we asked respondents about the purpose of university inventions (see

Table 2). We include these responses as regressors. We also include variables to capture the research “in-

tensity” of the firm.

           For stage of development we include five indicator variables:

                    PROTO = 1 if the response is for the prototype stage of development, 0 otherwise;

                    PRECLIN = 1 if the response is for the preclinical stage of development, 0 otherwise;

                    CLINICAL = 1 if the response is for the clinical stage of development, 0 otherwise;

                    MANUF = 1 if manufacturing feasibility is known, 0 otherwise; and

                    READY = 1 if the technology is ready for practical or commercial use, 0 otherwise.

Note that the omitted stage is proof of concept.

           The sample is divided into three industries based on the respondent’s primary line of business.

The two indicator variables are: PHARMA = 1 if the respondent’s industry is pharmaceuticals (0, other-

wise), MED = 1 if the respondent’s industry is biotechnology or medical devices (0, otherwise). All other

industries are in the omitted category.

           We measure firm size using employment and divide the sample into three sizes: 1) less than 100

employees (EMPL100 = 1 if there are fewer than 100 employees, 0 otherwise); 2) between 100 and 500

(EMPL100-500 = 1 if there are between 100 and 500 employees, 0 otherwise); and, 3) larger than 500.

The latter category is the one omitted from the regression.

           Regressors reflecting the use of inventions come from the responses in Table 2, that is, the per-

centage of time that a licensed-in technology was for new product development (PRODUCT), process
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                            14


improvement (PROCESS), as a research tool (TOOL), as a platform technology (PLATFORM) or to pre-

vent a rival from licensing the technology. We included only the first four responses from Table 2. We do

not consider that a license to prevent a rival from licensing would affect whether or not faculty are used in

further development unless the firm intended to license and then “shelve” the technology. In our earlier

survey of university technology transfer offices respondents did not consider shelving to be a significant

problem; in any event, few firms claim that they license-in to prevent a rival from licensing the technol-

ogy. For the sponsored research equation it would be better to have information on the purpose of spon-

sored research agreements rather than license agreements; since the former is not available we assume

that the purposes of licensed agreements and the purposes of sponsored research agreements are similar.

           Finally, we include regressors to capture the firm’s “absorptive capacity” in the sense of Cohen

and Levinthal (1989, 1990) and “connectedness,” which Cockburn and Henderson (1998) and Lim (2000)

argue is an important input to absorptive capacity. Absorptive capacity, as the name implies, is the ability

of the firm to assimilate and use new knowledge generated external to the firm; for our interests, this is

the ability of the firm to absorb new knowledge generated by universities. Connectedness is the degree to

which the R&D staff of a firm is in contact with or connected to external researchers; for our interests,

this is the degree to which the R&D staff is connected to university researchers. We argue that absorptive

capacity and connectedness may both be related to the use of faculty in further development of inven-

tions. In particular, one might expect firms with higher absorptive capacity to have less need for the spe-

cialized knowledge of faculty, so that absorptive capacity is a substitute for faculty involvement.

           Our measure of absorptive capacity is the fraction of the firm’s research that is basic or discovery

research (BASIC) as opposed to new product development or process improvement. If the firm does not

conduct R&D, then a zero value is used for the amount of basic research. An alternative measure would

have been R&D intensity defined by R&D expenditure relative to sales. The problem with this measure

for our sample is that a number of firms had no reported sales.

           Given our measure of absorptive capacity, one might well expect a complementary relation be-

tween faculty involvement and capacity, particularly in the sponsored research equation. There are two
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                           15


reasons for this. First, if the firm is conducting basic research, the R&D staff may have an interest in joint

research and publication with faculty, as has been noted in much of the literature (see for example, Cock-

burn and Henderson, 1998, and Zucker and Darby, 1995). Second, to the extent that there is a monitoring

problem with sponsored research agreements, one would expect firms conducting basic research to have a

greater capacity to effectively monitor the progress of faculty in research. The latter effect may not be as

important in the license equation as contract terms which stipulate royalty payment terms or equity can

serve to mitigate the moral hazard problem associated with faculty efforts after an agreement is signed

(see Jensen and Thursby, 2001).

           Our measure of connectedness, CONTACT, comes from our question as to how firms identify in-

ventions to license (See Table 7). CONTACT is the negative of the score respondents gave to the impor-

tance of personal contacts between the firm’s R&D staff and university personnel (who are almost always

university scientists). In our question to firms small scores indicated greater importance. We use the nega-

tive of the score for ease of interpretation, so that a positive coefficient indicates that greater connected-

ness leads to greater use of faculty. To account for differences in how respondents define “extremely im-

portant,” etc., we measure the importance of contacts as the difference between the importance attached to

personal contacts and the average response made to all sources for technologies; that is, we use a relative

measure of the importance of personal contacts.

           Initial results for our two econometric models are in Table 12, Part A. In both models the proto-

type stage (PROTO) is not significantly different from proof of concept whereas all other stages of devel-

opment are less likely to use faculty (all coefficients are significantly different at least a 5% level). The

coefficients of stage of development, except for PROTO, tend to be quite similar in both equations. We

tested for equality of the stage of development coefficients and found that, for each model, the coeffi-

cients are not significantly different. CLINICAL, MANUF and READY are all late stage and their equal-

ity is not surprising; their equality with PRECLIN is somewhat surprising. This may reflect the availabil-

ity of animal test data for many PRECLIN technologies.
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                           16


            In the sponsored research equation three of the variables reflecting use of technologies are sig-

nificantly different from zero at 1% significance levels. If technology use is as a platform technology or

as process improvement there is an increased chance of using sponsored research in lieu of a license

whereas there is less of a chance if the technology is a new product. Research tools is not significant.

None of the four coefficients regarding firm size or industry are significantly different from zero. BASIC,

the fraction of R&D that is basic research, is positive and significant at a 1% level. The positive effect of

BASIC suggests that the monitoring argument given above is important and/or there is a complementarity

between basic research and the use of faculty in sponsored research agreements. Note that CONTACTS,

our measure of connectedness, is not significant.

           In the license equation faculty are more likely to be used in early stages and they are more likely

to be used in the smallest size firms. Firms in the pharmaceuticals, biotech and medical device industries

are also more likely to use faculty. The coefficients of PHARMA and MED are not significantly different

from one another. Regarding the purpose of licensed-in technologies, only PROCESS is significant (at a

10% level). The sign on PROCESS is positive and follows, we believe, from the fact that process im-

provements are less likely to be within the core competencies of the R&D staff of a firm than are the other

purposes. For example, process improvement can be in response to environmental or health and safety

regulations; as such, one would not expect the R&D staff to be as prepared to develop further a technol-

ogy than they would be in the case, for example, of new product development. The connectedness vari-

able, CONTACT, is positive and significant at a 1% level; thus, faculty are more likely to be used the

more important are contacts with the R&D staff. Note that our absorptive capacity variable, BASIC, is not

significant.

           To reduce the parameter space we dropped PROTO, which is never significant. Since the remain-

ing stage of development variables are not significantly different we collected all stages other than

PROTO or proof of concept into a single dummy, LATE, to capture late stage technologies. We did the

same for PHARMA and MED. The resulting variable, MEDICAL, captures pharmaceuticals, biotechnol-

ogy and medical devices. Results are in Table 12, Part B. The results change little from the regression in
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                             17


Part A which include all variables; an exception is EMP100, which is now negative and significant at the

10% level.

           In the models considered above the only difference across industries is in a possible shift in the

constant term. However, it is quite possible that partial effects of other regressors might vary across

industry. To capture that possibility we divided our sample into two parts, one for firms whose primary

line of business is one of the life sciences (pharmaceuticals, biotechnology and medical devices) and a

second for firms in other industries. We then re-ran our regressions. Unfortunately, there are too few

observations in the second set of regressions (63 or fewer) to obtain meaningful answers.

           Table 13 presents results of the regressions for the industries involved in the life sciences. Part A

presents results based on all regressors, and in Part B we aggregate the late stage technologies (again, we

find no significant difference across the coefficients of late stage technologies). The results are similar to

those in Table 12 with two important exceptions. For the license equation, CONTACTS is no longer sig-

nificant. For the sponsored research equation and the model with all regressors the coefficients for both

BASIC and CONTACTS are significantly different from zero but they are opposite in sign (only the for-

mer is significant in the reduced regressor model reported in Part B). As is the case with the results in Ta-

ble 12, the more BASIC research conducted, the more likely the firm is to use sponsored research when a

license is not signed. However, the closer the contacts of the firm’s R&D staff with university personnel,

the less likely the firm is to use sponsored research. A possible explanation for the latter comes from dis-

cussions with industry licensing executives in which we were told on several occasions that sponsored

research agreements were sometimes used as a method for establishing relationships with faculty inven-

tors. Thus, if connectedness is low, there might be a bias towards the signing of a sponsored research

agreement in order to establish a relationship (i.e., in order to create connectedness).

           We conclude this section by noting that we also considered an econometric model relating re-

sponses in Table 10, how faculty input is obtained within the confines of a license agreement, with the

characteristics used in the above econometric models. Here, of course, we do not stack responses. Rather,

we estimate a different model for each of the three possible responses -- sponsored research, consulting
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                             18


negotiated with the faculty member and consulting negotiated with the university. We also considered a

model with the sum of both consulting figures as the dependent variable. In no case was there significance

of any variable indicating that the manner in which faculty input is sought through a license is not associ-

ated with firm characteristics. Note that our measure of absorptive capacity is important in the model of

sponsored research in lieu of a license, but no such relationship holds for sponsored research within a li-

cense. We believe this supports our contention that absorptive capacity is important for monitoring when

there is no license, but that license terms can deal with the moral hazard problem so that the ability to

monitor faculty research within a sponsored research agreement is important only when there is no li-

cense.

                        VII. CONCLUSIONS AND UNANSWERED QUESTIONS

           Not surprisingly, issues regarding faculty behavior and the concomitant implications for research

and education are central to much of the debate surrounding the merits of university licensing. While

there is a growing literature on the broader issues and the role of faculty, there is little evidence from the

perspective of businesses as to their role and its importance. In this paper, we present evidence from a

sample of 112 firms that have recently licensed university inventions. We focused on three ways in which

these firms rely on faculty: identification of inventions to license, further development of licensed inven-

tions, and sponsored research. Our results lend support to the view that faculty participation, through in-

formal as well as formal channels, is an important part of the license process. While our results provide

more detail on the nature and importance of faculty input from the business perspective, there are a num-

ber of questions left largely unanswered.

           In particular, there is an interesting dilemma inherent in these results: on the one hand, successful

licensing requires faculty efforts in further development, and on the other hand that effort potentially di-

verts faculty from their role in basic research. Thus successful technology transfer through licensing has a

potentially disturbing downside that deserves further attention. We only partially addressed this issue,

providing limited evidence on the nature of faculty research as a reason for increased business reliance on

licensing. The results reported here indicate that faculty orientation is substantially less important in the
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                          19


growth of university licensing than is university receptivity to contacts with industry. This result is

consistent with other results reported in Thursby and Thursby (2002), which show that the primary source

of growth in university licensing stems from an entrepreneurial bent of university administrations rather

than a change in faculty research. Nonetheless, it is still the case that nearly 11% of respondents noted a

change in faculty orientation as extremely important in their increased contacts with universities (see Ta-

ble 1). Some might view such a result as suggesting a move away from basic research, but there are dif-

ferent perspectives on this. For example, it may only signal an increased willingness to disclose rather

than a fundamental shift in the nature of research. The problem with studies such as these is that these

data are not the appropriate ones for examining the question of faculty research. What is needed to exam-

ine the direction of faculty research, and its relation to licensing, is micro data on faculty behavior, pro-

ductivity and funding sources. This is a subject of an ongoing, separate study we are conducting.7
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                     20


                                                 REFERENCES


       Adams, J.D., “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,” NBER Working
Paper 8292, May 2001.

        Agrawal, A. and Henderson, R.``Putting Patents in Context: Exploring Knowledge Transfer from
MIT.'' Management Science, 48, 2002, 44-60.

           Association of University Technology, Inc., 1998. AUTM Licensing Survey.

         Cockburn, I. and R. Henderson. “Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior, and the Organiza-
tion of Research in Drug Discovery, Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, 1998, 157-182.

        Cohen, W.M. and D.A. Levinthal. “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of R&D,” The Eco-
nomic Journal, 99, 1989, 569-596.

        Cohen, W.M. and D.A. Levinthal. “Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning and In-
novation,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 1990, 128-152.

        Cohen, W. M., R. Florida, L. Randazzese, and J. Walsh. “Industry and the Academy: Uneasy
Partners in the Cause of Technological Advance,” in Roger Noll (ed), Challenges to Research Universi-
ties, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1998, 171-199.

      Colyvas, J., Crow, M., Gelijns, A., Mazzoleni, R., Nelson, R.R., Rosenberg, N., Sampat, B.N.
“How Do University Inventions Get Into Practice.'' Management Science, 48, 2002, 61-71.

        Graham, J. and H. Campbell. “The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from the
Field” Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 2001, 187-243.

       Jansen, C. and H. Dillon. “Where do the Leads Come From? Source Data from Six Institutions.”
The Journal of the Association of University Technology Managers, 11, 1999.

         Jensen, R. and M. Thursby. “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing of University Inven-
tions.” American Economic Review, 91(1), 2001, 240-259.

           ______, and ______. “The Academic Effects of University Patent Licensing,” mimeo, 2003.

       Jensen, R., J. Thursby, M. Thursby, “The Disclosure and Licensing of University Inventions: The
Best We Can Do With the S**t We Get to Work With,” International Journal of Industrial Economics,
forthcoming.

       Lach, S. and M. Schankerman, “Incentives and Innovation in Universities,” NBER Working Pa-
per 9727, May 2003.

        Levin, S. and P. Stephan, 1991, “Research Productivity over the Life Cycle: Evidence for Ameri-
can Scientists,” American Economic Review 81, 114-132.

       Lim, K., 2000, “The Many Faces of Absorptive Capacity: Spillovers of Copper Interconnective
Technology for Semiconductor Chips,” Mimeo, MIT.
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                    21


         Lowe, R., “The Role and Experience of Inventor-Founded Firms: Case Studies from the Univer-
sity of California,” mimeo, 2002.

        Mansfield, E. “Academic Research Underlying Industrial Innovations: Sources, Characteristics,
and Financing,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 77, 1995, 55-65.

        ______, and Y. Lee. “The Modern University: Contributor to Industrial Innovation and Recipient
of Industrial R&D Support,” Research Policy, 25, 1996, 1027-1058.

       Thursby, J.G., R. Jensen and M. Thursby, 2001, “Objectives, Characteristics and Outcomes of
University Licensing: A Survey of Major U.S. Universities.” Journal of Technology Transfer, 26, 2001,
59-72.

        Thursby, J. and M. Thursby. “Who is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of Growth in University
Licensing,” Management Science, 48, 2002, 90-104.

        ______, and ______. “Patterns of Research and Licensing Activity of
Science and Engineering Faculty,” paper presented at Cornell Higher Education Research Institute, May
2003.

        Zucker, L. and M. Darby. “Virtuous Circles of Productivity: Star Bioscientists and the Institu-
tional Transformation of Industry,” NBER Working Paper 5342, 1995.

       Zucker, L., M. Darby and J. Armstrong. “Geographically Localized Knowledge: Spillovers or
Markets,” Economic Inquiry, 36(1), 1998, 65-86.

        Zucker, L., M. Darby and M. Brewer. “Intellectual Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology
Enterprises,” American Economic Review, 88, 1998, 290-306.
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                              22


                                    APPENDIX. INDUSTRY SURVEY DESIGN

           In preparing our survey we attended the annual meetings of the Licensing Executive Society, Inc.

(U.S.A. and Canada) to interview licensing executives concerning the university/industry licensing proc-

ess from their perspective. A preliminary survey document was prepared and further interviews were

conducted with that document as the focus. A final survey document was prepared based on feedback

from those interviews. A professional designer was employed to format questions. Pretests suggested that

the document could be completed in about 30 minutes.

           The sample was drawn from the mailing list of Licensing Executive Society, Inc. (U.S.A. and

Canada) (LES). We phoned companies with multiple entries to ensure a single response from each suit-

able business unit and to identify the most appropriate respondent. Further calls allowed us to eliminate

those who do not license-in technology from any source as well as those that are no longer in business.

This left us with 1385 business units in the sample, and 300 responded (21.7% response rate); 112 indi-

cated that they had licensed-in university technologies, and 188 indicated that their licenses were from

other sources, though 61 of the latter had sponsored university research. We mailed the survey in late No-

vember of 1998 with a request for a response by December 14. A reminder card was mailed two weeks

after the initial mailing. A second mailing of the survey was sent in early January. Each mailing was ac-

companied by a letter from the President of LES indicating that our survey had the support of the board of

LES. We used Purdue University MBA students to call those who had not responded to encourage a re-

sponse.

           Many of the companies on the LES list are not publicly traded so it is impossible to conduct the

usual tests for selectivity bias. While there is some public information for private companies, such infor-

mation is difficult to find for small start-ups which comprise a significant portion of the firms who license

from universities. In addition, and perhaps more importantly, our interests lie with those who actively li-

cense-in from universities, but we do not know which of the non-responding firms fall in that category.

Thus, in any tests for selectivity bias we not know which of the non-responding firms should be compared

to the responding firms. As an alternative to the usual tests for selectivity bias we make some compari-
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                            23


sons of respondents with data reported by AUTM in their annual survey and we can compare responses

from our business survey with responses to our earlier university survey.8

           Of the 112 firms who licensed-in university technologies, 104 gave information on the number of

their license agreements with universities. These 104 respondents had 417 licenses in 1997, which repre-

sents approximately 15% of the total reported by AUTM.9 Seventy-one respondents reported $307Mil of

support, which is approximately 17% of the comparable AUTM figure of $1,786Mil for 1997. If the firms

with missing sponsored research expenditures had the same average research expenditure as the 71 usable

responses then our 114 respondents account for about 28% of all industry research support at U.S. univer-

sities. Seventy-nine firms listed the primary universities with whom they licensed during the preceding

five years and 64 listed the primary universities with whom they sponsored research.10 Eighty-five univer-

sities are mentioned (many are mentioned by a number of firms) and they cover most of the major U.S.

research universities; based on the 1997 AUTM survey, they represent 35 of the top 50 industry supported

universities and 40 of the top 50 licensing universities. It is reasonable to conclude that our sample repre-

sents a substantial portion of all industry/university contractual agreements of the recent past. Further, as

noted in the text and footnote 3, we asked both universities and firms for the fraction of inventions in

various stages of development. The average response for each stage of development and for each group is

very similar.

           Finally, The employment profile of our respondents who license-in from universities is similar to

that reported by AUTM for 1998. In the AUTM survey 64% of all university licenses were to start-ups or

existing firms with fewer than 500 employees. About two thirds of our sample of firms have fewer than

500 employees, and less than half the respondents are responding for business units with no more than

100 employees. Sixty-three percent of those who actively license-in from universities had no more than

$1,000,000 in revenues in 1997.
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                          24


                                                 FOOTNOTES

*
    Financial support was provided by National Science Foundation (SES 0094573), Alan and Mildred Pe-

terson Foundation, National Bureau of Economic Research and Sloan Foundation under the NBER Pro-

ject on Industrial Technology and Productivity. We thank Linda Cohen and Arvids Ziedonis for com-

ments. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the 2nd annual Roundtable on Engineering Entre-

preneurship Research, Georgia Institute of Technology, April 2002, and the Western Economics Associa-

tion Meetings, Seattle, June 2002.

J.     Thursby:     Professor,   Economics   Department,    Emory     University,   Atlanta,   GA,    30306.

jthursb@emory.edu

M. Thursby: Professor, Dupree College of Business and NBER, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,

GA, 30322. marie.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu
1
    This growth has been sufficiently controversial to be the cover story of the March 2000 issue of Atlantic

Monthly and, in the recent past, Congress, the National Academies’ Committee on Science, Technology,

and Economic Policy, and the President’s Commission on Science and Technology have all undertaken

review of the Bayh-Dole Act, the law underlying university licensing of federally funded research (which

of course is the bulk of university research).
2
    For more on the sources of growth in university licensing see Thursby and Thursby (2002).
3
    In our survey of university technology transfer offices we asked about stage of development. They noted

that 45% and 37% of licenses were in the stages “proof of concept” and “prototype available,” respec-

tively. Further, 15% and 12% were in the stages “manufacturing feasibility known” and “ready for practi-

cal use,” respectively.
4
    We asked for the percent of licensed-in agreements with universities that were not successful; by not

successful we mean the technology did not fit the need anticipated at the time of the license – as an exam-

ple, it did not reach the royalty stage.
Thursby & Thursby
                                                                                                         25

5
    See also Jansen and Dillon (1999) who report that 56% of the primary leads for over 1100 licenses exe-

cuted at five universities and one national lab are inventors.
6
     This number is, of course, subject to error as the percentages in both tables do not necessarily sum to

100%. Typically, however, respondents provided percentages that did sum to 100%.
7
    For a preliminary analysis, see Thursby and Thursby (2003).
8
    This approach has been used by others to examine possible respondent bias. See, example, Graham and

Harvey (2001) who compare respondents in their survey to the general population of firms rather than

make sole use of a comparison of respondents and non-respondents (some of whom are not publicly

traded).
9
     The survey is explicit in differentiating between licenses and options whereas AUTM lumps both to-

gether, thus our estimate and the AUTM figure are not strictly comparable; however, the bulk of univer-

sity contracts (aside from research agreements) are licenses. In our survey, licenses outnumbered options

by about 4 to 1.
10
     Many who did not answer this question indicated confidentiality concerns. They were reluctant -- in

spite of assurances of confidentiality -- because knowledge of the universities with whom they deal can

give competitors information as to the strategic direction the firm might take in the future.
Thursby Thursby




     Table 1
     How important are the following in explaining the [increase in university contracts]?
     NOTE: A "don't know" response and "other" category were included.
                                                                                Relative Frequency for Those Indicating an Increase
                                                                                            Extremely                            Not
       Question                                                                 # Resp.     Important   2       3       4     important
           1      Cost of university research                                       46        10.9     19.6    30.4    10.9      28.3
           2      Faculty research is more oriented toward the                      47        10.6     21.3    27.7    19.1      21.3
                  needs of business
           3      A change in universities' receptivity to licensing                49        29.2     27.1    20.8    10.4      12.5
                  and/or research agreements
           4      A change in our unit's reliance on external R&D                   49        20.8     37.5    10.4    14.6      16.7
           5      A change in the amount of basic research                          49        18.4     22.4    20.4    14.3      24.5
                  conducted by our unit
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of question 1&2, 1&5, 2&4, 2&5, 3&4, and 3&5.

     Table 2
     When university technologies are licensed-in, approximately what percentage of the time is the
     purpose (percentages need not sum to 100%)
       Question    # Resp.        Mean Wgt. Mean
           1           96         42.6        51.5     new product development
           2           96         14.1         8.8     process improvement
           3           97         19.0        23.8     as a research tool
           4           94         23.8        17.5     as a platform (or core) technology
           5           94          4.4         1.4     to prevent a rival company from licensing the technology
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of question 3&4.

     Table 3
     Approximately what percentage of the time have the following been critical to the development of
     new products or processes? By critical we mean the product or process could not have been
     developed without substantial delay. (Percentages need not sum to 100%.)
       Question    # Resp.        Mean Wgt. Mean
           1          101         48.9        35.0     in-house patents
           2           98         24.4        23.1     patents licensed-in from universities
           3           95          8.2        28.5     non-patentable technology licensed-in from universities
           4           95         14.0        11.6     university sponsored research
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of questions 2&4, and 3&4.




                                                                       Page 1 of 7
Thursby Thursby




     Table 4
     For university technologies licensed-in over the last five years, approximately what percentage
     were in the following stages of development at the time the agreement was negotiated?
     (Percentages need notsum to 100%.)
       Question      # Resp.      Mean Wgt. Mean
           1           97         38.2        37.2     proof of concept (no prototype)
           2           94          36         37.3     prototype (only lab scale)
           3           90         15.3         8.7     preclinical stage
           4           89          4.7         2.1     clinical stage
           5           90          9.2        12.2     manufacturing feasibility known
           6           91          6.5        13.6     ready for practical or commercial use
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of questions 1&2, 3&5,
     3&6, 4&5, 4&6, and 5&6.

     Table 5
     When a university licensed-in technology is not successful, approximately what percentage of the
     time is the reason (percentages need not sum to 100%)
        Question     # Resp.      Mean Wgt. Mean
           1           72         46.5        48.5     failure of the technology
           2           70         26.3        30.0     lag time to market application longer than expected
           3           64         17.6        17.9     failure of the inventor to deliver know-how or cooperate
                                                       in further development
           4           68         12.6        11.1     technology would infringe on the intellectual property of others
           5           61         11.1        10.0     other
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of questions 2&3, 4&6, and 5&6.




                                                                       Page 2 of 7
Thursby Thursby




     Table 6
     Approximately what percentage of the time are the following significant enough problems
     with early stage technologies that you decide not to license them in? (Percentages need not
     sum to 100%.)
       Question     # Resp.       Mean Wgt. Mean
           1           92         50.5        51.9     unsure about the technology's contribution to the company's
                                                       market niche
           2           91         28.6        25.5     problems obtaining internal funding to support further
                                                       development
           3           86         10.1         7.4     problems obtaining external funding to support further
                                                       development
           4           90         16.3        10.5     lack of scientific expertise of in-house staff to develop the
                                                       technology
           5           85          9.6        11.2     lack of needed faculty cooperation
           6           81         12.2        16.7     other
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of questions 3&4, 3&5,
     3&6, 4&5, 4&6, and 5&6

     Table 7
     When you license-in university technology, how important are each of the following in
     identifying the technology?
     NOTE: A "don't know" response and "other" category were included.
                                                                                           Relative Frequency
                                                                                           Extremely                            Not
       Question                                                                 # Resp.    Important    2      3        4     important
            1       Journal publications                                            102       19.6     31.4   31.4     13.7      3.9
            2       Patent searches                                                 101       24.0     33.0   24.0     10.0      9.0
            3       Presentations at professional meetings                           99       13.1     37.4   31.3     16.2      2.0
            4       Marketing efforts by the university's technology                100       12.0     15.0   23.0     26.0     24.0
                    transfer office
            5       Personal contacts between our R&D staff and                     106       45.7     31.4   14.3     2.9       5.7
                    university personnel
            6       Our licensing staff routinely canvass universities               98        9.3     19.6   16.5     24.7     29.9
                    for new technologies
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of questions 1&2, 1&3, 2&3, and 4&6.




                                                                        Page 3 of 7
Thursby Thursby




     Table 8
     When you license-in technologies in the following stage of development, approximately
     what percentageof the time does the faculty inventor perform or cooperate in further
     development after the agreement? (Percentages need not sum to 100%.)
       Question    # Resp.        Mean Wgt. Mean
           1           71         55.2        39.6     proof of concept (no prototype)
           2           72         54.2        44.0     prototype (only lab scale)
           3           47         38.4        39.4     preclinical stage
           4           31         18.4        36.1     clinical stage
           5           38         15.0        25.5     manufacturing feasibility known
           6           38         14.6        24.4     ready for practical or commercial use
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of questions 1&2, 4&5, 4&6, and 5&6.

     Table 9
     When faculty input is considered important for further development of the technology,
     what percentage of the time is the reason (percentages need not sum to 100%).
       Question     # Resp.       Mean Wgt. Mean
           1           97         66.9        72.8     faculty have specialized knowledge
           2           87         16.7        12.4     faculty development cheaper than in-house
           3           88         27.5        28.3     time constraints on company research staff
           4           88         14.3         8.0     company lab specializes in late stage development
           5           94         22.7        27.7     establish working research relationship for future technologies
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of question 2&4.

     Table 10
     When faculty input is critical for further development of the technology, what percentage
     of the time does the license include (percentages need not add to 100%.)
        Question    # Resp.       Mean Wgt. Mean
            1          88         46.0        38.7   sponsored research agreements to develop the technology
            2          93         34.8        32.6   consulting contracts negotiated directly with the faculty member
            3          84         27.7        25.7   consulting contracts negotiated through the university
     Responses significantly different at 5% level.




                                                                         Page 4 of 7
Thursby Thursby




     Table 11
     When you decide not to license-in a technology in the following stages of development,
     what percentage of the time do you sign a research agreement for further development of
     the technology?
       Question    # Resp.        Mean Wgt. Mean
           1           67         21.3        18.5     proof of concept (no prototype)
           2           66         23.0        16.2     prototype (only lab scale)
           3           50          8.8        10.4     preclinical stage
           4           41          6.1         1.9     clinical stage
           5           46          6.8         6.5     manufacturing feasibility known
           6           45          6.9        13.8     ready for practical or commercial use
     Responses significantly different at 5% level with the exception of question 6&7.




                                                                  Page 5 of 7
Thursby Thursby




     Table 12     Sponsored Research & License Agreements: All Respondents

     Part A.
                Sponsored Agreement           License Agreement
                 Coef. t-statistic               Coef.    t-statistic
     PROTO         1.289      0.26                 -3.756      -1.05          *** Significant at the 1% level
     PRECLIN     -21.344     -3.63 ***            -16.083      -3.60    ***   ** Significant at the 5% level
     CLINICAL    -45.179     -5.27 ***            -22.945      -3.15    ***   * Significant at the 10% level
     MANUF       -39.832     -5.49 ***            -14.733      -2.35    **
     READY       -44.489     -5.73 ***            -13.442      -2.12    **
     PLATFORM      0.539      3.00 ***              0.207       1.39
     PROCESS       0.914      4.22 ***              0.337       1.90    *
     TOOL         -0.168     -0.91                 -0.011      -0.07
     PRODUCT      -0.565     -4.10 ***              0.040       0.27
     EMP100       -6.509     -0.85                 23.052       3.28    ***
     EMP100-500   12.026      1.07                  5.113       0.65
     PHARMA        9.122      1.26                 14.362       1.94    *
     MED           0.678      0.10                 16.831       2.76    ***
     BASIC        41.017      4.98 ***              7.423       0.87
     CONTACTS    -11.227     -1.38                 24.277       3.08    ***

     Part B.
     LATE          -34.281     -8.47   ***        -14.492      -4.43    ***
     PLATFORM        0.506      2.91   ***          0.201       1.31
     PROCESS         0.477      2.41   **           0.331       1.73    *
     TOOL            0.057      0.30               -0.016      -0.10
     PRODUCT        -0.560     -3.79   ***          0.025       0.17
     EMP100        -12.879     -1.79   *           23.721       3.33    ***
     EMP100-500      6.700      0.68                4.997       0.54
     MEDICAL         6.085      1.03               16.017       2.64    ***
     BASIC          38.457      4.63   ***          8.699       1.04
     CONTACTS       -2.143     -0.26               23.288       1.75    *




                                                                Page 6 of 7
Thursby Thursby




     Table 13     Sponsored Research & License Agreements: Pharma and Med only

     Part A.
                Sponsored Agreement           License Agreement
                 Coef. t-statistic               Coef.    t-statistic
     PROTO        -3.966     -0.75                 -3.238      -0.69             *** Significant at the 1% level
     PRECLIN     -26.040     -4.34 ***            -17.787      -3.25    ***      ** Significant at the 5% level
     CLINICAL    -44.897     -5.06 ***            -26.972      -2.70    ***      * Significant at the 10% level
     MANUF       -54.373     -6.29 ***            -34.017      -2.93    ***
     READY       -51.572     -5.53 ***            -23.704      -2.33    **
     PLATFORM      0.434      2.50 **               0.340       1.74    *
     PROCESS      -0.443     -1.35                  0.120       0.29
     TOOL         -0.063     -0.37                 -0.164      -0.87
     PRODUCT      -0.662     -4.82 ***              0.038       0.23
     EMP100       -4.541     -0.56                 16.916       1.55
     EMP100-500   21.421      2.44 **               3.326       0.29
     PHARMA       15.538      2.42 **               3.573       0.46
     BASIC        35.299      3.90 ***             11.343       0.97
     CONTACTS    -22.780     -2.64 ***             14.855       1.53

     Part B.
     LATE          -36.204     -7.54   ***        -19.529      -4.37 ***
     PLATFORM        0.690      3.46   ***          0.353       1.71 *
     PROCESS         1.164      2.64   ***          0.128       0.31
     TOOL            0.565      1.67   *           -0.161      -0.83
     PRODUCT         0.049      0.24                0.053       0.30
     EMP100          8.814      0.92               15.247       1.37
     EMP100-500     35.784      2.72   ***          1.078       0.09
     PHARMA         11.797      1.57                4.435       0.56
     BASIC          26.937      2.73   ***         11.077       0.96
     CONTACTS      -15.671     -1.43               16.680       1.58




                                                                Page 7 of 7
