                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ON THE WELFARE CONSEQUENCES OF THE
                     INCREASE IN INEQUALITY IN THE UNITED STATES

                                              Dirk Krueger
                                              Fabrizio Perri

                                          Working Paper 9993
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9993


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




Forthcoming in the 18th NBER Macroeconomics Annual. We thank Steven Davis , Mark Gertler, Ken
Rogoff, Kjetil Storesletten and seminar participants at UCLA and the NBER Macroannual conference for
their useful comments. Thanks the NSF for financial support under grant SE S 0004376. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Dirk Krueger and Fabrizio Perri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in Inequality in the United States
Dirk Krueger and Fabrizio Perri
NBER Working Paper No. 9993
September 2003
JEL No. D12, D31, D14, D63

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the welfare consequences of the stark increase in wage and earnings inequality in
the US over the last 30 years. Our data stems from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, which is the
only US data set that contains information on wages, hours worked, earnings and consumption for
the same cross section of US households. We first document that, while the cross-sectional variation
in wages and disposable earnings has significantly increased, the overall dispersion in consumption
has not significantly changed. We also show that households at the bottom of the consumption
distribution have increased their working hours to a larger extent than the rest of the population. In
order to assess the magnitude and the incidence of the welfare consquences of these trends we
stimate stochastic processes for earnings, consumption and leisure that are consistent with observed
cross-sectional variability (both within and between education groups) and with household mobility
patterns. In a standard lifetime utility framework, using consumption and leisure processes, as
opposed to earnings processes, results in fairly robust estimates of these consequences. We find that
about 60 percent of US households face welfare losses and that the size of these losses ranges from
one to six percent of lifetime consumption for different groups.

David Krueger                                         Fabrizio Perri
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                            New York University
3718 Locust Walk                                      Stern School of Business
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER                                              and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu                               fperri@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction

       The sharp increase in wage and earnings inequality in the US over the last 30 years is a

well-documented fact. Katz and Autor (1999) summarize the findings of a large body of empirical

research on this topic by concluding that “many researchers using a variety of data sets -including

both household and establishment surveys- have found that wage inequality and skill diﬀerentials

in earnings increased sharply in the United States from the late 1970s to the mid-1990s.” (p. 6).

The objective of this paper is to analyze the welfare consequences of this sharp change in the wage,

and the associated change in the earnings, distribution.2

       Our interest in welfare immediately forces us to look beyond the distribution of current

wages. If a households’ economic welfare depends on consumption and leisure enjoyed over that

households’ lifetime, as commonly assumed by economists, then an analysis of the welfare conse-

quences of increasing wage inequality has to determine how current wages are related to disposable

income, lifetime consumption and hours worked. First, even if current wages perfectly determine

lifetime earnings, transfers among extended family members, friends or the government may aug-

ment disposable income and thus increase consumption opportunities of families. Second, to the

extent that a significant fraction of the variations in wages, and thus income, appears to be due

to variations in its transitory component and to the extent that some forms of credit markets are

available to households, current wages or current income may not be the appropriate measure of

lifetime resources of these households. This suggests that the distribution of consumption is a better

indicator of the distribution of welfare. In addition, the distribution of consumption still does not

constitute a suﬃcient statistic for the welfare distribution, since high consumption in the light of low

wages may be realized at the expense of long working hours and thus little leisure of the household.

   2
    Our data stretches from 1972 to 2000. When we refer to the increase in inequality over the last thirty years we
mean the long-run trend within our sample period. Our data presented later show that inequality has not increased
at a uniform pace throughout the last thirty years.
The objective of our analysis is to take all these elements into consideration in evaluating the welfare

consequences of the increase in inequality in the US.3

       Our analysis is divided into two parts. In the first part we document, using data from

the Consumer Expenditure (CE) survey for the years 1972-2000, the evolution of the US cross-

sectional variability of individual wages, household total- and disposable earnings, hours worked

and consumption. We find a substantial increase in wage-, total earnings- and disposable earnings

inequality. Total household earnings inequality increases slightly less than individual wage inequality,

suggesting that longer hours might be used to partly compensate for declines in relative wages. We

also find that inequality in disposable earnings (which include government taxes and transfers)

increases by more than inequality in earnings, suggesting a reduction in the redistributive impact of

these public policies. Despite all these developments consumption inequality displays a very modest

increase.

       An important part of our analysis is the decomposition of the increase in cross-sectional

inequality in the data into an increase in (estimated as persistent) diﬀerences between groups (e.g.

college- and high-school educated households) and into an increase in (estimated as less persistent)

idiosyncratic diﬀerences within each group (e.g. employed and unemployed).

       In the second part of the paper we first estimate stochastic processes for household earnings,

consumption and hours worked that are consistent with the evolution of the empirical cross-sectional

distributions and with one year relative mobility matrices from the CE. Then a standard lifetime

utility framework, together with our estimates of the stochastic processes for the relevant variables,

is employed to deduce the magnitude of welfare losses from increased inequality. In particular, our

analysis focuses on the welfare consequences of two distinct aspects of the increase in inequality: i)

   3
    Obviously a full evaluation of the welfare consequences of inequality is a complex task that depends on a large
number of additional economic and social factors not considered here. Also, throughout the paper, we will treat
long-run growth trends in consumption and leisure, as orthogonal to changes in inequality. This imply that we will
ignore all the eﬀects that changes in inequality might have on these trends.



                                                        2
persistently higher diﬀerences between groups reduce relative mean resources of some groups and

increase them for others, ii) higher volatility withing group increases the risk faced by all groups

of the population. Both aspects potentially have large welfare impacts; the upshot of our analysis

is that (ii) significantly aﬀects the welfare of all groups, ceteris paribus, and that i) determines the

exact distribution of these welfare eﬀects, reinforcing them for groups that do poorly and mitigating

(or even oﬀsetting) them for groups that do better. Our framework allow us to quantify the size

of the welfare losses for many education/sex groups of the US population. The estimates obtained

using consumption and leisure processes are fairly robust to changes in the risk aversion parameter

and are as large as 6% of lifetime consumption for some groups.

       The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we briefly relate our study to the existing

literature. The main descriptive statistics of the CE wage-, earnings-, hours- and consumption

distributions are summarized and interpreted in Section 3. The quantitative welfare analysis based

on the empirical findings in that section is contained in Section 4 and Section 5 concludes. Further

details about the data used in the main body of the paper are discussed in the appendix.


2. Related Literature

       What are the behavioral and welfare consequences of changes in the wage structure? Several

strands of the existing literature provide partial answers to this question. First, a sizeable literature,

summarized in Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) investigates the behavioral response of labor supply

to changes in wages and employment status of the primary earner. Since we explicitly study hours

worked by several members of the household, the literature on the added worker eﬀect, which

studies the labor supply response of a spouse to the primary workers’ job loss or job displacement is

of relevance to our work. Whereas most studies find small eﬀects (see e.g. Heckman and MaCurdy

(1980) and Cullen and Gruber (2000), Stephens (2002) argues that, once the labor supply response

of spouses to an expected job loss of their partners and to permanently lower wages of partners

                                                    3
following their displacement are taken into account, this response may be quite sizeable.

          Second, if changes in the wage structure translate into changes in a households’ income

process, the question arises how these changes impact consumption. The complete consumption

insurance hypothesis has a very strong prediction for the risk sharing behavior among households.

Under this hypothesis the ratio of marginal utilities between two households is constant across

time and states, even when individuals face idiosyncratic income uncertainty.4 If preferences of

all individuals are identical and can be represented by a CRRA utility function that is separable

across time and between consumption and leisure, then, absent shifts in tastes, individual consump-

tion growth rates move in tandem with aggregate consumption growth rates. And, conditional on

aggregate consumption growth rates, individual consumption growth rates would be uncorrelated

with individual income growth rates, independent on whether income fluctuations are temporary or

permanent, expected or unexpected. As a consequence of full consumption insurance the increase

in variability of the idiosyncratic part of income (and if there is consumption insurance between

observably distinct groups, even the increase in between-group variability) in itself does not have

adverse welfare consequences. This hypothesis has been extensively tested empirically. Examples

include Altug and Miller (1990), Mace (1991), Cochrane (1991), Nelson (1994), Townsend (1994),

Attanasio and Davis (1996) and Hayashi, Altonji and Kotlikoﬀ (1996), with results that tend to

reject the full consumption insurance hypothesis.

          Full consumption insurance requires a sophisticated transfer or insurance system between

individual households (it can be achieved, e.g., with a full set of Arrow securities that pay out

contingent on individual income shocks). In contrast, the second strand of the literature studying the

map between income and consumption takes the permanent income hypothesis as point of departure,

which envisions a consumer in isolation attempting to self -insure against income fluctuations. The

  4
      See, e.g., Deaton (1992), Chapter 1.3.



                                                  4
welfare consequences of increased income instability in this paradigm depend crucially on whether

the income shocks are temporary or permanent, since transitory shocks can be easily smoothed

using (dis-)saving. Hall and Mishkin (1982) decompose income into its transitory and permanent

component and investigate whether, in fact, households smooth transitory income shocks to a higher

degree than permanent income shocks. Blundell and Preston (1999) use this idea and income and

consumption data to infer the extent to which income shocks are permanent. Finally, Heathcote et al.

(2003) build a model based on the permanent income hypothesis to assess the welfare consequences

of the recent increase in wage inequality. They use model-predicted consumption paths implied by

estimated wage processes in their welfare calculations.

        Common to both these literatures is that they interpret consumption data through the lens

of a particular economic model of financial markets (a complete set of contingent claims for the

former, a single uncontingent bond in the latter). Finally, there exists a descriptive literature that

does not take a stand on a particular economic model, but rather documents changes in income

and consumption distributions (and possibly interprets them). Examples include Cutler and Katz

(1991a,b), Johnson and Shipp (1991), Mayer and Jencks (1993), Johnson and Smeeding (1998)

and Slesnick (1993, 2001).5 In addition, the papers by Attanasio and Davis (1996), Dynarski and

Gruber (1997) and Krueger and Perri (2002) provide extensive descriptive analysis of cross-sectional

household consumption data, but then go on to interpret and analyze these data from the viewpoint

of an underlying theoretical model. Our approach will mostly follow this last descriptive tradition.

The only theory we use is a period budget constraint to organize our data and an intertemporal utility

function to evaluate the welfare consequences of changes in the wage distribution, in conjunction

with observed consumption and leisure choices from the data directly.

        Our thought experiment of assessing the welfare consequences of increased wage, income

   5
     Even policy circles and the popular press are occupied with the distribution of consumption. See Greenspan (1998)
for an example of the former, and the book by Cox and Alm (1999) for an example of the latter.


                                                          5
and consumption inequality using micro-consumption data is very similar in spirit to the exercise

conducted by Attanasio and Davis (1996). They quantify the welfare losses implied by incomplete

consumption insurance between diﬀerent education and cohort groups, relative to the complete

consumption insurance benchmark. Behind the veil of ignorance (i.e. before knowing what cohort-

education group one belongs to) agents have to be compensated by an increase of one to three percent

of consumption (at all dates, in all states) for imperfect consumption insurance. In our analysis we

study, in addition to imperfect between-group insurance, the welfare implications of within-group

consumption variability and we document how the welfare consequences are distributed across the

population (that is, we look after the veil of ignorance has been lifted). We find welfare losses

of increased consumption inequality of similar magnitude for a large part of the population and

conclude with Attanasio and Davis (1996) that these costs are two orders of magnitudes bigger than

the costs of business cycles commonly derived in the macroeconomic literature (see, e.g., Lucas,

1987).6


3. Descriptive Statistics

        Before assessing the welfare consequences of increasing wage and income inequality we first

want to document the basic facts from the CE data that link wages to the economic variables

that enter the utility function in our welfare analysis, namely consumption and leisure (that is, all

available nonsleeping time minus hours worked per member of the household). A comment about

our choice of the CE as our data source may be order at this time. For detailed information on

US individual household consumption, the CE is the only available data set. In addition, since

we want to investigate changes in the distribution of welfare associated with changes in the wage

and earnings distribution, including the within-group variation, synthetic cohort techniques that

   6
    Krusell and Smith (1999), among others, use a model with many heterogenous agents to document the distribution
of this cost across diﬀerent income and wealth classes and find that the cost of business cycles is small for almost all
population groups.



                                                           6
make it feasible to combine several diﬀerent data sets cannot be applied, since these techniques

average out all within-group (idiosyncratic) variation in the data.7 The CE does include not only

information on consumption, but also on hours worked and income, and indirectly on wages. It

has a relatively small sample size (an average of 5000 households per quarter) and a short panel

dimension (1 year), but it is the only available data set that reports household level observations

for all economic variables needed for our study.

        In order to organize the CE data we make use of a simple period-by-period budget constraint,

which reads, for an arbitrary household i, as


        cit = yit − sit


where cit are expenditures on consumption, yit is income from all sources, and sit is saving.

        We divide net income yit of the household into labor income net of taxes and capital income

net of taxes. Let wages of household member j be denoted by wijt , and hours worked by that

household member by hijt . Finally let tit denote direct labor income taxes paid by household i, and

by τ it government transfers. Therefore

                X                 X
        yit =       wijt hijt +       rikt aikt − tit + τ it = lyit − tit + τ it + kyit
                j                 k

and thus


        cit = lyit − tit + τ it + kyit − sit


where lyit is labor earnings before taxes and kyit is capital income after taxes.

        In our previous work (Krueger and Perri (2002)) we documented a significant increase in

the cross-sectional variance of after-tax labor income (henceforth disposable earnings, or simply

   7
    It needs to be ackowledged that with idiosyncratic variation a potentially important amount of measurement
error is contained in our data set, which synthetic cohort techniques tend to average out. However, as long as the
relative magnitude of these measurement errors do not change over time, our estimates of the changes in idiosyncratic
variability of wages, earnings and consumption remain informative.



                                                             7
earnings) lyit − tit + τ it , without a correspondingly large increase in the variance of consumption.

The cross-sectional variance of consumption is given by



       V ar(cit ) = V ar(yit ) + V ar(sit ) − 2Cov(yit , sit )

                      = V ar(lyit − tit + τ it ) + V ar(kyit ) + V ar(sit ) + Covariances



       Thus, in order to explore how wage inequality is related to inequality in hours worked and

to consumption inequality we have to explore how a) wage inequality is related to hours inequality

and disposable earnings inequality and b) disposable earnings inequality is related to consumption

inequality (and thus inequality in savings).


A. From Wage Inequality to Disposable Earnings Inequality

       Disposable earnings of household i at date t are given by

                J
                X
       lyit =         wijt hijt − tit + τ it
                j=1

where j indexes members of the household receiving earnings. Throughout our empirical analysis

we will restrict ourselves to households for which J ≤ 2. As Gottschalk and Moﬃtt (1994) and Katz

and Autor (1999) document and we confirm below, wage inequality has increased significantly in the

last thirty years. We also find that the inequality in wages translates in a quantitatively substantial

way into inequality of disposable earnings.


Wage Inequality

       In figure 1 we plot the standard deviation of the natural logarithm of weekly wages from

the CE, measured as the weekly earnings of the reference person8 of the household. The figure

shows a quantitatively significant increase in wage inequality, as the percentage standard deviation

  8
     The reference person in the CE is defined as the person who owns or rents the home in which the household
resides.


                                                        8
of wages increases from around 55% in the early 70s to around 67% at the end of the 90s. We select

only households that are classified as complete income respondents in the CE, that report positive

consumption expenditures for each quarter in which they are in the sample and whose reference

person is between 20 and 64 years of age and has worked at least one week in the year. Also,

in order to reduce measurement error we exclude reference persons that report unreasonably low

wages; we select only those that have a weekly wage above $67 in constant 1982 dollars (equal to

half of the 1982 minimum wage based on a 40 hour workweek). Finally, since we are interested in

the welfare impact of the increase in wage dispersion we divide the wage of the reference person by

the number of adult equivalents in the household.9

         Note that our sample includes households with low wages that are particularly vulnerable

to the increase in inequality (e.g. households whose reference person is not a full-time worker and

households with female reference persons).10 On the other hand, for households with a reference

person that never works during the year we do not observe wages; therefore these households are not

included in our wage distribution sample. Juhn, Murphy and Topel (2002) argue that the number

of such households is large and increasing throughout the 90s; they use the CPS to impute wage

data for individuals that are out of the labor force. The small sample of the CE does not allow us

to follow the same procedure. Fortunately, though, we have consumption data for these households,

and we will include them in the consumption distribution sample so that our welfare analysis will

take into account the eﬀects of long jobless spells and labor force withdrawals described by Juhn at

al. (2002).


         FIGURE 1 APPROXIMATELY HERE


         We briefly want to compare our wage inequality findings with previous studies in the litera-

  9
      The number of adult equivalents is computed using the Census equivalence scale.
 10
      This sample selection strategy was suggested to us by our discussant Steve Davis.


                                                           9
ture, because some authors (for example Cutler and Katz, 1991b) have questioned the reliability of

CE wage and income data. In order to do so we compute inequality measures in the CE for the wage

distribution of male reference persons who work at least 40 weeks for at least 35 hours per week,

the same selection criteria used by Katz and Autor (1999) to compute wage inequality measures for

the Current Population Survey (CPS) and by Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2003) for the

Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).

        In figure 2 we report the 90% -10% diﬀerential for male weekly log-wages in the CE and the

CPS (see figure 4 by Katz and Autor, 1999). Notice that both timing and magnitude of the increase

in inequality in the two samples are quite comparable. In figure 3 we compare the increase in the

standard deviation of log wages in our sample with the increase in the same measure in the CPS

sample (Katz and Autor (1999) table 1) and the PSID sample (Heathcote and al. (2003), table

2).11 The figure confirms that both timing and the magnitude of the increase in wage inequality are

similar across the three data sets.12


        FIGURES 2 AND 3 APPROXIMATELY HERE



Earnings Inequality

        Wage inequality may be accentuated or mitigated by the endogenous labor supply decisions

of the members of the household. A decline in the primary earners’ wage may induce other members

of the households to start working or to work longer hours (the added worker eﬀect). On the other

hand, in the face of temporarily low wages the primary wage earner may decide to intertemporally

substitute and work less today and more in the future when wages have recovered. The map between

  11
      All the series in figures 2 and 3 are based on wages per person and not on per adult equivalent wages (as the series
in figure 1).
   12
      Katz and Autor only report the standard deviation of log-wages for 5 years. The level of the standard deviations
is very similar in the CE and CPS while it is slightly higher in the PSID (for example in 1987 the standard deviation
of log wages is 0.57 in the CE, 0.579 in the CPS, and 0.601 in the PSID). Small diﬀerences in levels are not surprising
as levels are aﬀected by the diﬀerent top-coding thresholds in the data sets and by the potentially diﬀerent extent of
measurement error.


                                                           10
wage and labor income inequality is therefore determined by the relative importance of these eﬀects.

Furthermore, changes in taxes and transfers can reduce or magnify the eﬀect of changes in wages on
                                                                                         P
disposable earnings. In figure 4 we report inequality in total household earnings,          j   wijt hijt , and
                                    P
of disposable household earnings,     j   wijt hijt − tit + τ it . The sample we select is exactly the same

as the one chosen to compute wage inequality; as before we divide every variable by the number of

adult equivalent members of the household.


       FIGURE 4 APPROXIMATELY HERE


       The graph shows that total earnings inequality increases by a slightly smaller amount than

wage inequality, consistent with moderate responses of labor supply to wage changes. Notice also

that, not surprisingly, given the progressivity of the government tax and transfer system, disposable

earnings inequality is significantly lower than inequality in total earnings. It is interesting, however,

that the gap between total earnings and disposable earnings inequality has declined over time. This

suggests that the government tax and transfer system may have become less progressive over our

sample period, which caused part of the increase in disposable earnings inequality.

       Finally, for the purpose of this paper it is important to understand whether the increase in

earnings inequality stems from an increase in between- or within-group diﬀerences. The empirical

decomposition we employ is simple and widely used (see Katz and Autor, 1999). To control for

changes in the age race composition of the population we first regress each cross-section of the raw

data of disposable earnings on a constant, a quartic in the age of the household reference person and

a race dummy. The cross section of the residuals is denoted by yt = {ln yit }i∈I . By construction yt

has zero cross-sectional mean for every t and each observation is interpreted as percentage deviations

of earnings of household i from the average earning of a household of same age and same race.
                                                                         g
       We then decompose each earning observation in a into a component yit due to observables



                                                     11
                                                                                    d
(education and sex) and a part due to unobservable, purely idiosyncratic variation yit

                      g          d
       ln(yit ) = ln(yit ) + ln(yit )

               g d 13
so that yit = yit yit . We chose education and sex to define groups, since the increase of the skill

premium and the decline of the gender gap are the two most important determinants of the changes

of between-group earnings inequality in the last 30 years. We then assume that the unobservable

idiosyncratic component of earnings is orthogonal to the observable, common-group component of

earnings, so that we can find it by regressing ln(yit ) on the years of education of the household

reference person and sex dummies. For each household observation ln(yit ) we therefore obtain two
                                                                 g                         d ). To
new observations, the predicted (by education and sex) value ln(yit ) and the residual ln(yit
                                                                                               g
understand their interpretation consider, for example, household i that has ln yit = −0.4, ln(yit )=
             g
−0.2 and ln(yit ) = −0.2; this means that this household has earnings 40% below the average

earnings of an household with the same age and same race; half of this diﬀerence is explained by its

education/sex characteristic and the other half is purely idiosyncratic variation.
                 g
       From {ln(yit )} we compute cross-sectional “between-group” variances σ 2gt , and from {ln(yit
                                                                                                  d )}


cross-sectional idiosyncratic variances σ 2dt . This procedure yields time series {σ 2gt , σ 2dt }t∈T of vari-

ances satisfying


(1)    σ 2yt = σ 2gt + σ 2dt .


for our sample period T .

       Figure 5 shows the trends in between- and within-group earnings standard deviations. Note

that within-group inequality accounts for a larger fraction of total inequality but that both the

between- and the within-group component display a significant increase. Within-group inequality

  13
    We decompose the logarithm of earnings since the standard deviation of the log of a variable has a cardinal
interpretation, which makes our findings below easier to evaluate.




                                                      12
increases throughout the sample while between-group inequality slightly declines in the 70s (reflect-

ing a reduction in the college premium) but increases significantly in the 80s and 90s. The patterns

of both inequality measures from the CE are again similar to those from the CPS and the Census

data described by Katz and Autor (1999).


       FIGURE 5 APPROXIMATELY HERE



B. Consumption and Hours Inequality

       Our focus on welfare now leads us to investigate the evolution of the variables more directly

connected to the lifetime utility of households, namely consumption and leisure.


Consumption Inequality

       Figure 6 displays the trend in disposable earnings inequality (from figure 5), together with

two measures of consumption inequality. Both measures are standard deviations of household per

adult equivalent nondurable consumption plus imputed services from durables (this is the definition

of consumption used throughout the paper; see the appendix and Krueger and Perri (2002) for de-

tails about the construction of the consumption data). The first measure (labeled the positive wage

sample) is computed using the same sample selection criterion we use for wage and earnings inequal-

ity and does not include households with reference persons that earn no labor income. The second

measure (which we label full sample) includes all household that are complete income respondents,

have a reference person between the age of 20 and 64 and report positive consumption. Notice that

the second sample is larger than the first (about 15% larger) and that it includes households whose

reference person has left the labor force or is suﬀering a long unemployment spell. The picture shows

that although the level of inequality diﬀers across the two samples, neither series of consumption

inequality displays an increase comparable to the one registered for disposable earnings inequality.

In figure 7 we plot the average per adult equivalent consumption of the household in the bottom,

                                                 13
middle and top quintile of the disposable earnings distribution (relative to average consumption in

that year).14


        FIGURES 6 and 7 APPROXIMATELY HERE


        Both pictures confirm and extend the findings of Krueger and Perri (2002). During a period

of strongly widening wage and earnings dispersion there has been surprisingly little increase in

consumption inequality.15 In particular, households at the bottom of the earnings distribution have

experienced only a mild reduction in their relative consumption, even though their relative earnings

have declined substantially.


        FIGURE 8 APPROXIMATELY HERE


        Note that even though total consumption inequality has increased only by a small amount,

this phenomenon is a result of two oﬀsetting trends. If we decompose -as we did for earnings- con-

sumption inequality into within- and between-group inequality16 , figure 8 shows that the between-

group component has increased substantially, by about the same magnitude as the increase in

between-group earnings inequality. In stark contrast to earnings, within-group consumption in-

equality has, in fact, slightly declined. We draw two lessons from this decomposition, which will be

   14
      Consumption by earnings quintile is computed using the sample of all households that report positive consumption
(full sample). If we restrict the sample to households with reference person working at least one week, consumption
by quintiles displays the same constant pattern.
   15
      Kreueger and Perri (2002) document that this fact is robust to various definition of consumption expenditures. It
is worth mentioning that our results are based on quarterly consumption expenditures reported in the CE interview
survey. Attanasio (2002) presents some results from the CE Diary survey (that is the bi-weekly survey of expenditure
data for items purchased on a daily or weekly basis) showing increasing consumption inequality. Further work should
be done to estabilish the exact source of the discrepancy between the two surveys. Another important concern with
the CE consumption data is that their total does not matches up with the NIPA total. Slesnick (2001) discuss some
possible explanations for this phenomenon but concludes that a large part of the discrepancy between CE and NIPA
is still unexplained.
   16
      We do the decomposition exactly as for income. We first control for changes in the age/race structure of the
population by regressing the log of non durable consumption plus services from durables on a quartic polynomial
in the age of the reference person and on a dummy for his/her race. We then regress the residuals on the years of
education and sex of the reference person of the household. The sample used consists of all households that report
positive consumption.




                                                          14
crucial for interpreting our welfare calculations below. First, it is not true, as one may think from

simply looking at overall consumption inequality, that the increase in earnings inequality had no

impact on consumption inequality. Rather, it suggests that the increase in between-group earnings

inequality (i.e. the increase in the skill premium) translates almost one to one into an increase of

consumption inequality. Since between-group inequality tends to be highly persistent, it is likely

to have important welfare consequences.17 Second, the fact that within-group disposable earnings

inequality has increased while within-group consumption inequality has not indicates that the in-

crease in within-group earnings variations has been eﬀectively smoothed by households, possibly

through some form of credit markets.18


Hours Inequality

        Since a households’ lifetime utility depends on both the consumption and leisure it enjoys,

the number of hours worked by members of the household, by determining the hours available for

leisure, is an important determinant of welfare. Therefore, in this section we present some evidence

on how the distribution of hours worked across American households has changed. In figure 9 we

plot the percentage standard deviation of household yearly hours worked (per adult), together with

the standard deviation of wages of the reference person of the household.19


        FIGURE 9 APPROXIMATELY HERE


        We observe that, despite the increase in wage dispersion, the variability in hours worked

shows a moderate decline. If hours and consumption were uncorrelated, abstracting from any

  17
     This is a point that has been highlighted by Attanasio and Davis (1996). In the second part we will provide an
estimate of the persistence of between-group diﬀerences.
  18
     Blundell and Preston, 1999, Heathcote et al. (2003) and Krueger and Perri (2002) investigate the role of credit
markets in generating this divergence between income and consumption inequality in detail.
  19
     We use the same sample we used for the wage and earnings distribution. We construct per-person hours worked
by households in the following way: if a household consists of a single adult member, its hours worked are the hours
worked in a year by that adult, and if the household consists of (at least) two adult members, average hours worked
by the household are measured as total hours worked by both members, divided by 2.



                                                        15
change in their trends, the reduction in hours dispersion would imply welfare gains. However, figure

10 suggests that hours and consumption are not uncorrelated. It plots the number of per-person

yearly hours worked for all households in our sample and for households in diﬀerent quintiles of the

consumption distribution.


        FIGURE 10 APPROXIMATELY HERE


        Apart from the strong average increase in hours worked, whose causes and consequences we

will not analyze here20 , the picture reveals two other facts. First, households with high consumption

work more hours; second, high consumption households have increased their hours by less than low

consumption households. For example, in 1972-73, on average households in the bottom quintile of

the consumption distribution worked 28% less than households in the top quintile. In 1999-2000 the

same ratio has fallen to 17%. In other words, figure 10 suggests a positive, but falling correlation

between consumption and hours worked.

        Figure 11 plots the correlation between hours and consumption (total, between-group com-

ponent and within-group component); The picture indeed shows a significant decline over time in

the correlation between hours and consumption. This declining positive correlation explains the fall

in hours variability and, together with constant consumption inequality, can generate negative wel-

fare eﬀects for low-consumption households, even if their relative consumption may not fall. More

concretely, in the 70s the high correlation between consumption and hours implied that households

with low consumption were compensated with high leisure. In the 90s the reduction in this correla-

tion implies that households with relatively low consumption do not enjoy as much leisure as they

used to, and thus face potentially substantial welfare losses from this change over time. We will

quantify the welfare consequences from a declining correlation in consumption and hours worked in

  20
   Inspection of the CE data immediately reveals that most of the average increase in hours worked is due to increased
female labor force participation.


                                                         16
the section containing our welfare calculations below.


       FIGURE 11 APPROXIMATELY HERE


C. Summary

       To summarize, the CE data suggest that the substantial increase in wage inequality has

caused an increase in household earnings inequality of similar magnitude. The tax and transfer

system has not mitigated this increase, so that it appears equally strong in disposable earnings.

The consumption distribution data, on the other hand, suggest that low consumption households

do almost as well (relatively to the mean) in the late 90s as they did in the 70s.

       This, however, does not necessarily imply that the welfare eﬀects of the increase in inequality

are negligible. A closer investigation of consumption inequality reveals that households that suf-

fer permanent relative income falls (e.g. households with little education) experience substantial

declines in relative consumption, with associated important welfare consequences.

       In addition, the declining trend in the consumption-hours-worked correlation suggests that

one way through which low-consumption household maintain their relative consumption is by work-

ing longer hours, again with implied welfare losses. In the next section of the paper we will try to

quantify the size and exact distribution of these welfare eﬀects.


4. Welfare Consequences of Increased Inequality

       What are the welfare consequences of the trends in wage, income and consumption inequality

documented in the last section? In order to explicitly answer these question we now have to take a

stand on how households value consumption and leisure, and we have to model, in a statistical or

theoretical way, how a households’ consumption and leisure processes changed as the variability of

wages and earnings changed. The second step can be carried out in (at least) two diﬀerent ways.

Either one takes a stand on a particular theoretical model, feeds as input into the model two diﬀerent


                                                 17
earnings processes estimated from data (one reflecting increased earnings inequality), computes the

corresponding consumption and labor supply allocations implied by the model, and then uses these

allocations to compute the welfare gain/loss distribution from the change in the earnings (or wage)

process.21 Alternatively one can specify or estimate a statistical model for consumption and labor

supply (or leisure). The parameters governing these processes are allowed to be time-dependent, so

that the processes reflect the changes in the cross-sectional distribution of consumption and hours

worked documented in the last section of the paper. We will adopt the second approach in this

paper.

         We now first discuss our exact estimation strategy, then we explain how we use our estimation

results to answer the welfare question posed at the beginning of the paper, and finally we present

our results.


A. Modelling Household Earnings, Consumption and Leisure Processes

         To carry our welfare analysis we need stochastic processes for disposable earnings, consump-

tion and for leisure. Take an arbitrary variable of interest from the last section, for concreteness

                                                                                                    d)
disposable earnings. In the empirical analysis we discussed how each pre-filtered cross section ln(yit

                                         d ) and a within-group part ln(y g ).
can be decomposed in a between-group ln(yit                              it

         In this section we specify time series processes for both components of earnings. In particular,

                        d ) and ln(y g ) follow finite state Markov chains (of cardinality N ) with
we assume that both ln(yit          it

possibly time-varying states Ytd and Ytg and with time-invariant22 transition matrices π d , π g .

         The states {Ytg }t∈T are determined by setting Ytg (i) equal to the midpoint of the i-th quantile
            g
of the {ln(yit )}-sample for that period. By construction our stochastic process matches, for every t,

  21
    The studies by Krueger and Perri (2002) and Heathcote et al. (2003) take this approach.
  22
    In principle our procedure could be used to estimate time-varying transition matrices. We have experimented
with this for the time period 1984-2000 and found that the transition matrices display very little time variation. We
therefore decided to use time-independent transition matrices in our analysis.




                                                         18
                                    g
N (N − 1)/2 quantile ratios of {ln(yit )}, its mean (by construction equal to 0), but not necessarily

its variance.23 A similar construction yields the states {Ytd }t∈T . Note that, because of the initial

pre-filtering, there is no aggregate growth in the logs of any of our variables (i.e. Ei (ln xit ) = 0,

for every x and every t), which, in particular, removes aggregate consumption growth and growth

in average hours worked. The welfare conclusions presented below have to be interpreted with this

remark in mind, which we will follow up on in the conclusion.

        Finally, we use the panel dimension of the CE to estimate Markov transition matrices for

the variables of interest, which will embody the persistence properties of our stochastic processes.
                          g
For all observations {ln(yit )}i,t we group households into N relative classes delimited by N − 1

uniformly spaced, time dependent quantiles: the first class is composed by the bottom 1/N % of the

distribution in that quarter for that variable, the second class by the following 1/N % etc. With
                                            g
this construction the lowest class for {ln yit } is interpreted as the group of the households for which

earnings explained by observables (sex and education) is lowest (i.e. households with female head

and low education levels). We then search for all households for which we have observations in two

consecutive periods and compute which relative class they belong to in the second period.24 After

repeating this procedure for every period in the sample the probability π gij of transiting from class

i to class j is computed as the total number of households transiting from i to j, divided by the

total number of households starting in class i for the entire sample.25 Using the same procedure

                    d )} yields a transition matrix π d . As a result of our estimation procedure we
for the sample {ln(yit

  23
     We find, however, that the ratio between the variance implied by the estimated process and the variance in the
data is quite high (about 70%) and almost constant over time. It would have been easy to set the states of our
stochastic process to exactly match the variance in the data but we opted to match quantile ratios of the data because
of our interest in the distribution of welfare losses. Our procedure is similar in spirit to the one used by Tauchen and
Hussey (1991).
  24
     More precisely, a period is roughly 3 quarters, as we use data from the 2nd and 5th interview of a household in
the CEX to determine transitions. This timing comes closest to our notion of a period length of one year. Second,
the only useful income observations for a household are contained in these interviews..
  25
     Transitions of households between “groups”, are rare and occur only if there are large swings in the returns to
education, in the wage gender gap or (the dominating reason) if households change sex or the education of their
reference person (through death, marriage or divorce).



                                                          19
obtain Markov processes for the group-specific as well as within-group components of earnings; we

follow exactly the same procedures to construct time series processes for household consumption.

In table 1 we report a summary measure of the persistence properties of the various processes we

estimate. Note that the processes for between-group diﬀerences are significantly more persistent

than the processes for within-group diﬀerences, so that changes in between-group inequality are

more likely to have larger welfare eﬀects.

         For hours worked we find that between-group inequality explains only a very small fraction

of total variance (less than 0.5%), so the process for hours does not distinguish between the two

components. In our welfare analysis we will also study the case in which welfare is jointly determined

by household consumption and hours worked. For this case we specify a joint stochastic process

for between-group consumption, within-group consumption and hours worked. Since the correlation

between hours and between-group consumption is fairly constant and close to 0 (see figure 11 above)

we assume that hours and between-group consumption are uncorrelated. However, we specify the

parameters of the joint Markov chain for hours and within-group consumption in such a way that

the correlation between the two variables in the model exactly matches the falling cross sectional

correlation between the two variables in the data as reported in figure 11.          26 .


         For short, denote the estimated stochastic processes for earnings, consumption and hours

by (Y, C, H) and the processes associated with no change in wage inequality (i.e. the process with

states constant at their 1972 values) by (Ŷ , L̂, Ĥ). These are the necessary ingredients for the welfare

calculations which we describe next.


B. Calculating the Welfare Consequences

         We assume that households value streams of consumption ct and leisure lt = 1 − ht (where

ht are hours worked per household member, as a fraction of total non-sleeping time) according to

 26
      The complete results of our estimation procedure are available upon request.


                                                          20
the lifetime utility function

                          ∞
                          X
          U (C, L) = E          β t u(ct , lt ).
                          t=0

We restrict the period utility function u to lie in the parametric class
                      
                      
                                [cα l1−α ]
                                              1−σ
                      
                                                    for σ 6= 1
                                      1−σ
          u(c, l) =
                      
                      
                      
                       α ln(c) + (1 − α) ln(l) for σ = 1

where (α, β, σ) are preference parameters that govern the relative importance of consumption relative

to leisure, time discounting and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, respectively.27 Nested

in this formulation are utility functions that depend on consumption alone (α = 1).

          Suppose that all economic variables follow Markov processes as estimated above, then we can

write28

                                           £                  ¤
(2)       V (t, c, l) = u(c, l) + βE V (t + 1, c0 , l0 )|(c, l)


Note that, conditional on knowing the function V the conditional expectation can be evaluated since

the stochastic processes for consumption and leisure have Markov structure. Also note that for an

arbitrary individual with current consumption and leisure (c, l), expected lifetime utility is given

by V (t, c, l), which obviously depends on the time-varying stochastic process for consumption and

leisure. Further note that this Bellman equation does not involve any maximization.

          In particular, let V (c, l) be the value function associated with the estimated stochastic

processes and let V̂ (c, l) denote the value function associated with the stochastic processes if wage

inequality had not increased (and thus the cross-sectional variances (σ 2dt , σ 2gt ) had remained the

   27
      Note that these utility functions have unit elasticity between consumption and leisure. With this class of utility
functions our welfare results are invariant to long-run deterministic average consumption growth.
   28
      This formulation implicitly assumes that households are infinitely lived. With finite lives age becomes an additional
state variable. The welfare consequences for a person living through the increase in inequality for only a finite number
of periods is roughly proportional to the numbers reported below (such a household faces the same stochastic processes
as our model households, simply for less periods). The proportionality factor is less than one and the smaller the
smaller the remaining lifetime of a household.




                                                             21
same).29 More precisely, V̂ is computed by employing the same transition matrices as for V, but

under the assumption that the states of the Markov chains remain at their estimated 1972 values

forever, rather than change over time, in the way estimated above.

       The welfare consequences of an agent with current state (c, l) in 1972 (the distribution of

which we observe in our cross-sectional data set) of the ensuing increase in wage inequality in the

future is thus given by

                    °                       °
                    °                       °
       W(c, l) = °V (c, l) − V̂ (c, l)°


where k.k is a particular metric. We let W(c, l) equal the uniform percentage increase of consumption

in each state of the world needed to make a household indiﬀerent between the stochastic processes

with more variability and the ones without, keeping leisure constant. What we want to document

is the distribution of W(c, l), that is, the distribution of the welfare consequences of the increase in

wage inequality.


C. Results
An Upper Bound

       Suppose that households do not have access to any savings technology and do not value

leisure,30 Then consumption equals to labor earnings y and equation (2) becomes (ignoring irrelevant

constants and suppressing time indexation)

                                 £          ¤
       V (y) = u(y) + βE V (y0 )|y


or more explicitly
                         h       i1−σ
                         yg yd                  h                      i
       V (yg , y d ) =                  + βE V (yg0 , yd0 )|yg , y d
                             1−σ
  29
    We suppress the time index t = 1972.
  30
    The same results are obtained if households do not change their labor supply or if consumption and leisure are
separable in the utility function.




                                                              22
and a similar definition for V̂ (yg , y d ) applies. The welfare criterion is given by


                                    °                                    °
                                    °                                    °
           W(yg , y d ) = °V (yg , y d ) − V̂ (y g , yd )°
                                    "                     #    1
                                        V̂ (y g , y d )       1−σ
                            =                                       −1
                                        V (y g , y d )


           The number W(y g , yd ) gives the percentage increase in consumption (or earnings) at the new,

more unequal earnings process, at each contingency, necessary to make an agent with arbitrary

current earnings y = (yg , y d ) indiﬀerent between the old and the new wage (and thus earnings)

process.31 In order to compute this number three steps have to be carried out


   1. Solve for the function V and V̂ using standard value function iteration, given time series

         processes Y and Ŷ


   2. Draw arbitrary y = (y g , y d ) from the initial earnings distribution


   3. Evaluate W(yg , y d )


           Evidently steps 2. and 3. can be easily carried out for all y in the initial distribution of

earnings, and thus the distribution of welfare consequences can be derived. These numbers provide

an upper bound for the welfare consequences from increased earnings inequality because agents are

assumed not to be able to smooth consumption via savings responses.


Example 1. A simple example illustrates this basic procedure. Suppose that before 1972 earnings

followed the simple continuous-state white noise process


           ln(y0 ) = µ̂ + ε̂

  31
       For σ = 1, one can show that the welfare criterion as defined above is given by
                                £                                            ¤
           W(y g , y d ) = exp (1 − β)(V̂ (y g , y d ) − V (y g , y d )) − 1




                                                                                 23
where ε̂ ∼ N (0, σ̂ 2ε ), and after 1972 the process changes to


         ln(y0 ) = µ + ε


with ε ∼ N (0, σ 2ε ), σ 2ε = γ σ̂ 2ε with γ > 1 and

                 1
         µ = µ̂ − σ̂ 2ε (γ − 1) < µ̂
                 2

Note that the adjustment of the mean of log-earnings is required for the level of earnings to have

the same mean before and after the change in its variance. For period utility being logarithmic, the

value function V solves
                              Z
                                   ¡     ¢
         V (y) = log(y) + β       V eµ+ε dΦ(ε)


where Φ is the normal cdf with variance σ 2ε = γ σ̂ 2ε . The function V̂ solves the same equation, with

Φ replaced by Φ̂, the normal cdf with variance σ̂ 2ε . A simple guess-and-verify strategy shows that


                           β
         V (y) = ln(y) +      µ
                          1−β
                           β
         V̂ (y) = ln(y) +     µ̂ > V (y)
                          1−β


In particular, if µ̂ = 0 (which simply normalizes mean earnings), then



         W(y) = W = exp (β(µ̂ − µ)) − 1
                           µ ¶   ³             ´
                            β
                 = exp        exp σ̂ 2ε (γ − 1) − 1 > 0
                            2


and for this particular example the welfare losses from increased earnings inequality are a) indepen-

dent of an agents’ current earnings and b) proportional to the increase of the variance of log-earnings

σ̂ 2ε (γ − 1).


         For a general stochastic earnings process and period utility function, of course, the value

function evidently cannot be solved for by guess-and-verify methods and has to be computed nu-

                                                       24
merically.32 As a benchmark an annual time discount rate of 4%. and logarithmic utility are assumed.

We then document how our welfare conclusions depend on the degree of risk aversion of households

and discuss the role of the time discount rate for our results.


        FIGURE 12 APPROXIMATELY HERE


        In figure 12a we plot the welfare losses implied by our estimated income processes from the

CE. Each individual, in 1972, is characterized by (y g , y d ) ∈ (Y g , Y d ), where both Y g and Y d have

                                                                                                           1
cardinality 9. Thus there are 81 distinct earnings classes, with equal population mass                     81 .   On the

x-axis we plot idiosyncratic earnings y d , as a fraction of average (idiosyncratic) earnings, and each of

the separate 9 lines corresponds to one group-specific earnings level y g . The y-axis shows the welfare

losses, in percent consumption equivalent variation, implied by the increase in earnings inequality,

as estimated by our processes.

        We observe that the welfare losses implied by the increase in earnings inequality are po-

tentially substantial, amounting to as much as 2% of consumption or more for more than half of

the population, namely the earnings-poor households in 1972. The welfare losses are declining (and

substantially so) as one moves up the group-specific earnings distribution, to the extent that the

highest two earnings groups (22% of the population) benefit from the increase in earnings inequal-

ity.33 Welfare losses (or gains) are fairly uniform in the idiosyncratic income state yd a household

starts with in 1972.

        These findings can be interpreted as follows. The aggregate statistics show an increase in

inequality in the last thirty years. An individual household in 1972 experiences two events: fu-

ture changes in its expected mean earnings and more earnings risk in the future. Conditional on

  32
     Given the discrete nature of the income process this can be done quickly and with very high precision, using a
standard value function iteration algorithm.
  33
     Note that, when we refer to welfare losses from inequality from now on for short, it is understood that individuals
are aﬀected directly only by changes in their relative earnings (and higher earnings uncertainty in the future), rather
than by the change in the aggregate statistics per se.


                                                          25
remaining in the same earnings class, high-earnings class households will enjoy increasing relative

earnings, and low-earning classes declining relative earnings. This is true for both the group- as

well as the idiosyncratic component of earnings. From the figure we observe, however, that the

welfare losses diﬀer substantially by groups, but are fairly uniform with respect to the idiosyncratic

earnings component. This diﬀerence is explained by the much higher persistence of the between-

group earnings process, compared to the idiosyncratic process, documented in the last section. As

a rough approximation, suppose that the group-earnings transition matrix is the identity matrix

(so that all agents with probability one stay in their earnings group) and the idiosyncratic earnings

process is iid over time, then welfare losses should vary greatly by group (because relative group

earnings have diverged over time) but should be uniform across idiosyncratic states, as everybody

is equally negatively aﬀected by the higher idiosyncratic earnings uncertainty. Figure 12 indicates

that this first approximation provides fairly accurate intuition for the computed welfare numbers.

The negative (uniform) impact of higher idiosyncratic uncertainty also explains why almost the

entire population suﬀers welfare losses from increased earnings inequality, even though half of the

population experiences increases in relative earnings.

       From the previous discussion one would expect the welfare losses from increasing earnings

inequality to rise with risk aversion of the household, since higher idiosyncratic uncertainty is disliked

more severely. That this is indeed the case is demonstrated by figure 12b, which assumes a coeﬃcient

of relative risk aversion of σ = 2. Now the welfare losses become as high as 8% of consumption,

and despite significant expected earnings increases even the highest earnings group suﬀers welfare

losses of about 2% due to the increase in future earnings (and thus, by construction, consumption)

variability. To summarize, when judged from earnings data for a degree of risk aversion of σ = 2,

commonly assumed in the macro and public finance literature, all groups of the population suﬀer

welfare losses from increased earnings instability that more than outweigh the increase in relative


                                                   26
incomes experienced by the highest earnings groups.

        Before documenting how our results change if one uses consumption rather than earnings

data for our welfare analysis, a brief discussion of the role of the time discount factor is in order.

Our estimated transition matrices (in particular for the group component) are persistent, but not

perfectly persistent, so that the unconditional probability of a household leaving her 1972 earnings

state increases with time. With sizeable time discounting of 4% per year the experienced welfare

losses are aﬀected by events along the transition period 1972−2000 (the increase in earnings inequal-

ity occurs gradually over this time period) and vary crucially with initial earnings states, because

earnings realizations in the early years of the transition largely determine welfare. This is what

Figure 12 shows. If one were to choose very low time discounting (none in the limit), then house-

holds’ welfare losses are determined largely (completely in the limit), by the change in the steady

state earnings distribution, and would neither depend on a households’ initial earnings position nor

the transition path.34 Since we want to document the distribution of welfare losses across diﬀerent

population groups we chose a time discount rate of 4% that attributes substantial importance to

initial conditions and transition paths. As comparison, a time discount rate of 0.05% yields welfare

losses, roughly uniform across the population, of about 1.4% for σ = 1 and 10.5% for σ = 2.


The Eﬀects of Consumption Smoothing

        The previous section documented potentially large welfare costs of increased earnings inequal-

ity, under the assumption that households have no ability to intertemporally smooth consumption,

either via self-insurance and/or formal and informal insurance arrangements. Calculations like these

often form the explicit or implicit basis for concern expressed about the increase in inequality by

researchers and policy makers.

  34
    One may interpret this latter thought experiment and welfare numbers as household living behind the veil of
ignorance; they don’t know which income state they will be born into in the old, pre-1972 steady state and they don’t
know in which income state they end up in the new, post-2000 steady state.



                                                         27
        As argued in the introduction, basing welfare evaluations of increased inequality on consump-

tion data directly takes the mitigating eﬀects of intertemporal smoothing opportunities, government

transfer programs and explicit or implicit insurance programs (such as transfers among members of

the extended family) into account. Therefore in this subsection we repeat our previous analysis, but

now use estimated consumption processes from the CE instead of earnings processes. The Bellman

equation becomes

                             £          ¤
(3)     V (c) = u(c) + βE V (c0 )|(c)


which is as easily solved as in the previous subsection, under the maintained assumption that the

estimated stochastic consumption processes have Markov structure.

        Again we start with the benchmark case of logarithmic utility and plot the welfare losses from

increased consumption inequality in Figure 12c. Qualitatively the welfare consequences are similar to

the previous section: to a large part the consumption group to which a household belongs determines

whether it ends up as a looser or winner of the increase in inequality; again the welfare consequences

are fairly uniform across idiosyncratic consumption states. Quantitatively, however, some crucial

diﬀerences to the results based on earnings observations emerge. The highest welfare losses now

amount to slightly more than 5% of consumption, but only for the consumption-poorest 10% of the

population.35 Note that, while maximal welfare losses from increased inequality when measured

with consumption data are even higher than with earnings, a much larger fraction of the population

(roughly 45%) now benefits suﬃciently from the increase in relative group consumption to experience

welfare gains from increased consumption inequality. This diﬀerential finding is due to the fact that

the variability of the idiosyncratic component of consumption has remained relatively constant over

  35
    These high losses of the lowest consumption group, compared to the more moderate losses of the lowest earnings
group documented above are largely due to timing of the transition, coupled with sizeable time-discounting: relative
consumption for the lowest group drops early on and then stays constant, whereas relative earnings for the lowest
group declines most dramatically only at the end of the 1972-2000 transition period.




                                                        28
time, very much in contrast to that of earnings. Therefore the welfare consequences, when derived

from consumption data, are almost exclusively determined by relative group consumption.36

        Whereas for earnings an increase in the risk aversion of households led to dramatically in-

creased welfare losses from increased inequality, when using consumption data the welfare conse-

quences of increased inequality are close to invariant to changes in a households’ attitudes towards

risk. Again, this is explained by the stable trend of the variance of the idiosyncratic consumption

component. The welfare losses/gains in figure 12d, computed for risk aversion of σ = 2, are almost

indistinguishable from the corresponding figure for σ = 1. Thus, in comparison to our findings for

earnings, for a reasonable degree of risk aversion of σ = 2, consumption data do not suggest nearly

as severe welfare losses as do earnings data. Repeating our calculations with a low time discount

rate of 0.05% again results in welfare losses that are fairly uniform across the population, amounting

to losses of 0.5% for σ = 1 and 1.6% for σ = 2, again significantly smaller than the corresponding

numbers derived from earnings.

        Our findings are consistent with Attanasio and Davis (1996) who document that a significant

share of the increase in wage inequality between observably diﬀerent groups is reflected in increases

in consumption inequality between these groups. Our welfare numbers reproduce exactly this phe-

nomenon. These results are also in line with findings in our earlier work (Krueger and Perri, 2002)

in that the idiosyncratic component of consumption inequality has not increased significantly over

time and thus has not, to any noticeable extent, contributed to the welfare losses from increased

inequality. Finally note that, in order to focus on the welfare eﬀects of increased inequality we have

eﬀectively de-trended our data from aggregate consumption growth. Thus our results are not to

be interpreted as absolute standards of living having declined over the last thirty years for a large

fraction of the population.

  36
    Since the transition matrix for the group-component of consumption displays very high persistence, increased risk
in the between-group component is quantitatively of second-order importance.


                                                         29
The Impact of Changes in Leisure

        In our empirical section we documented that, in the light of increased wage variability, the

relative labor supply of diﬀerent groups in the population has changed, albeit only moderately so.

In this section we extend our welfare analysis to incorporate these changes in relative labor supply

and hence leisure.

        The Bellman equation for this augmented problem now becomes

                                  £               ¤
(4)     V (c, l) = u(c, l) + βE V (c0 , l0 )|(c, l)


Here the expectations operator pertains to the joint Markov process for consumption c and leisure

l. This Markov process may feature independence between c and l (our benchmark), or allow for

dependence between consumption and leisure (a case that we will investigate as sensitivity analysis).

        Both the definition of welfare costs as well as its computation remain the same as in the

previous subsection. We parameterize the period utility function as before, and choose a share

                  1
parameter α =     3   and a non-sleeping time endowment of 15 hours per person, per day.37


Labor Supply Uncorrelated with Consumption How does the inclusion of leisure into the

analysis change the magnitude of the welfare losses from increased inequality? To a first order

approximation the magnitude as well as the distribution of these losses is unaﬀected by the incor-

poration of leisure into the analysis. Again, the consumption group a household belongs to in 1972

largely determines how it fares in terms of welfare, whereas the idiosyncratic consumption state, the

  37                                                                                              1
    In a static deterministic model with our preferences, an agent would choose to work exactly   3
                                                                                                      of her nonsleeping
time if α = 13 , independent of the wage.
  Note that the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion for consumption is now given by
        −cucc
              = σα + 1 − α
         uc

When we report results for a particular risk aversion, we set σ, given α = 13 , to the appropriate value to attain that
risk aversion.




                                                          30
leisure state or the risk aversion of the household play only a minor quantitative role.38

        Since the hours and thus leisure distribution has become somewhat less dispersed between

1972 and 2000, the welfare losses from increased overall inequality are slightly mitigated by the

presence of leisure in the utility function, but the reduction in welfare losses amounts to no more

than 0.4% for any of the population groups, compared to the welfare losses reported in the last

section based on consumption observations alone.

        One has to bear in mind, though, that, as with consumption, our estimation of stochastic

processes for hours worked eﬀectively removed the positive trend in average hours worked by house-

holds; therefore our welfare numbers do not reflect the potentially adverse eﬀect on well-being of

longer hours worked by a large fraction of US households.


Labor Supply Correlated with Consumption In our empirical analysis we found that the

correlation between idiosyncratic consumption and leisure is negative, and, more importantly, has

declined in absolute value between 1972 and 2000. In other words, while low consumption house-

holds used to at least enjoy significantly higher leisure in 1972, this has become less pronounced in

2000. We now investigate whether allowing consumption and leisure to be correlated (and therefore

allowing more extreme negative states over time -those with increasingly low relative consumption

and decreasingly high leisure), modifies our result that the incorporation of leisure into the analysis

leaves our welfare numbers roughly unaﬀected.

        Figure 13 compares the welfare losses (or gains) implied by three utility and stochastic process

specifications: consumption only (a subset of figures 12c and 12d), consumption and leisure, un-

correlated (see the discussion in the previous subsection) and consumption and leisure processes

allowed to be correlated. The sub-panels distinguish risk aversion and agents belonging to diﬀerent

  38
     The reason for why the leisure state is not an important determinant of the welfare losses is similar to the one
for idiosyncratic consumption: we estimate labor supply and hence leisure to be not nearly as persistent as group
consumption (roughly as persistent as idosyncratic consumption).


                                                         31
consumption groups. All four panels contain the welfare losses of agents that start with the highest

leisure state in 1972. Similar (but somewhat less pronounced) results are obtained for households

starting in other leisure states in 1972.


       FIGURE 13 APPROXIMATELY HERE


       For separable preferences (CRRA = 1) correlation between consumption and leisure does not

change our findings from the previous section. As households become more risk-averse, however,

welfare losses arising under the correlated consumption-leisure process actually exceed the corre-

sponding number under the consumption-only process, by up to 0.5% percentage points (see Figure

13b). This finding is due to the higher likelihood of experiencing states with low consumption and

fairly low leisure, compared to the situation in which consumption and leisure were modelled as

independent processes. We conclude that, while the welfare numbers based on consumption alone

tell most of the story, the incorporation of leisure may, when correlated with consumption, increase

welfare losses from increased inequality to a quantitatively nontrivial extent.


5. Concluding Remarks

       What are the welfare consequences of the increase in inequality in the United States between

1972 and 2000? In this paper we use a standard intertemporal utility function and wage-, earnings-

, consumption- and hours-worked data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey to answer this

question.

       Our main findings are twofold. First, welfare losses can be substantial, with significant vari-

ation of these losses across the population. Whereas households at the bottom of the consumption

distribution suﬀer declines in welfare up to about 6% in consumption equivalent variation, house-

holds at the top end of the distribution enjoy sizeable welfare gains of similar magnitude as the

losses of the poorest agents. Overall, a majority of the population (based on consumption observa-


                                                 32
tions, roughly sixty percent of Americans) is on the losing side. The main part of these losses arises

from the increase in between-group consumption inequality. The increase in consumption/leisure

correlation contributes to moderately higher welfare losses, in the order of magnitude of 0.5% for

most households. Second, while welfare losses from increased inequality are fairly sizeable for a lot

of US households when based on consumption data, they are not nearly as big and aﬀect not nearly

as many households as an analysis based on earnings data alone would suggest (80% to 100% of the

population losing up to 10%). In addition, the estimates of welfare losses based on consumption and

leisure processes are fairly robust to diﬀerent values of risk aversion while those based on income

processes are highly sensitive to that parameter.

       In order to more precisely focus on the welfare eﬀects of increasing inequality we have ignored

two important features of our data. First, there was substantial growth in average real household

consumption and second, total hours worked by a typical household increased noticeably over the

last 30 years. To the extent that these trends are causally linked to the trend in inequality we have

overstated (because of consumption growth) or understated (because of the decline in leisure) the

welfare implications of the increase in inequality. Future empirical and theoretical work is needed

to understand if, and to what extent, the trends in hours worked, in average consumption and in

the cross-sectional variance of consumption are causally related.




                                                 33
6. Data Appendix

       Our statistics are based on repeated cross-sections constructed from the Consumer Expendi-

ture Survey (CE) Interview Surveys for the years 1972-1973, 1980-81 and 1984 to 2000, as provided

by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The 1972-1973 samples were conducted quarterly, but only

annual totals were released; thus for these years we have only two cross sections, each reporting

consumption and income for the year of the interview. The surveys from 1980 on were conducted

on a quarterly basis, so we have four cross sections for each year. Households report consumption

expenditures for the quarter preceding the interview and income data for the year preceding the

interview. A fraction of the households in the survey is interviewed for four consecutive quarters and

reports consumption information in every quarter, as well as income and wage information in the

first and last interview. For these households we can construct annual measures of wages, earnings,

consumption and number of hours from 72-73 until 2000.


A. Wages, Earnings and Hours

       The definition of wages we use is earnings of the reference person divided by the number

of weeks worked by the person during the year. We construct earnings of the reference person as

her wages and salaries plus a fixed fraction of her self-employment farm- and non-farm income (the

exact fraction is 0.864 and is taken from Diaz-Jimenez, Quadrini and Rios-Rull, 1997). Household

earnings simply sums the earnings of the reference person and her spouse. Disposable household

earnings are computed as household earnings minus reported federal, state and local taxes (net of

refunds) and social security contributions paid by the household. We then add reported government

transfers: in particular we add unemployment insurance, food stamps and welfare receipts. Since

the 72-73 CE does not report the number of hours per week by households members, but only

whether they are part- or full-time workers, hours worked by a person are computed as the number

of weeks worked by that person times 20, if the person works part-time, or times 40 if the person


                                                 34
works full time. For the post-1980 sample we compare the standard deviation of hours constructed

in this way with the series constructed using actual weekly hours; the two series have very similar

trends (although diﬀerent levels).


B. Consumption

       Our definition of consumption consists of nondurables plus imputed services from durables.

It includes expenditures on nondurable goods and services, expenditures on household furnishings

and imputed services from houses and cars. Expenditures on nondurable goods and services include

consumption expenditures for food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco, utilities, personal care, household

operations, public transportation, gasoline and motor oil, apparel, education, reading, health services

and miscellaneous expenditures. Each component of consumption is deflated by its corresponding

monthly CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

       Expenditures on household furnishings include items such as furniture, appliances and floor

coverings (e.g. rugs). The reason for why we use expenditures and not imputed services is that in

the CE no information is available for the value or the inventory of the stock of these furnishings,

and the panel dimension of the CE is too short to carry out perpetual inventory techniques. With

respect to vehicles, we impute services from cars in the following manner, following closely the

procedure outlined by Cutler and Katz (1991a). From the CE data we have expenditures for

purchases of new and used vehicles. We also have data on the number of cars a consumer unit

possesses. For each year we first select all households that report positive expenditures for vehicle

purchases, and run a regression of vehicle expenditures on a constant, age, sex and education

of the reference person of the consumer unit, total consumption expenditures, excluding vehicle

expenditures of the consumer, the same variable squared, total income before taxes, family size and

quarter dummies. We use the estimated regression coeﬃcients to predict expenditures for vehicles for

all households in that quarter (i.e. for those who did and for those who did not report positive vehicle

                                                  35
expenditures). Our measure of consumption services from vehicles is then the predicted expenditure

                                                                                1
on vehicles, times the number of vehicles the consumer unit owns, times         32   (reflecting the assumption

of average complete depreciation of a vehicle after 32 quarters) plus other expenditures for cars, such

as insurance, maintenance and finance charges. With respect to housing services the CE provides

information on rent paid for the residence of the consumer unit, including insurance and other out

of pocket expenses paid by the renter. To impute housing services for those consumer households

that own their residence we use a variable from the CE that measures the market rent (as estimated

by the reference person of the consumer unit) the residence would command if rented out.39 This

variable is not available for the years 1980-81 and 1993-94; for these years we do not compute

inequality measures for ND+ consumption expenditures.40 As with nondurable consumption, all

imputed services from consumer durables and housing are deflated with the corresponding CPI.

  39
     The exact question that the reference person of the CU is asked is “If you were to rent your home today, how
much you think it would rent for monthly, without furnishings and utilities?”
  40
     We experimented with using an imputation procedure similar to the one used for vehicles in order to obtain
housing services for the four missing years. Results were very similar and are available upon request.




                                                       36
References

 [1] Altug, S. and R. Miller (1990), “Household Choices in Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 58, 543-570.


 [2] Attanasio, O. and S. Davis (1996), “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Con-

    sumption,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1227-1262.


 [3] Attanasio, O. (2002) “Consumption and Income Inequality: What do we know and what we

    can learn from it.”, Mimeo UCL


 [4] Blundell, R. and T. MaCurdy (1999), “Labor Supply: a Review of Alternative Approaches,” in:

    O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds) Handbook of Labor Economics, North Holland, Amsterdam.


 [5] Blundell, R. and I. Preston (1998), “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty,” Quar-

    terly Journal of Economics, 113, 603-640.


 [6] Cochrane, J. (1991), “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy,

    99, 957-976.


 [7] Cox, M. and R. Alm (1999), Myths of Rich & Poor: Why We’re Better Oﬀ Than We Think,

    Basic Books, New York.


 [8] Cullen, J. and J. Gruber (2000), “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd Out Spousal Labor

    Supply?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 18, 546-572.


 [9] Cutler, D. and L. Katz (1991a), “Rising Inequality? Changes in the Distribution of Income

    and Consumption in the 1980s,” American Economic Review, 82, 546-551.


[10] Cutler, D. and L. Katz (1991b), “Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvan-

    taged,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-74.


[11] Deaton, A. (1992), Understanding Consumption, Clarendon Press, Oxford.


                                                37
[12] Díaz-Giménez, J., V. Quadrini and J.V. Ríos-Rull (1997), “Dimensions of Inequality: Facts on

    the U.S. Distributions of Earnings, Income, and Wealth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

    Quarterly Review, 21, 3-21.


[13] Dynarski, S. and J. Gruber (1997), “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?,” Brookings

    Papers on Economic Activity, 229-284.


[14] Greenspan, A. (1998), “Opening Remarks to the Symposium on Income Inequality: Issues and

    Policy Options,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.


[15] Gottschalk, P. and R. Moﬃtt (1994), “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor

    Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 217-272.


[16] Hall, R. and F. Mishkin (1982), “The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income: Esti-

    mates from Panel Data on Households,” Econometrica, 50, 461-481.


[17] Hayashi, F., J. Altonji, and L. Kotlikoﬀ (1996), “Risk Sharing Between and Within Families,”

    Econometrica, 64, 261-294.


[18] Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten and G. Violante (2003), “The Welfare Implications of Rising

    Wage Inequality in the US,” Mimeo, IIES, Stockholm University.


[19] Heckman, J. and T. MaCurdy (1980), “A Life Cycle Model of Female Labor Supply,” Review

    of Economic Studies,” 47, 47-74.


[20] Johnson, D. and S. Shipp (1991), “Trends in Inequality using Consumer Expenditures: 1960

    to 1993,” Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical Associ-

    ation, 1-7.


[21] Johnson, D. and T. Smeeding (1998), “Measuring the Trends in Inequality of Individuals and

    Families: Income and Consumption,” mimeo.

                                               38
[22] Juhn, C., K. Murphy and R. Topel (2002) “Current unemployment, historically contemplated”,

    Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 79-136


[23] Katz, L. and D. Autor (1999), “Changes in Wages Structure and Earnings Inequality,” in: O.

    Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds) Handbook of Labor Economics, North Holland, Amsterdam.


[24] Krueger, D. and F. Perri (2002), “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality:

    Evidence and Theory,” NBER working paper 9202.


[25] Krusell, P. and A. Smith (1999), “On the Welfare Eﬀects of Eliminating Business Cycles,”

    Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 245-272.


[26] Lucas, R. (1987), Models of Business Cycles, Basil Blackwell, New York.


[27] Mace, B. (1991), “Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty,” Journal of Political

    Economy, 99, 928-56.


[28] Mayer, S. and C. Jencks (1993), “Recent Trends in Economic Inequality in the United States:

    Income versus Expenditures versus Well-Being,” in Papadimitriou, D and E. Wolﬀ (eds.),

    Poverty and Prosperity in the USA in the Late Twentieth Century, St. Martin’s Press, New

    York.


[29] Nelson, J. (1994), “On Testing for Full Insurance Using Consumer Expenditure Survey

    Data,”Journal of Political Economy, 102, 384-394.


[30] Slesnick, D. (1993), “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States,” Journal of

    Political Economy, 101, 1-38.


[31] Slesnick, D. (2001), Consumption and Social Welfare, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.




                                                 39
[32] Stephens, M. (2002), “Worker Displacement and the Added Worker Eﬀect,” Journal of Labor

    Economics, 20, 504-537.


[33] Tauchen, G. and R. Hussey (1991), “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate

    Solutions to Non Linear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 59, 371-396.


[34] Townsend, R. (1994), “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62, 539-591.




                                               40
        Table 1. The persistence of the estimated processes*

                 Disposable Earnings

                 Within-group      Between-group

        Value    0.76              0.97

                 Consumption

                 Within-group      Between-group

        Value    0.72              0.98

*The reported measure of persistence is the value of the second largest eigenvalue of the transition matrices
π d and π g




                                                     41
                         Figure 1. Standard Deviation of Log Weekly Wages
        0.68




        0.66




        0.64




        0.62
Value




         0.6




        0.58




        0.56




        0.54
           1970   1975       1980              1985             1990        1995   2000
                                              Year
                                                                       Figure 2. Wage inequality from CE and CPS
                                        1.6


                                                CE
                                       1.55     CPS (Katz and Autor)



                                        1.5
90%-10% Log weekly wage differential




                                       1.45



                                        1.4



                                       1.35



                                        1.3



                                       1.25



                                        1.2



                                       1.15



                                        1.1
                                         1970        1975               1980             1985              1990    1995   2000
                                                                                         Year
                                                                                     Figure 3. Change in wage inequality from CE, CPS and PSID
                                                            0.14

                                                                   CE
                                                                   CPS (Katz and Autor)
                                                                   PSID (Heathcote et al.)
                                                            0.12
Standard Deviation of Log wages (Change from 1972 value)




                                                             0.1




                                                           0.08




                                                           0.06




                                                           0.04




                                                           0.02




                                                              0




                                                           -0.02
                                                                   1975                      1980          1985               1990               1995   2000
                                                                                                               Year
                        Figure 4. Standard Deviation of Log Total and Disposable Earnings
         0.9




        0.85




         0.8




        0.75
Value




         0.7




        0.65




         0.6




        0.55                                                                     Total Earnings
                                                                                 Disposable Earnings
                                                                                 Wages


         0.5
          1970   1975               1980              1985              1990                1995       2000
                                                      Year
                                                        Figure 5. Decomposition of Disposable Earnings Inequality
                                0.8


                                        Total
                                        Within Group
                                        Between Group
                                0.7




                                0.6
Percentage Standard Deviation




                                0.5




                                0.4




                                0.3




                                0.2


                                 1970        1975               1980              1985              1990            1995   2000
                                                                                  Year
                 Figure 6. Standard Deviation of Log Disposable Earnings and Log Consumption

         0.8




        0.75




         0.7




        0.65
Value




         0.6




        0.55




         0.5




        0.45

                                                     Disposable Earnings (Positive wage sample)
                                                     Consumption (Positive wage sample)
                                                     Consumption (Full sample)
         0.4

          1970   1975              1980             1985                1990                 1995   2000
                                                    Year
                                                  Figure 7. Consumption by selected quintiles of the disp. earnings distribution
                                  2

                                         Top
                                         Middle
                                         Bottom
                                 1.8




                                 1.6
Consumption (relative to mean)




                                 1.4




                                 1.2




                                   1




                                 0.8




                                 0.6




                                 0.4


                                  1970        1975                  1980              1985               1990               1995   2000
                                                                                      Year
                                                Figure 8. Decomposition of Consumption Inequality
                                 0.5




                                0.45




                                 0.4
Percentage Standard Deviation




                                0.35




                                 0.3




                                0.25




                                 0.2                                                                Total
                                                                                                    Within Group
                                                                                                    Between group



                                0.15
                                  1970   1975        1980             1985             1990               1995      2000
                                                                      Year
                            Figure 9. Standard Deviation of Log Wages and of Log per adult hours




        0.65     Wages
                 Household hours (per adult)




         0.6




        0.55
Value




         0.5




        0.45




         0.4
          1970       1975                1980               1985              1990                 1995   2000
                                                           Year
                             Figure 10. Yearly hours worked per person(average and by selected quintiles of the consumption distribution)
                      1900




                      1800




                      1700




                      1600
Yearly hours worked




                      1500




                      1400




                      1300

                                                                                                                  Average
                                                                                                                  Top
                                                                                                                  Middle
                      1200                                                                                        Bottom




                      1100
                         1970               1975              1980              1985              1990               1995              2000
                                                                                Year
                        Figure 11. Correlation of hours worked and consumption
                                                                                        Total
                                                                                        Between Group
                                                                                        Within Group



        0.25




         0.2
Value




        0.15




         0.1




        0.05




          0
          1970   1975          1980              1985             1990           1995               2000
                                                Year
                                                                 Figure 12. Welfare Losses
                                   12a. Using Earnings (σ=1)                                                       12b. Using Earnings (σ=2)
                                                                                                                      Lowest Earnings Groups
                          8                                                                               8
Welfare Loss in Percent   6                                                                               6




                                                                                Welfare Loss in Percent
                          4                                                                               4
                                      Lowest Earnings Groups                                                          Highest Earnings Group
                          2                                                                               2

                          0                                                                               0

                          -2                                                                              -2
                                      Highest Earnings Group
                          -4                                                                              -4

                          -6                                                                              -6
                                    -0.5            0          0.5                                                  -0.5            0          0.5
                                 Earnings, Idiosyncratic Component                                               Earnings, Idiosyncratic Component


                                12c. Using Consumption (σ=1)                                                    12d. Using Consumption (σ=2)
                          8                                                                               8

                          6         Lowest Consumption Group                                              6         Lowest Consumption Group

                          4                                                                               4
Welfare Loss




                                                                                Welfare Loss
                          2                                                                               2

                          0                                                                               0

                          -2                                                                              -2

                          -4        Highest Consumption Group                                             -4        Highest Consumption Group
                          -6                                                                              -6
                               -0.5               0              0.5                                           -0.5               0              0.5
                               Consumption, Idiosyncratic Component                                            Consumption, Idiosyncratic Component
                                                                     Figure 13. Welfare Losses
                                       13a. Lowest Cons. Group (CRRA=1)                   13b. Lowest Cons. Group (CRRA=2)
                                  7                                                                                7
                                               Consumption Only                                                                  Consumption Only
                                               Cons. and Leisure, Uncorrelated                                                   Cons. and Leisure, Uncorrelated
                                 6.5           Cons. and Leisure, Correlatated                                    6.5            Cons. and Leisure, Correlatated
       Welfare Loss in Percent




                                                                                        Welfare Loss in Percent
                                  6                                                                                6


                                 5.5                                                                              5.5


                                  5                                                                                5


                                 4.5                                                                              4.5
                                       -0.5               0              0.5                                             -0.5               0              0.5
                                       Consumption, Idiosyncratic Component                                              Consumption, Idiosyncratic Component


                                  Figure 13c. Highest Cons. Group (CRRA=1)                                              13d. Highest Cons. Group (CRRA=2)
                                 -4                                                                               -4
                                               Consumption Only                                                                  Consumption Only
                                               Cons. and Leisure, Uncorrelated                                                   Cons. and Leisure, Uncorrelated
                                               Cons. and Leisure, Correlatated                                                   Cons. and Leisure, Correlatated
Welfare Loss in Percent




                                                                                 Welfare Loss in Percent
                          -4.5                                                                             -4.5



                                  -5                                                                               -5



                          -5.5                                                                             -5.5



                                 -6                                                                               -6
                                       -0.5               0              0.5                                             -0.5               0              0.5
                                       Consumption, Idiosyncratic Component                                              Consumption, Idiosyncratic Component
