                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ARE MENTAL HEALTH INSURANCE MANDATES EFFECTIVE?:
                           EVIDENCE FROM SUICIDES

                                             Jonathan Klick
                                             Sara Markowitz

                                          Working Paper 9994
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9994


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2003




The authors would like to thank Jennifer Tennant, Dan Grossman and Richard Flom for excellent research
assistance. In addition, we would like to express our appreciation for helpful comments and suggestions
provided by Peter Loeb, Ted Joyce, Will Dow and participants at the NBER Summer Institute in Health
Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Jonathan Klick and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Are Mental Health Insurance Mandates Effective?: Evidence from Suicides
Jonathan Klick and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 9994
September 2003
JEL No. I0, K0

                                           ABSTRACT

Many states have passed laws mandating insurance companies to provide or offer some form of
mental health benefits. These laws presumably lower the price of obtaining mental health services
for many adults, and as a result, might improve health outcomes. This paper analyzes the
effectiveness of mental health insurance mandates by examining the influence of mandates on adult
suicides, which are strongly correlated with mental illness. Data on completed suicides in each state
for the period 1981-2000 are analyzed. Ordinary least squares and two-stage least squares results
show that mental health mandates are not effective in reducing suicide rates.


Jonathan Klick
The American Enterprise Institute
1150 Seventeenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
jklick@aei.org

Sara Markowitz
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016
and Rutgers University, Newark
smarkow@newark.rutgers.edu
INTRODUCTION


          Mental illnesses are debilitating diseases affecting millions of people each year. These

conditions constituted five of the top ten leading causes of disability worldwide in 1990,

measured in years lived with a disability. Unipolar depression is the largest cause of disability

(Murray and Lopez 1996). Despite the severity of the burden of mental illness, many cases of

mental disorders remain untreated. Estimates show that about 28 percent of the U.S. adult

population in any year has a diagnosable mental or addictive disorder, yet only 8 percent seeks

treatment (USDHHS 1999).

          In response to the increasing scope of the problems associated with mental illness,

coupled with improvements in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders, a number of

states and the federal government have taken steps to improve access to mental illness services in

the form of mandated mental health benefits, including mental health parity laws. These laws

have the potential to lower the effective price of mental health services, increasing utilization.

However, it is possible these laws might raise the cost of providing insurance thereby reducing

access.

          Evaluating the effectiveness of mental health insurance mandates requires analysts to

answer three major questions: 1) do mandates successfully lower the price of obtaining mental

health services; 2) do mandates increase access to mental health services; and 3) do mandates

contribute to improvements in mental health outcomes? Conclusive answers to these questions

are elusive, primarily because work in this area suffers from significant data limitations. While

existing research provides some insights into the first two questions, no research to date attempts

to answer the third question.

          This paper examines the question of whether or not mandates directly contribute to



                                                   1
improvements in mental health. The answer to this question is crucial to policymakers at the

state and federal levels as they consider implementing and expanding mental health insurance

mandates. The results of this study provide evidence of the impact of mental health and

substance abuse treatment mandates, including parity laws, on adult suicides, a measurable

outcome of poor mental health. In considering the efficacy of mental health mandates in

reducing suicides, instrumental variables are used to control for potential simultaneity between

suicide rates and mandate adoption. The results indicate that mental health mandates are

exogenous, and they are also ineffective in reducing suicide rates.

       In the sections that follow, background information is provided regarding the impetus for

the mental health insurance mandate movement, as well as a discussion of prior analyses of the

effects of mandates. We then discuss research design, data, and empirical results, concluding

with directions for future research.



BACKGROUND

       Although a few states enacted mental health insurance mandates in the 1970s and 1980s,

a nationwide push for mandates, especially so-called mental health parity mandates, began in

earnest in the early 1990s. Mental health parity laws require insurers to provide parity in

coverage between mental health and physical health coverage. These laws typically prohibit

insurance companies from offering plans that place greater financial burden on access to

diagnostic or treatment services for mental health conditions than for physical health conditions.

Such laws are designed to lower the price of mental health services faced by insured individuals,

improve access to treatment, and ultimately to improve mental health outcomes. Other types of

laws include mandated mental health benefits and mandated mental health benefit offerings.




                                                 2
       By 2002, forty-six states mandated some form of mental health benefit, but the specifics

of those laws vary widely. Some require full parity in which insurers must provide mental health

benefits at exactly the same terms applying to physical health benefits. Other mandates simply

require that a minimum level of mental health coverage be provided or offered, with varying

equivalence requirements and pricing restrictions. Further, some states define mental illness

broadly, applying their mandates to virtually any illness listed in the American Psychiatric

Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, while other states limit the conditions covered

by the laws to a few “biologically based” illnesses, such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and

major depressive disorders. Some states have exemptions for small businesses and large cost

increases. One particularly visible distinction is whether or not the laws cover treatment for

substance abuse and addiction. Roughly half of the states with mandated mental health benefits

explicitly include addiction treatment, while about a quarter explicitly exclude it from the

mandate.

       In addition to the success in passing mandates at the state level, mental health advocates

argue that federal mental health parity legislation is necessary. Many employers are unaffected

by state insurance regulations due to the federal pre-emption granted by the Employee

Retirement Security Act (ERISA) of 1974. ERISA effectively pre-empts state regulation of self-

funded health insurance plans. That is, ERISA disallows individual states from imposing health

insurance mandates of any kind on any firm that self-insures. Self-insured plans are typical of

large employers, and as a result, employees of large companies are not likely to benefit from

state mandates regarding mental health benefits. These self-insured plans represent about one-

third of workers with employment-based insurance (EBRI 2000).

       The federal Mental Health Parity Act of 1996, which became effective in 1998 and was




                                                 3
eventually extended through the end of 2002, was passed to fill the regulatory gap created by the

ERISA exemption. The federal parity mandate prohibited group health insurers providing

mental health benefits from imposing annual and lifetime expenditure limits for mental health

treatments that are stricter than those applying to physical health treatments. However, this law

did not impose any conditions on deductibles, copayments, or days covered, nor did it include

provisions for substance abuse treatment. More important, the law did not require employers to

offer mental health coverage, leaving employers the option of dropping mental health benefits

altogether. The law also contained two major exemptions. The first exempted small employers

with 50 of fewer employees. In 2000, small firms employed approximately 28 percent of the

labor force. The second exemption arose if the law resulted in a cost increase of at least one

percent of medical costs.



EXISTING EVIDENCE ON EFFECT OF MANDATES

       The extent to which mental health mandates improve the welfare of individuals with

mental illnesses is ambiguous. Although supporters of the mandates deem them necessary to

solve apparent “market failures” in the provision of mental health insurance, there is conflicting

evidence on the issue of whether coverage mandates improve access to mental health services.

       Shortly after a number of states enacted minimum mental health benefit laws, researchers

began to evaluate the effectiveness of such laws on access to care. McGuire and Montgomery

(1982) examined the impact of the laws on hours of practice by fee-for-service psychiatrists and

psychologists in 1978. Their findings suggest that mental health mandates increase service use,

but these estimates are statistically insignificant. Using a panel of states during the 1970s, Frank

(1985) reaches a similar conclusion in his study on visits to psychiatrists. He finds that mental




                                                 4
health mandates increase the demand for services by 12-22 percent, but again, these estimates are

imprecise. Horgan (1986) finds that mandated private insurance coverage increases the

probability of using ambulatory mental health services in the specialty sector, while simply

mandating the availability of benefits has no effect on use. She also finds that neither mandated

private insurance coverage nor mandated availability of benefits has any effect on the number of

visits among users who have out-of-pocket expenses for mental health treatment.

       Opponents of insurance mandates in general often claim that mandates increase the cost

of insurance, inducing employees or firms to drop health insurance altogether (Economic Report

of the President 1991). Gruber (1994) presents evidence that this displacement effect of

mandates is virtually non-existent. Using data from the May CPS supplements data 1979, 1983

and 1988, Gruber finds that state mandates to cover certain health services, including alcohol,

drug abuse and mental illness, have no impact on the probability that an employee of a small

firm is covered by health insurance. There is some evidence, however, that alcohol treatment

mandates lower the probability that a small firm will offer insurance. Gruber explains that

mandates in general might be ineffective since firms generally offer benefits that exceed the

mandated minimums.

       Kaestner and Simon (2002) also examine the displacement effect of state health mandates

on the private provision of health insurance benefits by small employers. Focusing on the total

number of health mandates in a state, they find that such mandates have no impact on the

prevalence of health insurance coverage for full-time and part-time employees in small firms. A

similar conclusion is reached when examining the joint effect of four high-cost mandates; drug

treatment, alcohol treatment, mental health care and mental health parity.

       Parity mandates, however, might generate different effects than minimum benefit




                                                5
mandates since they tie mental health benefits to physical health benefits. That is, parity

mandates do not only affect the cost of providing insurance for mental health treatments, they

also indirectly affect the cost of providing traditional health insurance. If a firm wishes to

increase its physical health benefits, parity mandates require a concomitant increase in mental

health benefits as well. This joint determination generates an ambiguity in the effect of mandates

on access to mental health treatments.

       Some researchers suggest that the costs of increased mental health benefits are at least

partially offset by the benefits employers enjoy due to improved mental health among their

workers. The financial offset argument claims that providing mental illness coverage reduces

other costs borne by employers. England (1999) makes this case with respect to depression,

claiming that employers lost $24 billion due to lost work time and productivity in 1993 as a

result of untreated depression among their employees. Olfson et al. (1999) note that these

indirect cost savings might be particularly important with respect to treatments for alcoholism,

citing evidence that early treatment of the disorder can eliminate many costs due to alcohol-

induced long term physical health disorders, such as cirrhosis, cardiomyopathy, and chronic

hepatic encephalopathy.

       In resolving this theoretical ambiguity, it is difficult to ascertain the causal effects of

mandates on access to mental health services because adoption of the mandates appears to be

endogenous to underlying state characteristics, which also affect access to care. For example,

Sturm and Pacula (1999) document that states with below average use rates of mental health

services are more likely to pass mandates, and, even after adoption, those states continue to lag

behind national averages. Recognizing this simultaneity, Pacula and Sturm (2000) use a two-

stage procedure on a sample of individuals over a one-year period to estimate the impact of




                                                  6
parity laws on mental health service utilization. They find no difference in the level of mental

health service utilization among people living in states with parity laws compared to those living

in states without parity laws. They speculate that this finding is generated by an insurance

displacement effect for high-risk individuals. A major problem with such individual level data is

that details of the respondent’s employment situation and/or health insurance coverage are often

unknown. This information is vital given that many insurance plans are exempt from state

mandates and the lack of such information can bias results.

       Sturm (2000) uses data from the Health Tracking Initiative, which is designed to track

changes in health care over time, to analyze the effect of parity laws on insurance coverage for

individuals with mental health disorders. Using a difference-in-difference estimation strategy,

this study finds that mentally ill individuals living in states with parity laws are more likely to

lose insurance coverage, although the benefits for those retaining coverage is generous and

access to care is easier. These estimates, however, are small in magnitude and statistically

insignificant.

       The presumption against the efficacy of mandates is strengthened by results suggesting

that access to mental health services has increased even in the absence of mandates. Zuvekas et

al. (2002) find that while treatment prevalence increased by 50 percent in one employer group

during the three year period after mental health parity mandates were enacted, a similar increase

occurred in employer groups that were not subject to the mandate. Research on the effects of the

federal mental health parity law has shown very few changes in plans as a result. The Substance

Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration found that almost half of all eligible

employers were already in compliance with the act prior to its effective date. Sixty-eight percent

of the plans reported no change in benefits as a result of the law, and almost none chose to drop




                                                  7
mental health coverage (SAMHSA 1999).

       Dissimilarities in treatments between mental illness and physical illness also induce some

limitations on the effect of parity laws in improving access to mental health services. Frank et al.

(2001) point out that many important aspects of mental health treatments have no counterpart in

standard medical care, leaving them unaffected by parity laws. For example, many health

insurance plans do not cover residential treatment programs or day-hospital care. In some cases,

these components of treatment might be necessary for effective mental health treatment. A

General Accounting Office (2000) survey indicates that many employers compensate for the

changes in limits by imposing restrictions on aspects of mental health treatment not covered in

the federal parity mandate.

       It is an open question then as to whether mental health insurance mandates improve the

welfare of those facing mental illnesses. Direct evidence about the effect of mandates on the

benefits provided to employees does not resolve the questions about the efficacy of mental health

mandated benefits and parity laws.



ANAYTICAL FRAMEWORK

       The model of mental health used is derived from Grossman (1972) and involves a mental

health production function and input demand functions:

1) M=m(Tm, A, D, µ),

Equation 1 posits that good mental health (M) is a function of mental health treatment (Tm),

alcohol and/or drug consumption (A), demographic and socio-economic factors (D), and

unobserved individual factors, which might include a genetic endowment of health (µ). It is

assumed that alcohol and drug consumption have a negative impact on good mental health




                                                 8
whereas treatment has a positive impact.1

        Alcohol and drug consumption, as well as treatment services face the following demand

functions:

2) A=a(M, Ta, Pa, Y, D, µ).

3) Tm=t(A, Ptm, Y, D, µ),

4) Ta=t(A, Pta, Y, D, µ),

Equation 2 represents the demand function for alcohol or drugs where consumption is

determined by mental illness, price (Pa), income (Y), demographic factors and unobserved

individual factors. Consumption can be lowered through substance abuse treatment services

(Ta). Equations 3 and 4 are demand functions for mental health and substance abuse treatment

services, respectively. Here, treatment levels are determined by drug and alcohol consumption,

prices (Ptm, Pta), income, demographic factors and unobserved individual factors. The prices of

treatment faced by individuals may be affected by insurance coverage.

        A reduced form model of mental health serves as the basis for empirical estimation:

5) M=m(Ptm, Pta, Pa, Y, D, µ).

Equation 5 is derived by substituting equations 2, 3 and 4 into equation 1. The estimation of

equation 5 will show the direct effectiveness of reductions in mental health and substance abuse

treatment prices in improving mental health status.

        Mandates are intended to lower the price of obtaining mental health and substance abuse

treatment services, therefore, indicators for the presence of these laws in each state will be used

to represent price. Mandate adoption will serve as a proxy for changes in the price of treatment

through changes in insurance coverage.


1
 There exists a complex relationship between substance use and mental illness, with many researchers believing that
substance use contributes to deteriorating mental health (Egelko et al. 2002; Havassy and Arns 1998).


                                                        9
EMPIRICAL MODEL AND DATA

       In order to estimate equation 5, a valid measure of mental health is needed. Previous

studies examine the impact of mental health parity laws on mental health service utilization

(Pacula and Sturm 2000; Zuvekas et al. 2002) and insurance coverage (Sturm 2000), but none

has looked directly at mental health outcomes. We take this approach and use a measurable

outcome of mental health services, suicide. Suicide is a useful outcome for a number of reasons.

       First, suicide is strongly correlated with mental illness. Researchers believe that almost

all individuals who commit suicide have a diagnosable mental disorder (Maris et al. 1992). It

has been estimated that two-thirds of people who commit suicide have a depressive illness; 5

percent suffer from schizophrenia; and 10 percent meet the criteria for other mental illnesses

including borderline personality disorder. However, only half of people who die by suicide

receive any mental health treatment in their lifetimes (Maltsberger 1992; Clark and Horton-

Deutsch 1992).

       Second, parity legislation is often intended primarily to benefit the most severely ill

patients (Sturm 2000). For example, the federal law only affected annual and lifetime dollar

limits, which are likely to be reached only by the severely ill. The risk of suicide is highly

correlated with the intensity of treatment. Simon and Von Korff (1998) find that among insured

patients receiving treatment for depression, the highest risk of suicide was among those receiving

inpatient treatment and medication. The lowest risk was found among individuals receiving

outpatient treatment without medication.

       Lastly, suicide is related to both substance use and mental illness. Since many of the

mental health mandates include both substance abuse and mental health treatment, a desirable




                                                 10
health outcome is related to both substance use and mental illness. Suicide meets this criterion.

Alcohol abuse disorders are found in approximately 25 percent of completed suicides cases, and

20-25 percent of suicide victims are intoxicated at the time of death (Murphy 1992; Goldsmith et

al. 2002).

       For the conclusions of this study to be useful, not only must the demand for treatment be

affected by parity laws, but treatment itself must affect the suicide rate. Previous research in

economics has shown that the treatment of mental illness is responsive to price, and while the

elasticity of demand is fairly inelastic, it has been estimated to be more price responsive than

general health (see Frank and McGuire 2000 for a review of the literature). The answer to the

question of whether treatment is successful in lowering suicides is much more elusive. It is

nearly impossible to estimate how many suicides are avoided through the provision of mental

health services, although advances in psychopharmacology have often been credited with

improving mental health outcomes and suicide rates. For example, a recent study of suicides in

Australia found a strong, negative correlation between suicides and sales of antidepressants (Hall

et al. 2003). The reduction in suicide rates might be a result of the use of the drugs, or it might

reflect increased diagnosis and treatment of depression by psychiatrists or general practitioners,

since the prescription of antidepressants is typically accompanied by other interventions such as

counseling which may also reduce suicides.

       Each state’s suicide rate for adults ages 25-64 is used as the measure of the mental health

status of each state’s population. Data on completed suicides come from the National Center for

Health Statistics’s Compressed Mortality File, which contains information on all completed

suicides over time. These data are collected from death certificates filed in each state and

include the state of residence, age, race, and gender of each individual.




                                                 11
       Focusing on the suicide rates as a measure of mental health, the empirical equation takes

the following form:

       (6) suicide rateit = α1 mandateit + α2 psychit + α3 large firmit + α4 uninsuredit +

                           α5 medicaidit + ΘX + λi + τt + εit

where the dependent variable is the adult suicide rate in state i during year t. The primary

covariate of interest is the mental health mandate variable, which is an indicator taking the value

of one if state i has a mandate during year t and zero otherwise. As described below, three

different mandate categories are examined. Next, the per-capita number of psychiatrists is

included, as are the fraction of state i’s workforce employed in large firms during year t (large

firms), the fraction of state i’s population without insurance during year t (uninsured), and the

fraction of state i’s population on Medicaid during year t (medicaid). The vector X represents

other state-specific characteristics that might be related to suicide rates. Time invariant state

effects (λ) are included, as well as year effects (τ) that are common to all states during time t.

       There exist tremendous differences in the scope and provisions of mental health

insurance mandates across states and time. Using categories created by the National Conference

of State Legislatures and consulting the state statues, the state laws are grouped into three mental

health mandate categories (NCSL 2003). The first mental health mandate is a very broad

category termed “any mental health mandate” and includes all states that have some type of

mandate in effect. The laws could apply to all insurance plans or only to plans that offer mental

health benefits. It includes those laws requiring that mental health benefits be provided on parity

with physical health benefits and those laws that simply require a minimum level of mental

health coverage be provided or merely offered. The second category represents laws mandating

that all health insurance plans provide mental health benefits. Termed “required mental health




                                                  12
benefit,” this category is different than the first in that firms must provide benefits. This measure

includes the states with parity laws and the many states and time periods for which the mandated

benefits are not necessarily on parity with physical health. The last indicator is termed “parity

law” and represents those state laws that require the provision of mental health benefits on parity

with physical health. Note that according to this definition, parity might apply to cost sharing,

days, and/or lifetime and annual limits.2,3

        We caution that it is difficult to categorize the various mental health insurance mandates

into specific groupings in any consistent way, given the varying language used in the statutes.

Even in cases where essentially the same wording is used, the interpretation of each statute is

conditional on existing judicial precedent and the policies of regulatory agencies within the state.

If we abstract away these institutional differences and focus on the plain language meaning of

the statutes, it is still generally not possible to categorize the mandates in a principled way. For

example, although there is a temptation to treat mandatory benefit statutes differently from

mandatory offering statutes, in many cases the difference is merely nominal. That is, there is

very little practical difference between a mandatory offer and a mandatory benefit as long as the

pricing restrictions and benefit levels are equivalent, since under each regime a consumer will be

covered for the stipulated services if he chooses to elect them. With that in mind, in many ways,

the general category of mandates is the least arbitrary, though it is unclear whether parsing the

mandates would help us achieve greater precision in the estimates. For this reason, we rely on

multiple groupings to examine the robustness of our estimates.



2
  Other studies and sources of the laws use different definitions for “parity” states. For example, Sturm and Pacula
(1999) include in the group of parity states those which require parity, but do not necessarily mandate benefits.
3
  A fourth category of laws was tested representing substance abuse treatment mandates. Our characterization of
these laws is incomplete, however, since a number of states have substance abuse treatment laws which are separate
from their mental health benefits laws. Analyzing the impact of these laws is beyond the scope of this paper, but is
a subject for future research.


                                                        13
        The percent uninsured, the percent on Medicaid, and the percent employed by large firms

are included in all models to help mitigate a potential bias resulting from heterogeneity in

coverage. The uninsured are not covered by the mental health mandates imposed on insurance

companies, nor are other sub-populations such as people on Medicare and Medicaid.4 Further,

the ERISA pre-emption exempts all self-insured employers and their employees from the

provisions of the state laws.

        Unfortunately, the suicide data cannot identify an individual’s coverage status, although

we do include only those suicides by individuals under the age of 65 to eliminate any effect of

the Medicare population on the results. The fact that the suicide data include both covered and

uncovered individuals effectively biases the results toward zero since, in theory, the estimated

effect of a law is a weighted average of a zero effect (for those not covered) and the effect of

those covered by the laws. To capture some of this coverage heterogeneity, the percent of each

state’s population that is uninsured and the percent covered by Medicaid are included in all

models. To account for the effect of ERISA pre-emption, the percent of a state’s workforce that

is employed by large firms (over 500 employers) that are likely to fall under ERISA is included.

Consistent data (cross sectional by state or time series within given states) on ERISA coverage

are not available, however, large employers are much more likely to self-insure than smaller

companies (EBRI 2000), therefore, the percent of employees in large firms may serve as a valid

measure of scope of the ERISA exemption.

        Next, the number of psychiatrists per capita is included in all models. This variable is

important to include because it is likely to be correlated both with the suicide rate and the

mandated benefits. The number of psychiatrists might affect suicides by influencing the full


4
 Medicare provides both inpatient and outpatient mental health benefits. Medicaid also provides mental health
services, but to varying degrees based on the state.


                                                       14
price of receiving mental health treatment through availability of services, and it might influence

the passage of mental health mandates through a strong lobbying effort. We caution that this

variable could be endogenous if the observed level reflects the overall mental health status of the

state population, with more psychiatrists demanded in states with higher rates of mental illness.

However, its inclusion helps to reduce the correlation of the mandates with the error term in the

suicide equation, particularly in the OLS equations. The endogeneity of mandates is discussed

further below.

       Lastly, a number of other state-level variables are used as covariates to represent the

demographic and socio-economic status of each state’s population. These variables include the

female labor force participation rate, the unemployment rate, real income per capita, the

percentage of the population living in rural areas, the percentage of the population 25 years and

over that has obtained a bachelor's degree, and the real (1982-1984 dollars) state excise tax on

beer. Previous research has found many of these state characteristics to be important determinants

of suicide rates (see for example Maris et al. 1992; Cutler et al. 2001; and Markowitz et al. 2003).

Descriptive statistics and sources for all variables are presented in Table 1.



ESTIMATION ISSUES

       A simple population weighted OLS estimation of suicide rates on parity laws and state

characteristics provides a baseline estimate of the effectiveness of the laws. This specification

might prove to be biased due to simultaneity between parity adoption and suicide rates. Sturm

and Pacula (1999) find that parity legislation is more likely to be passed in states where mental

heath service use is low, indicating a potential reverse causality from mental health outcomes to

legislation. It is possible that states with high suicide rates are more likely to pass parity




                                                  15
legislation in response to the poor mental health status of the population. Note that this

proposition depends on the factors influencing legislators’ decisions to enact such mandates.

Suicides are fairly rare events and are typically not publicized for fear of encouraging copycat

deaths. As a result, legislators might not be influenced by the suicide rate per se in passing

mental health legislation. Nevertheless, two-stage least squares (TSLS) will be used to test for

and correct for the potential endogeneity in the parity laws. The instruments used include

variables relating to politics and policy.

       The first instrument is an indicator measuring whether or not the state has enacted an

insurance mandate with respect to diabetes. That is, many states, during the same time period

used here, considered laws requiring insurers to cover medical treatments for diabetes, such as

insulin, diabetes pills, and dialysis treatments. Passage of a diabetes mandate is likely to be an

indicator of a state’s willingness to mandate coverage in general and, accordingly, should be

correlated with the passage of parity laws. There is no reason to suspect that diabetes coverage

and suicide rates are directly related.

       Next, the percent of each state’s congressional representatives that are Republican and

the percent of Republicans in each state’s lower house are used in some specifications as

additional instruments to capture the political preferences of a state’s voters. These preferences

are likely to be correlated with mandate adoption, and there is no reason a priori as to why they

should be directly related to suicide rates. In the empirical estimation, these variables have little

predictive power in many specifications. Angrist and Krueger (2001) discuss the bias in the two-

stage least squares coefficient as a result of weak instruments. Reducing the number of

instruments can reduce this bias, therefore, the results are shown for models that include and

exclude these two Republican Party variables.




                                                 16
       All models include a series of dichotomous indicators for each state in order to account

for any unobserved state-level factors that may influence both the mental health mandates and

suicide rates. One common problem in policy research with including these dummy variables is

that they often are highly correlated with the variables of interest, leaving little independent

variation for the instruments to detect. As a robustness check of the results, models were also

tested that exclude the state dummies and include instead a series of broader area indicators, each

representing one of the nine census divisions of the country. As expected, the predictive power

of the instruments typically improve in these specifications, however, the overall conclusions of

this paper remain unchanged (results available upon request).



RESULTS

Mandated benefit laws

       Figure 1 shows the U.S. suicide rate for all adults ages 25-64. This figure shows a

distinct downward trend over time in the suicide rate. Figure 2 shows the suicide rates over time

in four states. The rates in Maryland and Minnesota, which have mental health mandated

benefits on parity with physical health, are compared to the rates in Iowa and Michigan, which

had not enacted any mental health mandated benefits as of 2000. The laws in Maryland and

Minnesota are considered to be very comprehensive. These laws in these states apply to all types

of mental illnesses, have no small business or cost increase exemptions, and include substance

abuse treatment. Figure 2 shows that both Maryland and Minnesota experienced downward

trends in the suicide rates after the enactment of the mental health parity laws, however,

downward trends also existed during certain periods prior to the laws as well. Indeed, Michigan,

which has no mental health benefit laws, experienced a downward trend throughout the entire




                                                 17
1981-2000 period. Based on this simple picture, there is no suggestion that any decrease in the

suicide rate can be attributed to the enactment of mental health parity laws. Thus, we proceed

with a more formal, multivariate analysis.

         The results in Table 2 show the effect of the adoption of any mental health insurance

mandate (columns 1-3) and required mental health benefits (columns 4-6). In the OLS estimates

presented in column 1, the effect of any mandate on the suicide rate is positive but not

statistically significant. Once the endogeneity of mandate adoption is accounted for through the

use of instrumental variables, the results presented in columns 2 and 3 suggest that mental health

mandates remain positively associated with the suicide rate. However, only one of the TSLS

coefficients is statistically significant and this is only at the 10 percent level (column 2). The

instruments prove to be reliable. (First stage results are presented in Appendix Table 1.) The

diabetes mandate indicator is a statistically significant predictor of mental health mandates, as is

the percent of Republicans in the state’s lower house. The F-statistics show that the instruments

are statistically significant, and the magnitudes are fairly large. This indicates that it is unlikely

that the models suffer from the problems of weak instruments.5 In column 3, the

overidentification statistic implies that the three instruments are appropriately excluded from the

second stage equation and are not directly related to the suicide rate. Interestingly, the Hausman

tests in columns 2 and 3 cannot reject the consistency of the OLS estimates, therefore, we

conclude that the OLS results are trustworthy and the mandated benefit laws do not appear to be

endogenous to the suicide rates.

         In the models shown in columns 4-6 of Table 2, the mandate indicator takes the value of

one when a mental health benefit must be provided (the required mental health benefit indicator).


5
 Bound et al. (1995) and others have noted that a low first stage F-statistic for the identifying instrumental variables
may suggest that the TSLS estimates are no better than biased OLS estimates.


                                                          18
Although the OLS estimate of the mandate coefficient is positive, it is small and statistically

insignificant. The TSLS estimates shown in columns 5 and 6 are negative, but again, are not

statistically significant at conventional levels. These TSLS results are not trustworthy as the F-

statistics on the instruments are not statistically significant, indicating the instruments are

extremely weak predictors of required mandated benefits. As a result, the Hausman test statistics

can not be trusted, and provide little guidance as to whether or not this measure of mandated

benefits is endogenous.

       Table 3 presents regression results where the mandate indicator takes the value of one

only in instances where mental health benefits must be provided on parity with physical health.

The models in columns 1-3 include the same covariates and instruments as those in the previous

table. Unfortunately, as a result of extremely weak instruments, the TSLS results in columns 2

and 3 cannot be trusted (first stage results are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table

2). Here, the F-statistics on the instruments are not statistically significant at conventional levels.

The lack of predictive power in the first stage may result from the fact that no state enacted a

mental health parity law prior to 1993, meaning that the parity law takes on a value of zero for all

states in 12 years or in at least 60 percent of the observations. In an attempt to improve the

predictive power of the instruments, the models shown in columns 4-6 are estimated based on a

sample that is limited to the years 1993-2000, the time period in which states began passing

parity laws. Here again, the OLS and TSLS estimates of the impact of the parity law on suicide

rates are not statistically significant, although limiting the sample improves the first stage results.

The instruments are statistically significant predictors of the passage of parity laws (columns 5

and 6), the overidentification restrictions are valid (column 6), while the Hausman test does not

reject the consistency of OLS (columns 5 and 6). These results suggest that no relationship




                                                  19
exists between parity laws and the adult suicide rate.

       The measures of the mental health mandates used in Tables 2 and 3 are dichotomous

indicators representing the presence or absence of certain mandates. An alternative way to

present these results is to treat the mandates as mutually exclusive categories. The models

shown in Table 4 include three indicators of the different types of mandates. As discussed

above, we caution that these groupings are somewhat arbitrary and that the actual influence

of the laws will depend tremendously on the details of the laws and the policies of regulatory

agencies within the state. Subject to this caveat, mandate 1 represents states with mandated

offerings only, mandate 2 represents states with mandated benefits that are not required to be

on parity with physical health, and mandate 3 represents states with mandated benefits that

are on parity with physical health. The omitted category represents states with no mandates.

       Ordinary least squares and TSLS models are presented for the full sample (columns 1

and 2) and the sample limited to the years 1993-2000 (columns 3 and 4). All three available

instruments are used in order to achieve identification. The discussion of the results in this

table focuses on the OLS estimates since the statistics related to the TSLS estimates show

that the instruments are valid (although their predictive power is very low in some cases), and

the consistency of OLS cannot be rejected. The results uniformly show that mandates 1 and

3 are not statistically significant predictors of suicide rates, and the OLS magnitudes are

small with the sign varying depending on the sample used. By contrast, mandate 2, which

represents required benefits that are not on parity with physical health, is positively related to

the suicide rates in the OLS models spanning all years. Here, the suicide rate in states having

such a mandate is actually higher by almost 1 person per 100,000. This results may be

indicative of the displacement effect of insurance mandates where increased costs induce




                                                 20
individuals and businesses to drop coverage. When the sample is limited to 1993-2000, the

effect of the required benefits remains positive, but is smaller and not longer statistically

significant.



State Characteristics

        Overall, mandated benefit laws appear to have no influence on adult suicide rates. The

results in Tables 2-4 do show that some of the other state characteristics may help explain some

of the variation in suicide rates across the full sample period. For example, labor market

characteristics and economic conditions may predict suicide rates. Higher rates of female labor

force participation are positively associated with suicides, as are higher unemployment rates. Per

capita income, however, appears to have little effect as the magnitude of the coefficients are

extremely small and are statistically insignificant in models utilizing the full sample period,

although the coefficients are negative and statistically significant in models using the 1993-2000

period. In addition, states with larger percentages of the population with college degrees tend to

have lower suicide rates.

        The number of psychiatrists per 100,000 population is positively associated with the

suicide rate. As discussed above, the interpretation of this result must be taken with caution as it

is likely that the observed numbers of psychiatrists reflects the overall mental health status of the

state population. Next, larger percentages of the population without health insurance are

associated with lower suicide rates. The negative effect of uninsurance on suicide rates might

arise if self-selection is present and people who do not buy insurance are a relatively healthy

group. For example, self-employed individuals are much more likely than wage-earners to be

uninsured, yet Perry and Rosen (2001, 2003) find no discernable differences between these two




                                                 21
groups in regards to physical health status, mental health status, and service utilization. Lastly,

larger percentages of the population on Medicaid are associated with higher suicide rates, A

positive effect may arise if the program fails to provide the level of access to care necessary to

prevent suicides among this population, however, it is also likely that this effect may simply

reflect a time-varying state level characteristic such as lower levels of income among the state

population.



CONCLUSION

       This paper examines the potential for mental health insurance mandates to improve the

mental health of the population as represented by the adult suicide rate. Using three different

measures of mental health mandates, the results suggest that mandates do little to reduce the

suicide rate. One of the primary difficulties in estimating the effects of mandated benefit laws on

health outcomes is the potential endogenity of the laws. Previous research has shown that mental

health parity laws are more likely to be enacted in states with lower mental health utilization and

presumably better mental health status. Our research tests for such endogeneity, but finds little

support for this claim when suicide rates are considered.

       Using OLS and TSLS, the estimates employing the most general definition of what

constitutes a mental health insurance mandate provide the most convincing and most robust

results. Indeed, there appears to be no statistically significant relationship between mandate

adoption and adult suicides. Partitioning the mandates into different categories provides a check

on the robustness of this result. Mandated offering laws and parity laws, which represent the

majority of the different types of state laws, drive the overall results and each appear to have no

effect on suicide rates. However, the presence of mandated benefits that are not on parity with




                                                 22
physical health benefits might increase the suicide rate. This result is consistent with a

displacement effect of mandates.

       This study contributes to the growing consensus in the literature that mental health

mandates do not accomplish their desired goals. However, this research suffers from the

problem of weak instruments with respect to some specific mandate classifications. Another

limitation of this research is that the outcome studied includes individuals who are not affected

by mental health mandates, which could bias the results toward zero. Despite these limitations,

this research provides no evidence that mental health mandates reduce suicide rates. At best,

these mandates have no effect on this outcome.

       This research raises many interesting questions. A next step for research is to examine

why these laws are not achieving improvements in mental health outcomes. This paper points to

a number of possibilities. The design of the laws themselves might ensure no impact. In states

like Arizona and Kentucky, where minimum mental health benefits are required only if the plan

provides any mental health benefits, firms and insurance companies have the incentive and the

option to drop benefits if they are too costly. Similarly, cost increase exemptions and small

employer exemptions in a number of the state laws might prevent any of the mandates from

being binding. The design of the laws notwithstanding, it is also unclear what impact the

mandates have on the cost of providing mental and even physical health insurance. Rising

premiums might encourage employers to raise employee contributions or to drop coverage

altogether. These questions are beyond the scope of this study, but are nonetheless important

questions in determining whether mandated mental health benefits improve the mental health of

the population.




                                                 23
                                        REFERENCES

Angrist J.D. and A.B. Krueger (2001). “Instrumental Variables and the Search for Identification:
       From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       15 (4), 69-85.

Bound, J, Jaeger, DA, Baker, RM. (1995) “Problems With Instrumental Variables Estimation
     when the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory
     Variables is Weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association. 90:443-450.

Clark, DC and Horton-Deutsch SL. (1992) “Assessment in Absentia: The Value of the
       Psychological Autopsy Method for Studying Antecedents of Suicide and Predicting
       Future Suicides” in Maris RW, Berman AL, Maltsberger JT, and Yufit, RI (Eds)
       Assessment and Prediction of Suicide, New York: The Guilford Press.

Cutler D, Glaeser EL, and Norberg KE (2001). “The Economic Approach to Teenage Suicide”
       in Gruber J, (ed) Risky Behavior Among Youths. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
       Press.

Economic Report of the President (1991). United States Government Printing Office,
      Washington, D.C.

Egelko, S., M. Galanter, H. Dermatis, E. Jurewicz, A. Jamison, S. Dingle, and G. De Leon
       (2002). “Improved Psychological Status in a Modified Therapeutic Community for
       Homeless MICA Men.” Journal of Addictive Diseases, 21(2): 75-92.

Employee Benefits Research Institute (April 2000). “Employment-Based Health Care Benefits
      and Self-Funded Employment-Based Plans: An Overview.” EBRI, Washington, DC.

England, Mary (1999). “Capturing Mental Health Care Offsets.” Health Affairs 18(2): 91-93.

Frank, Richard (1985). “Price and Location of Physician Services in Mental Health” Economic
       Inquiry 23(115): 115-133.

Frank, Richard and Thomas McGuire (2000). “Economics and Mental Health” in Culyer AJ
       and JP Newhouse, editors, Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1B. Elsevier
       Science: Amsterdam.

Frank, Richard, Howard Goldman, and Thomas McGuire (2001). “Will Parity in Coverage
       Result in Better Mental Health Care?” The New England Journal of Medicine, 345(23):
       1701-1704.

General Accounting Office (2000). “Mental Health Parity Act: Despite New Federal Standards,
      Mental Health Benefits Remain Limited.” HEHS-00-95: May 10.

Goldsmith, SK, TC Pellmar, AM Kleinman, and WE Bunney, (Eds) (2002). Reducing Suicide:


                                              24
       A National Imperative. The National Academy Press: Washington DC.

Grossman, M. (1972) The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation. New
      York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gruber, Jonathan (1994). “State-Mandated Benefits and Employer-Provided Health Insurance.”
       The Journal of Public Economics, 55(3): 433-464.

Hall, WD, Mant, A, Mitchell, PB, Rendle, VA, Hickie, IB, and McManus, P (2003).
       “Association Between Antidepressant Prescribing and Suicide in Australia, 1991-2000:
       Trend Analysis” British Medical Journal, 326:1008-11.

Havassy, B, and P. Arns (1998). “Relationship of Cocaine and Other Substance Dependence to
      Well-Being of High-Risk Psychiatric Patients.” Psychiatric Services, 49(7): 935-940.

Horgan, CM (1986). “The Demand for Ambulatory Mental Health Services from Specialty
      Providers” Health Services Research, 21(2): 291-319.

Kaestner, Robert and Kosali Simon (2002). “Labor Market Consequences of State Health
      Insurance Regulation.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56(1): 136-159.

Maltsberger, JT (1992) “The Psychodynamic Formulation: An Aid in Assessing Suicide Risk”
       in Maris RW, Berman AL, Maltsberger JT, and Yufit, RI (Eds) Assessment and
       Prediction of Suicide, New York: The Guilford Press.

Maris RW, Berman AL, Maltsberger JT, and Yufit, RI (Eds) (1992) Assessment and Prediction
       of Suicide, New York: The Guilford Press.

Markowitz, S., P. Chatterji and R. Kaestner (2003) “Estimating the Impact of Alcohol Policies
     on Youth Suicides” Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 6: 37-46.

McGuire, TG and J Montgomery (1982). “Mandated Mental Health Benefits in Privat Health
     Insurance Policies” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 7(2): 380-406.

Murphy, C.E. (1992). Suicide in Alcoholism. New York: Oxford University Press.

Murray, C. J. L., and A.D. Lopez, (Eds.) (1996). The global burden of disease. A comprehensive
      assessment of mortality and disability from diseases, injuries, and risk factors in 1990
      and projected to 2020. Cambridge, MA: Harvard School of Public Health.

National Conference of State Legislatures (June 2003). State Laws Mandating or Regulating
       Mental Health Benefits. Retreived June 2003 from NCLS on the World Wide Web:
       http://www.ncsl.org/programs/health/mentalben.htm.

Olfson, M., M. Sing, and H. Schlesinger (1999). “Mental Health/Medical Care Cost Offsets:
       Opportunities for Managed Care.” Health Affairs 18(2): 79-90.



                                              25
Pacula, Rosalie and Roland Sturm (2000). “Mental Health Parity Legislation: Much Ado About
       Nothing?” Health Services Research, 35(1): 263-275.

Perry, C.W. and H.S. Rosen (2001). “The Self-Employed Are Less Likely Than Wage-Earners
       to Have Health Insurance. So What?” NBER working paper #8316.

Perry, C.W. and H.S. Rosen (2003). “Insurance and the Utilization of Medical Services Among
       the Self-Employed,” in S Cnossen and HW Sinn (eds), Public Finances and Public Policy
       in the New Century. Mit Press: Cambridge, MA.

Simon, GE and M. Von Korff (1998). “Suicide Mortality Among Patients Treated for
       Depression in an Insured Population” American Journal of Epidemiology, 147(2), 155-
       160.

Sturm, Roland. "State Parity Legislation and Changes in Health Insurance and Perceived Access
       to Care Among Individual with Mental Illness: 1996-1998." Journal of Mental Health
       Policy and Economics 3 (2000): 209-13.

Sturm, Roland and Rosalie Pacula (1999). “State Mental Health Parity Laws: Cause or
       Consequence of Differences in Use?” Health Affairs, 18(5): 182-192.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (1999). Effects of the Mental
       Health Parity Act of 1996. Rockville, Md.: U.S. Department of Health and Human
       Services.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999). Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon
       General—Executive Summary. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human
       Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for
       Mental Health Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Mental
       Health, 1999.

Zuvekas, Samuel, Darrel Regier, Donald Rae, Agnes Rupp, and William Narrow (2002). “The
      Impacts of Mental Health Parity and Managed Care in One Large Employer Group.”
      Health Affairs, 21(3): 148-159.




                                             26
                                                           Figure 1
                                             U.S. Suicide Rate, Adults ages 25-64

               20




               15
Suicide Rate




               10




                5




                0
                1980      1982     1984       1986    1988     1990      1992   1994      1996   1998     2000
                                                                Year




                                                       Figure 2
                                   Suicide Rates, Selected States, Adults ages 25-64


               20



               18



               16



               14



               12



               10
                1980      1982      1984      1986    1988      1990     1992   1994      1996    1998    2000
                                                                Year

                    Minnesota: Parity 1995       Maryland: Parity 1994     Iowa: No law      Michigan: No law


                                                              27
                                                         Table 1
                                              Summary Statistics of Selected Variables
 Variable                  Definition                                             Mean      Std Dev   Source
                           Number of adult suicides ages 25-64, per 100,000                           NCHS
 Adult suicide rate                                                                16.41     4.16
                           population ages 25-64
                           Indicator = 1 if state has some form of a mental
 Any mental health                                                                                    NCSL and
                           health insurance mandate in place, including parity      0.27     0.44
 mandate                                                                                              state statutes
                           mandate, benefit mandate, or offering mandate
                           Indicator = 1 if state mandates health insurance
 Required mental                                                                                      NCSL and
                           plans to provide mental health benefits. May or          0.11     0.31
 health benefit                                                                                       state statutes
                           may not be on parity with physical health benefits
                           Indicator =1 if state mandates health insurance
                                                                                                      NCSL and
 Parity                    plans to provide mental health benefits on parity        0.06     0.24
                                                                                                      state statutes
                           with physical health
 Labor force
                           Labor force participation rate of women                 58.26     5.20     BLS
 participation

 Unemployment              Unemployment rate                                        6.05     2.20     BLS

 Real income               Per capita income adjusted for inflation                140.32   24.20     BEA

 Percent rural             Percent of state population living in rural areas       31.07    14.59     Census

                           Percent of state population ages 25 years and older
 College degree                                                                    20.38     4.65     Census
                           that has graduated from a 4-year college

 Percent black             Percent of state population black                        9.64     9.22     Census

 Beer tax                  State excise tax on beer                                 0.51     0.19     Beer Institute

 Psychiatrists             Number of psychiatrists per 100,000 population          21.46     9.77     AMA

 Percent large             Percent of state workforce in firms with 500 +
                                                                                   33.08    14.88     SBA
 employers                 employees

 Percent uninsured         Percent of state population with no health insurance    16.34     4.73     CPS

 Percent Medicaid          Percent of state population with Medicaid                8.73     3.47     CPS

                           Indicator = 1 if state has mandate requiring insurers
 Diabetes law                                                                       0.17     0.38     NCSL
                           to cover diabetes treatments
 Congressional             Percent of congressional delegation affiliated with
                                                                                    0.48     0.29     STAT AB
 Republicans               Republican Party

 State Republicans         Percent of Republicans in state lower house              0.44     0.17     STAT AB
AMA: American Medical Association
BLS: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor
BEA: Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce
Census: U.S. Bureau of the Census
CPS: Current Population Survey, BLS and Bureau of the Census
NCHS: National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control
NCSL: National Conference of State Legislatures
STAT AB: Statistical Abstract
SBA: U.S. Small Business Administration



                                                             28
                                                       Table 2
                                             OLS and TSLS Regressions
                                      Adult Suicides and Mental Health Benefits

                                   OLS           TSLS            TSLS             OLS           TSLS          TSLS
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)
Any mental health mandate          0.012          2.530          0.905
                                  (0.09)         (1.80)         (1.05)
Required mental health                                                           0.119        -11.141       -11.869
  benefit                                                                       (0.61)        (-0.98)       (-1.01)
Labor force participation          0.162          0.135          0.153           0.164          0.058          0.052
                                  (5.32)         (3.48)         (4.69)          (5.36)         (0.47)         (0.40)
Unemployment                       0.119          0.126          0.122           0.118          0.248          0.256
                                  (2.89)         (2.60)         (2.87)          (2.85)         (1.56)         (1.56)
Real income                       -0.009         -0.008          -0.009          -0.010         0.020          0.022
                                 (-1.02)        (-0.79)         (-0.96)         (-1.06)        (0.56)         (0.59)
Percent rural                      0.033          0.023          0.029           0.031          0.171          0.180
                                  (0.91)         (0.54)         (0.79)          (0.87)         (1.06)         (1.08)
College degree                    -0.081         -0.108          -0.090          -0.081        -0.042         -0.040
                                 (-2.10)        (-2.28)         (-2.24)         (-2.10)       (-0.46)        (-0.41)
Percent black                      0.314          0.118          0.244           0.313          0.503          0.516
                                  (3.02)         (0.72)         (1.95)          (3.02)         (1.71)         (1.68)
Beer tax                           0.476          1.301          0.769           0.418          5.533          5.863
                                  (0.55)         (1.17)         (0.83)          (0.48)         (1.00)         (1.03)
Psychiatrists                      0.295          0.294          0.295           0.295          0.325          0.327
                                  (8.69)         (7.43)         (8.49)          (8.68)         (4.12)         (3.96)
Percent large employers           -0.016         -0.046          -0.027          -0.017         0.105          0.113
                                 (-0.77)        (-1.56)         (-1.13)         (-0.83)        (0.80)         (0.83)
Percent uninsured                 -0.068         -0.072          -0.069          -0.067        -0.140         -0.145
                                 (-2.92)        (-2.64)         (-2.91)         (-2.89)       (-1.57)        (-1.57)
Percent Medicaid                   0.059          0.064          0.061           0.060         -0.017         -0.022
                                  (2.31)         (2.16)         (2.33)          (2.34)        (-0.18)        (-0.22)

R-squared                          0.903          0.868          0.898           0.903          0.554         0.507

Overidentification test                                          4.349                                         0.103
                                                                [0.114]                                       [0.950]
Hausman test                                      3.239          1.100                          0.981          1.041
                                                 [0.072]        [0.294]                        [0.322]        [0.308]
F-test on instrument(s)                         12.370           8.620                          1.250          0.430
                                                [0.000]         [0.000]                        [0.265]        [0.731]
 Note: t-statistics in parentheses, p-values in brackets, and intercept not shown. All models include state and year
 dummies. N=1,000. The instrument in columns 2 and 5 is the diabetes mandate. The instruments in columns 3 and 6
 are the diabetes mandate, the percent of Republicans in state lower house, and the percent of the state’s congressional
 delegation Republican.




                                                           29
                                                  Table 3
                                       OLS and TSLS Regressions
                                 Adult Suicides and Mental Health Parity
                                OLS           TSLS            TSLS           OLS          TSLS          TSLS
                                (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                              All years     All years     All years       1993-2000     1993-2000     1993-2000
Parity                         -0.305       -13.057       -10.721           -0.081        2.465         0.503
                              (-1.50)       (-0.91)       (-1.12)          (-0.37)       (1.29)        (0.62)
Labor force participation       0.157        -0.081           -0.037        0.038         0.106         0.053
                               (5.11)       (-0.29)          (-0.20)       (0.74)        (1.34)        (0.96)
Unemployment                    0.122         0.207           0.191         0.450         0.488         0.459
                               (2.94)        (1.53)          (1.85)        (3.74)        (3.35)        (3.75)
Real income                    -0.008         0.059           0.047         -0.066        -0.113        -0.077
                              (-0.84)        (0.76)          (0.88)        (-3.30)       (-2.68)       (-3.10)
Percent rural                   0.035         0.111           0.097         -0.058        -0.081        -0.064
                               (0.97)        (0.93)          (1.07)        (-0.76)       (-0.88)       (-0.82)
College degree                 -0.077         0.052           0.028         -0.029        -0.069        -0.038
                              (-2.01)        (0.31)          (0.23)        (-0.67)       (-1.17)       (-0.84)
Percent black                   0.320         0.525           0.487         0.430         0.310         0.402
                               (3.09)        (1.58)          (1.91)        (2.05)        (1.17)        (1.87)
Beer tax                        0.543         3.474           2.937         2.307         -1.791        1.367
                               (0.62)        (0.90)          (1.05)        (0.57)        (-0.31)       (0.32)
Psychiatrists                   0.299         0.434           0.409         0.176         0.193         0.180
                               (8.78)        (2.54)          (3.36)        (2.13)        (1.95)        (2.15)
Percent large employers        -0.014         0.048           0.037         -0.106        -0.085        -0.101
                              (-0.70)        (0.57)          (0.59)        (-1.48)       (-0.97)       (-1.39)
Percent uninsured              -0.068        -0.078           -0.076        0.036         0.071         0.044
                              (-2.94)       (-1.43)          (-1.65)       (1.00)        (1.42)        (1.16)
Percent Medicaid                0.061         0.132           0.119         0.083         0.072         0.081
                               (2.38)        (1.33)          (1.62)        (2.30)        (1.63)        (2.19)

R-squared                       0.903         0.487           0.625         0.942         0.919         0.941

Overidentification test                                       0.233                                     2.114
                                                             [0.890]                                   [0.348]
Hausman test                                  0.790           1.185                       1.799         0.559
                                             [0.374]         [0.276]                     [0.180]       [0.455]
F-test on instrument(s)                       0.980           0.530                       6.250         8.890
                                             [0.324]         [0.663]                     [0.013]       [0.000]
Note: t-statistics in parentheses, p-values in brackets, and intercept not shown. All models include state and year
dummies. N=1,000 in columns 1 and 2, N=400 in columns 3 and 4. The instrument in columns 2 and 5 is the diabetes
mandate. The instruments in columns 3 and 6 are the diabetes mandate, the percent of Republicans in state lower
house, and the percent of the state’s congressional delegation Republican.




                                                        30
                                              Table 4
                                     OLS and TSLS Regressions
                        Adult Suicides and Mental Health Mandates Categories
                                     OLS                 TSLS                 OLS               TSLS
                                     (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                   All years         All years            1993-2000          1993-2000
Mandate 1                           -0.089             -0.676               -0.017              1.115
                                   (-0.56)           (-0.23)               (-0.07)             (0.22)
Mandate 2                            0.961           -10.211                 0.477             -4.786
                                    (2.96)           (-0.34)                (1.28)            (-0.88)
Mandate 3                           -0.171           -15.584                 0.002             -0.679
                                   (-0.78)           (-0.76)                (0.01)            (-0.46)
Labor force participation            0.152             -0.019                0.042             -0.020
                                    (4.96)           (-0.06)                (0.82)            (-0.16)
Unemployment                         0.115              0.264                0.434              0.555
                                    (2.78)             (1.07)               (3.55)             (1.14)
Real income                         -0.006              0.044               -0.063             -0.101
                                   (-0.67)             (0.45)              (-3.13)            (-2.22)
Percent rural                        0.027              0.186               -0.067              0.032
                                    (0.75)             (0.67)              (-0.87)             (0.24)
College degree                      -0.072              0.014               -0.024             -0.083
                                   (-1.87)             (0.06)              (-0.55)            (-0.84)
Percent black                        0.322              0.615                0.440              0.277
                                    (3.11)             (1.10)               (2.09)             (0.84)
Beer tax                             0.227              5.817                1.890             10.375
                                    (0.26)             (0.64)               (0.45)             (0.45)
Psychiatrists                        0.305              0.378                0.179              0.185
                                    (8.98)             (1.50)               (2.15)             (0.93)
Percent large employers             -0.021              0.122               -0.104             -0.123
                                   (-1.00)             (0.48)              (-1.44)            (-1.13)
Percent Uninsured                   -0.062             -0.133                0.037              0.027
                                   (-2.66)            (-0.72)               (1.03)             (0.52)
Percent Medicaid                     0.072              0.022                0.088              0.023
                                    (2.81)             (0.07)               (2.42)             (0.33)

R-squared                            0.904             0.328                  0.943             0.901
Hausman test                                           6.520                                    3.921
                                                      [0.089]                                  [0.270]
F-test on instruments for                             13.080                                    0.680
   mandate 1                                          [0.000]                                  [0.566]
F-test on on instruments for                           0.290                                    2.030
   mandate 2                                          [0.833]                                  [0.109]
F-test on on instruments for                           0.530                                    8.89
   mandate 3                                          [0.663]                                  [0.000]
Note: t-statistics in parentheses, p-values in brackets, and intercept not shown. All models include state and year
dummies. N=1,000 in columns 1 and 2, N=400 in columns 3 and 4. The instruments in columns 2 and 4 are the
diabetes mandate, the percent of Republicans in state lower house, and the percent of the state’s congressional
delegation Republican. Mandate 1 represents states with mandated offerings only. Mandate 2 represents states
with mandated benefits that are not on parity with physical health. Mandate 3 represents states with mandated
benefits that are on parity with physical health. The omitted category represents states with no mandates.



                                                    31
                                        Appendix Table 1
                                     First Stage Regressions

                                            Any mental health mandate    Required mental health
                                                                                 benefit
                                                 (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)
Diabetes Law                                    0.123          0.136      -0.028         -0.028
                                               (3.52)         (3.88)     (-1.12)       (-1.10)
Congress Republicans                                          -0.070                   -0.012
                                                             (-0.94)                  (-0.23)
State Republicans                                              0.718                    0.003
                                                              (3.60)                   (0.02)
Labor force participation                       0.012          0.010      -0.009       -0.009
                                               (1.63)         (1.42)     (-1.85)      (-1.84)
Unemployment                                   -0.004         -0.005       0.012        0.012
                                              (-0.39)        (-0.54)      (1.70)       (1.71)
Real income                                    -0.001         -0.00004     0.003        0.003
                                              (-0.30)        (-0.02)      (1.77)       (1.73)
Percent rural                                   0.008          0.006       0.012        0.011
                                               (0.89)         (0.65)      (1.91)       (1.89)
College degree                                  0.014          0.013       0.003        0.003
                                               (1.51)         (1.40)      (0.44)       (0.42)
Percent black                                   0.070          0.060       0.019        0.019
                                               (2.88)         (2.44)      (1.07)       (1.08)
Beer tax                                       -0.360         -0.139       0.462        0.458
                                              (-1.76)        (-0.64)      (3.16)       (2.95)
Psychiatrists                                  -0.004         -0.005       0.004        0.004
                                              (-0.54)        (-0.64)      (0.65)       (0.62)
Percent large employers                         0.011          0.006       0.011        0.011
                                               (2.31)         (1.15)      (3.16)       (2.97)
Percent uninsured                              -0.00032       -0.001      -0.006       -0.006
                                              (-0.060)       (-0.15)     (-1.55)      (-1.56)
Percent Medicaid                               -0.00165        0.001      -0.007       -0.007
                                              (-0.280)        (0.22)     (-1.62)      (-1.61)
Note: t-statistics in parentheses, and intercept not shown. N=1,000.




                                                  32
                                      Appendix Table 2
                                   First Stage Regressions

                                                   Parity                         Parity
                                                 1981-2000                      1993-2000
                                              (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)
Diabetes Law                                -0.024        -0.024            0.115         0.123
                                           (-0.99)       (-0.97)           (2.50)        (2.72)
Congress Republicans                                      -0.036                          0.006
                                                         (-0.70)                         (0.05)
State Republicans                                         -0.041                          1.757
                                                         (-0.29)                         (4.47)
Labor force participation                   -0.019        -0.019           -0.025        -0.026
                                           (-3.80)       (-3.74)          (-2.02)       (-2.14)
Unemployment                                 0.007         0.008           -0.014        -0.027
                                            (1.03)        (1.11)          (-0.45)       (-0.91)
Real income                                  0.005         0.005            0.018         0.019
                                            (3.63)        (3.49)           (3.65)        (3.91)
Percent rural                                0.005         0.005            0.024         0.012
                                            (0.90)        (0.89)           (1.20)        (0.59)
College degree                               0.010         0.009            0.017         0.021
                                            (1.54)        (1.50)           (1.61)        (2.01)
Percent black                                0.018         0.020            0.050         0.005
                                            (1.04)        (1.15)           (0.96)        (0.10)
Beer tax                                     0.236         0.209            1.380         2.561
                                            (1.68)        (1.40)           (1.36)        (2.50)
Psychiatrists                                0.012         0.011           -0.022        -0.027
                                            (2.07)        (1.97)          (-1.02)       (-1.28)
Percent large employers                      0.005         0.006           -0.016        -0.051
                                            (1.49)        (1.62)          (-0.88)       (-2.62)
Percent uninsured                           -0.0004       -0.001           -0.014        -0.012
                                           (-0.11)       (-0.16)          (-1.57)       (-1.32)
Percent Medicaid                             0.005         0.005            0.006         0.007
                                            (1.32)        (1.21)           (0.65)        (0.82)
Note: t-statistics in parentheses, and intercept not shown. N=1,000 in columns 1 and 2, N=400 in
columns 3 and 4.




                                                33
