NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RETIREMENT AND THE EVOLUTION OF PENSION STRUCTURE
Leora Friedberg
Anthony Webb
Working Paper 9999
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9999
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2003

We would like to thank Scott J. Adams, Hugo Benítez Silva, Courtney Coile, Vince Crawford, Daniel
Dulitzky, Marjorie Flavin, Alan Gustman, Ted Groves, Jon Gruber, Jim Poterba, and participants of several
seminars for very helpful comments. We are grateful to Vince Crawford, Cathy Liebowitz, and Bob Peticolas
for enormous help with obtaining and/or explaining the HRS pension data.The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Retirement and the Evolution of Pension Structure
Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb
NBER Working Paper No. 9999
September 2003
JEL No. J14, J26, J32
ABSTRACT
Defined benefit pension plans have become considerably less common since the early 1980s, while
defined contribution plans have spread. Previous research showed that defined benefit plans, with
sharp incentives encouraging retirement after a certain point, contributed to the striking postwar
decline in American retirement ages. In this paper we find that the absence of age-related incentives
in defined contribution plans leads workers to retire almost two years later on average, compared
to workers with defined benefit plans. Thus, the evolution of pension structure can help explain
recent increases in employment among people in their 60s, after decades of decline.

Leora Friedberg
Department of Economics
114 Rouss Hall
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
lfriedberg@virginia.edu
Anthony Webb
International Longevity Center
60 E. 86th Street
New York, NY 10028
tonyw@ilcusa.org

The typical employer-provided pension has changed dramatically in the last twenty years.
The percentage of pensioned full-time employees with a 401(k) or other defined contribution
(DC) plan rose from 40% in 1983 to 79% in 1998. The percentage covered by a defined benefit
(DB) plan declined similarly, from 87% in 1983 to 44% in 1998.1
Pension wealth in traditional DB plans is a complicated function of earnings, tenure, and
age. DB pension wealth typically accumulates slowly early in a job, accelerates or jumps after
many years of tenure, and then ultimately slows down or declines if one stays in the job long
enough. Therefore, DB pensions encourage workers to stay early on in order to gain access to
large future pension accruals, and later to leave, after 25-30 years of tenure.2 Earlier studies
showed that DB pension plans influenced retirement behavior by as much or more than Social
Security, and that the postwar spread of DB plans contributed to the striking decline in American
retirement ages.3 However, retirement ages leveled off in the early 1980s and employment at
older ages has risen since then.4 We argue that the shift in pension structure played a role in
reversing the decades’ long decline. DC pensions accumulate a lump sum which depends strictly
on contributions and returns accumulated in a portable account, so the timing of pension wealth
accruals is not tied to the timing of retirement as in DB pensions.
Our goal in this study is to analyze how the decline in DB pension coverage has
influenced retirement. Our approach is essentially quasi-experimental, comparing retirement
responses to financial incentives in DB versus DC plans. In addition, we offer some further
extensions to the literature on private pensions. We show that the measures of pension accrual
that are crucial for understanding DB pension incentives do not meaningfully describe DC plans.
1

EBRI (1996) and authors’ computations from the Survey of Consumer Finances.
These age-related incentives were documented by Burkhauser (1979) and Kotlikoff and Wise (1985, 1987, 1989).
3
Costa (1998) reported that labor force participation rates fell from 58% to less than 20% between 1930 and 1990
among men aged 65+ and from 82% to 67% between 1940 and 1990 among men aged 55-64.
2

3

We also employ new data from the nationally representative, longitudinal Health and Retirement
Study. The HRS began in 1992, more recently than data used in earlier studies of DB pensions,
and it offers descriptions of pension plans from employers.5
We hypothesize that retirement hazards will smooth out for workers with DC plans,
compared to workers with DB plans. In theory, that might reduce the average retirement age, if
DB plans generally constrain workers to retire later than they would otherwise; or it might raise
it, if DB plans constrain workers to retire earlier. Our estimates show that the differences in
pension wealth accrual significantly affect retirement. Simulations based on the estimates
demonstrate that workers with DB plans retire almost two years earlier, on average, compared to
workers with DC plans and holding other characteristics constant. Accounting for DC
contributions that are voluntary and possibly endogenous does not affect the estimation results,
nor does allowing retirement behavior to differ by pension type, which controls flexibly for other
differences between DB and DC pensions.
The simulation results imply that the shift in pension structure will raise the median
retirement age by about 10 months when comparing full-time employees with a pension in the
cohort aged 53-57 in 1983 with the cohort aged 53-57 in 2015. Under different assumptions
about those without a pension, this corresponds to a 9-12 month increase in the median
retirement age of all full-time employees in those cohorts. This response stands in sharp contrast
to the trend towards earlier retirement that slowed down in the early 1980s, and it can help
explain recent increases in employment among people in their 60s.

4

These recent trends have been documented by Quinn (2000) and Genser (2001).
Coile and Gruber (2000) used the same HRS data to analyze the impact of Social Security on retirement. In some
of their specifications they included private pensions, but they summed together pension and Social Security
incentives, and they measured financial incentives in DB and DC plans in the same way.
5

4

While our work builds on previous research that treats pension type as exogenous, we
recognize that workers may sort into firms endogenously, based on pension characteristics or on
other characteristics correlated with pensions. We argue that the shift in pension structure does
not appear to be related to retirement preferences.

Moreover, we find little evidence of sorting

into pension type on observable worker and job characteristics.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we outline how differences
between DB and DC pensions influence retirement and why pension structure may have changed.
In Section II we describe the data and show raw statistics on pensions and retirement. We present
the estimation and simulation results in Section III and summarize our findings in Section IV.
I. PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
In this section, we show how pension structure may influence retirement. Then, we
discuss why pension structure may have changed and argue that these changes occurred for
reasons that were unrelated to retirement preferences.
A. The impact of pensions on retirement
The retirement decision. Each period a worker decides whether to stay in a job or leave
(retire).6 He or she weighs the utility of retiring now or of staying and deciding next period
whether to retire. The value of this decision Vt can be written as Vt = V(Rt), where Rt equals one
if the decision is to retire and zero if the decision is to stay in the job.
Suppose that the value of staying in the job this period is
V(0) = u0(Wt) + β E(Vt+1)

(1)

6

This framework may apply to quits at any age, if leaving a job is irreversible. Similarly, older workers may
choose to take another job rather than retiring completely. These extensions do not alter the qualitative impact of
pensions.

5

the sum of utility from the wage Wt received this period and the discounted expected value of
facing the retirement decision next period.7 Suppose that the value of retiring is
V(1) = u1(Pt )
which depends on pension wealth Pt and possibly other factors, such as utility from leisure or
another job. The decision depends on how current and expected future compensation in the job
compare to the value of retirement.
Pensions. A pension is a form of compensation deferred until a worker leaves his or her job and
often conditioned on having reached a certain age and/or tenure before leaving. A key factor is
the value of the pension as the retirement date changes:
• Delaying retirement may substantially raise long-term benefits, so pension wealth accrual is
large at some future date, though small today. That raises Vt+1, Vt+2, … in (1), encouraging later
retirement. This pattern arises in DB plans at younger ages.
• Delaying retirement may have little or no effect on future pension benefits. Then, the
foregone income makes pension wealth accrual small or negative, encouraging immediate
retirement. This pattern generally arises in DB plans after eligibility for early or full benefits.
• Future pension benefits may increase at a constant rate when retirement is delayed. This
pattern occurs in DC plans, in which case the incentive to retire depends on factors like the
employer contribution rate.8
DB pension wealth accrual. A person who retires at age t has DB pension wealth equal to
T

1
P tDB = E  ∑
δ s t p (q , t )  ,
s-t
s = t (1 + r )


7
8

β reflects the rate of time preference and mortality risk, which is assumed fixed for simplicity.
These distinctions between the path of DB and DC pension accruals were also noted by Quinn et al (1998).

6

or the expected discounted value of pension benefit flows p(q, t) received each period after the
pension commences at age q ≥ t.9 A typical formula for p(q, t) involves a benefit that is
proportional to the worker’s final or average salary, with the proportion increasing in tenure.
Benefits are discounted to time t by the age-conditional probability of survival δ and the interest
rate r.
 1

Pt +1  - Pt , indicates the gain in pension
DB pension wealth accrual, defined as 
1 + r

wealth if one works an additional year and then retires. Figure 1 shows pension wealth accrual
in an actual DB plan as the retirement age t increases.10

FIGURE 1: Pension Wealth Accruals

Accrual, $1000

100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
40

45

50

Age

Defined benefit

55

60

65

70

Defined contribution

Two or three key dates can cause sharp changes in P tDB . Pension wealth is zero until the
vesting date, when a worker becomes eligible to receive a future pension. The maximum
9

A person who quits may not be eligible to receive benefits immediately, but it is almost always optimal to begin
receiving benefits as soon as one is eligible.

7

vesting date is now 5-7 years but was 10 years in the plan shown in Figure 1. Pension wealth
then accrues gradually as the future benefit rises with earnings growth, tenure, and the approach
of retirement. Pension wealth accrual generally spikes again if the plan offers an early retirement
date (ERD), when a worker can leave the job and first receive a reduced benefit, or at the normal
retirement date (NRD), when a worker qualifies for the full benefit. The spike in Figure 1 results
from a discrete jump in the pension benefit at the ERD. Accruals are negative following the
NRD because current benefits are foregone and future benefits are often flat. In Figure 1 the
penalty for receiving early benefits is mild, so accruals turn negative after the ERD.11
It is clear that a single year’s pension accrual does not capture the full value of
postponing retirement. Stock and Wise (1990a) developed an “option value” approach that
reflects the increment to utility from postponing retirement and gaining access to distant
accruals. Estimation of their model requires numerous functional form and distributional
assumptions, however. Coile and Gruber (2000), in their analysis of Social Security incentives,


1
introduced a simpler measure of the “peak value” of pension wealth accrual 
Pm  - Pt,
m−t
 (1 + r )


where pension wealth reaches its discounted maximum in future year m. They argued that peak
value isolates the key incentives influencing retirement while imposing fewer assumptions.12
Although peak value does not fully capture the effect of the number of years until the peak, we
find that the results are not sensitive to normalizing by years to peak.
10

The pension accruals in Figure 1 were computed from sample HRS plans that were slightly modified to protect
anonymity. Following the literature, our calculations assume a 3% real discount rate, average mortality probabilities
by age and gender, and a terminal age of 120.
11
The maximum vesting period was reduced in 1989; most workers in our sample had already passed the vesting
date before it was reduced, and the shorter vesting date is incorporated in plans of workers who had not. 1986
legislation that eliminated the use of age-related limits on maximum pension benefits is also reflected in the plans in
our sample; tenure-related limits are still permitted (see, for example, Mitchell 1999, Table 15) and generate
negative accruals like those shown in Figure 1.

8

DC pension wealth accrual. DC plans function very differently. DC pension wealth is the market

value of current assets.13 The gain to DC pension wealth each period is the return on the initial
balance plus this year’s contributions from the employee and employer. While contributions to a
401(k) are voluntary, they are mandatory in other DC plans.14
An additional year of work has no effect on pension wealth if contributions are zero and
raises pension wealth if contributions are positive. Therefore, DC pension wealth never reaches a
peak, and the peak-value measure is not meaningful. This is apparent in the pension accruals
shown in Figure 1 from a typical DC plan. Only a portion of DC pension accruals constitute an
incentive to delay retirement. Employer contributions will cease at retirement, and access to a
tax-deferred savings vehicle will diminish or cease. In contrast, existing assets will generate
returns regardless of retirement.
There are, nonetheless, two potentially important dates in DC pension wealth accrual.
First, some DC plans have vesting dates of up to five years, though a majority vest within 0-2
years (Mitchell 1999). Second, 401(k) funds can be withdrawn without a penalty beginning at
age 59½; we will test for an age-59½ effect on retirement.
Another important point is that voluntary contributions may replace other personal saving
and thus depend on retirement intentions – an important point because voluntary contributions
generate some, though not all, of the cross-sectional variation in pension accrual. Therefore, we
try omitting a measure of voluntary contributions from DC pension wealth when we estimate the
impact of pensions on retirement.

12

Samwick (2000) demonstrated that controlling separately for earnings, as we do, captures the key difference
between the option value and peak value measures.
13
To be precise, DC pension wealth should also include the present value of future tax relief. We will follow the
literature in omitting this component, since DB pension wealth is also tax-deferred.
14
Other types of DC plans are money purchase plans, profit sharing plans, target benefit plans, simplified employee
pensions, and employee stock ownership plans.

9

Lastly, as we noted earlier, most existing research on 401(k) plans examined their impact
on personal saving.15 This debate is not relevant for our paper. Differences in pension structure
can influence retirement whether or not they alter savings rates.
B. Summary of key differences 16
DC pension wealth accrues smoothly. We hypothesize that retirement hazards will smooth out

for workers with DC plans, compared to workers with DB plans who experience swings in
pension accruals. This could lead to earlier retirement under DC plans, if DB plans have
generally constrained workers to retire later than they would otherwise in order to gain access to
the peaks in pension wealth accrual, or it might lead to later retirement, if DB plans have
constrained workers to retire early, when accruals drop off or turn negative. We will be able to
distinguish which through simulations based on our estimation results.
DC pension wealth includes voluntary contributions. Since these may be determined

endogenously with retirement plans, we examine whether voluntary contributions affect
estimates of the influence of DC pensions.
DC plans are typically not annuitized. By insuring against lifespan uncertainty, a DB plan with

actuarially equivalent present value is worth more than a DC plan to a risk-averse individual
lacking a bequest motive.17 Workers with DC plans may therefore save more or retire later.
While we lack sufficient information on annuitization options in DC plans in order to identify the
direct impact on retirement, we allow for distinct effects on retirement of different types of pension
wealth in order to capture differences like these.

15

See, for example, Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1996) and Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1996).
Friedberg and Owyang (2002a) describe these and other differences between DB and DC pensions in more detail.
17
Less than 20% of DC plans allow annuitization after retirement (Brown, Mitchell, Poterba, and Warshawsky
1999).
16

10

DB and DC pensions have different risk characteristics. The DB rate of return depends on

earnings growth before retirement and on inflation after retirement. The DC rate of return
depends on portfolio choices and yields, and differences between expected and realized rates of
return may alter retirement plans.18 Again, we allow different effects of different types of
pension wealth to capture distinctions like these. We also try a specification that includes a
control for people who invested their DC plans mostly in stocks, although this is potentially
endogenous with retirement plans.
DC pensions have shorter vesting periods. Taking a new job may have become more attractive

to older workers, since new jobs are now more likely to offer a DC instead of a DB pension, and
quick vesting in DC plans raises effective compensation for people who expect to retire fully a
few years later. Thus, we distinguish in the empirical analysis between people who leave their
pensioned job for another job and those who retire fully.
C. What determines the structure of pensions?

In Lazear’s theory of deferred compensation, DB pensions solve a contracting problem
between workers and firms (see, for example, Lazear 1986). Firms cannot perfectly monitor
workers but want to deter shirking. Deferred pension accruals, as well as a rising wage profile,
induce workers to devote optimal effort so that they do not lose their jobs. A similar motive for
deferred compensation arises if workers require firm-specific training or hiring is costly for other
reasons. At some point, however, rising wages exceed marginal productivity of older workers.
DB pension provisions help encourage retirement at an appropriate age.
While various elements of these theories have found support in explaining the use of DB
pensions, they offer little insight about the use of DC pensions or about their increasing
18

For example, workers who invested their DC assets in equities may have earned unexpectedly high returns in the

11

prevalence. Most explanations for the shift in pension structure focus on regulatory changes,
which have had several effects. A series of laws enacted since 1974 tightened DB funding
standards, enhanced workers’ claims to DB pension wealth after leaving a job, restricted the use
of pensions in compensating highly-paid employees, and extended tax breaks for DC
contributions. The new rules raised the cost of administering pensions, but early evidence yields
mixed conclusions about its impact. Ippolito (1995) reported estimates from the Hay-Huggins
Company (1990) indicating that only very small DB plans grew relatively more expensive to
administer; for larger firms, average costs of DB and 401(k) plans rose at similar rates. Kruse
(1995) concluded that rising administrative costs might explain some but not all of the decline in
DB pensions during 1980-86. Clark and McDermed (1990) argued, further, that some of the
restrictions limited the usefulness of DB pensions in providing optimal long-term incentives.
Nevertheless, it is apparent from Figure 1 that DB plans can still be designed to deliver pension
wealth in a highly nonlinear fashion.
Friedberg and Owyang (2002b) offered another explanation for the decline in DB
coverage. Building on Lazear’s theory, they examined reasons why the value of long-term jobs
might have declined. Their explanation emphasizes the nature of long-term jobs held by primeage workers, rather than retirement incentives of older workers. That focus is consistent with the
more rapid change in pension structure among younger workers; with an overall decline in
average job tenure; and with evidence of structural change in the economy involving workers of
all ages – for example, the rate of decline in the use of DB plans has varied across industries, and
workers (who typically move when they are young) have shifted from jobs typically covered by
DB plans to jobs typically covered by DC plans.19

late 1990s and then chosen to retire early. Coronado and Perozek (2001) found evidence of this in the HRS.
19
Clark and McDermed (1990), Gustman and Steinmeier (1992), Ippolito (1995), Kruse (1995), Papke (1999).

12

In sum, both the regulatory and contracting explanations for the shift in pension structure
appear to have little to do with retirement incentives. If anything, the move away from DB plans
may have increased firms' use of temporary early retirement inducements.20
We recognize nonetheless that pensions and retirement may be endogenously determined.
A firm’s choice of pension structure may be influenced by factors correlated with the average
age and retirement preferences of workers. However, we do not believe it is feasible to estimate
the determinants of pension design. Filer and Honig (1998), for example, failed to find
convincing exclusion restrictions when allowing for endogenous DB pension design.21
Nevertheless, we address some concerns about endogenous sorting. We control for observable
worker and job characteristics (e.g., firm size, industry, unionization, job tenure) that are
correlated with pension type; none influence the estimated effect of pension characteristics on
retirement. Also, we show that older workers with different pensions types are quite similar on
other key dimensions like earnings and wealth, along which one might expect observable
differences if workers were sorting by retirement preferences or related characteristics.
II. DATA
A. The Health and Retirement Study

The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is a detailed longitudinal survey of over 7,600
households with a member born between 1931 and 1941. The HRS began in 1992 and surveys
people every two years. We use data from the first four waves.22 The HRS reports
unprecedented detail about household and job characteristics as people age. For people who said
20

Lumsdaine, Stock, and Wise (1990), Brown (1999).
They estimated a joint model of the DB early retirement date faced by a worker, along with the worker’s actual
retirement age. They used macroeconomic variables (unemployment, inflation) at the hiring date to identify the
impact of the pension retirement age on retirement. These variables did not have a statistically significant impact on
the pension, however, so the estimation was essentially identified from nonlinear functional form.

21

13

they had a pension and gave permission, the HRS contacted employers to get information about
the pension. The HRS also obtained Social Security earnings records for those who gave
permission. The HRS pension and Social Security data are available on a restricted basis,
together with a program to compute private pension wealth at all ages. We have written a similar
program to compute approximate Social Security wealth.23
Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) studied the quality of the pension data. In the first wave,
65% of workers who reported a pension in their current job were matched to their pension data.24
Match failures arose either when someone refused permission to the HRS to contact their
employer, or when the employer did not respond to HRS queries. Gustman and Steinmeier
found that some variables significantly affect the probability of a match, but that they have
relatively little explanatory power.25 In our judgment we lack sufficient information to impute
missing pension data or control for selection due to match failure.
For people who say they have a pension, we use employer data to determine whether they
have only DB plans, only DC plans, or else both types or combined plans. We classify people as
having a DB plan if their employer offers one, since participation is rarely voluntary. We
classify them as having a DC plan if their employer offers one and they participate in it. We
focus on participation rather than eligibility because the HRS did not contact employers of
people who said they had no pension, so we miss some people who are eligible but did not

22

Third and fourth wave data are from the early releases.
We use earnings records and current rules to compute the present value of Social Security benefits, but we do not
compute dependent and survivor benefits.
24
Since the match rate for earlier pensions was only 35%, we do not focus on exit from earlier jobs. If DB pensions
encouraged some HRS respondents to leave their main job before they were first observed 1992, sample selection
would bias our estimates downward.
25
In a probit estimating the likelihood of getting pension data, the pseudo R-squared was 0.1164. The likelihood of
a match rose with education, firm size, the value of self-reported pension assets, and working in a non-manufacturing
firm, and fell with personal assets and earnings.
23

14

participate.26 This might bias the results if, for example, people who intend to retire later do not
contribute to their 401(k); we address some concerns about endogenous participation by
estimating a specification that omits a measure of voluntary DC contributions.
Employers reported the plan parameters that determine DB pension wealth. 27 DC plan
balances were not reported by employers, so the HRS imputed DC pension wealth from data on
employer contributions, match rates, and compulsory and voluntary employee contributions.
Gustman and Steinmeier recommended using these imputed values rather than self-reported plan
balances, since respondents made frequent reporting errors. Still, because imputed values tend to
overstate DC pension wealth when plans allow voluntary contributions, they proposed a
correction for this which we try as well.28
B. Characteristics of workers and pensions

Table 1 compares full-time employees with different types of pensions in the first wave
in 1992.29 We focus on those who appear in columns (1), (2), and (3); these are 1,528 people
who have a DB and/or a DC plan in which they participate, and for whom the HRS obtained
private and public pension data. Among them, 62% have only DB plans, 20% have only DC
plans, and 18% have both types or a combination plan.30

26

Using different data, Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1995) estimated the effect of 401(k) eligibility, rather than the
endogenous effect of 401(k) participation, on saving. We could do something similar if we limited the sample to
workers with a DB plan and compared those who are additionally eligible or not for a DC plan; Webb (2002) used
the HRS to analyze saving in this way. However, we would not learn a great deal about retirement, since our results
are driven by the presence or absence of a DB plan, not a DC plan.
27
In calculating the present value of future DB pension wealth, we modified the HRS program to discount DB
pension wealth by age-specific survival probabilities.
28
The correction is based on regressing the ratio of self-reported to employer-reported values on the log of the
employer-reported value and its square.
29
We will refer to our sample of full-time employees as “workers” in the rest of the paper for ease of exposition.
Additional sample selection criteria are mentioned in the notes to Table 1.
30
This sample is considerably larger than in earlier pension studies. Most researchers used data on one or a few
firms, while Samwick (1998) used a sample of 520 employees from the 1983 SCF. The proportions with different
types of pension plans differ from Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) because of our focus on DC participation, rather
than eligibility, as described earlier.

15

People with different types of pensions are quite similar, except in three dimensions; we
control for these differences in the regressions, and they do not influence the estimated effect of
pension incentives on retirement. First, people with only a DC plan have average job tenure of
14 years, compared to 18-19 for others. This difference is related to the recent spread of DC
plans in new jobs. Second, 55% of individuals with stand-alone DB plans are employed in
professional or related services or public administration, compared with 29-33% of those with
DC or combined plans. Third, pension wealth differs systematically across plans. People with
combined plans have the highest pension wealth, with a median of $345,156 if they retire at age
65 – higher than the sum of the median stand-alone DB plan and the median stand-alone DC
plan. In contrast, non-pension wealth is similar across pension type, with median financial assets
lying in the range of $22,000-26,300. We would not expect to find this similarity if workers
select into pension types based on differences in retirement preferences, which should also lead
to differences in life-cycle saving behavior.
In other dimensions as well, people with different pension types are otherwise similar.
Median earnings across pension type lie in the range of $30-33,000. Education and occupation
differ, but not by a great deal. People who attended college comprise 52% of those with DB
plans only, 49% with DC plans, and 57% with combination plans, while skilled workers (in
management, professional, or technical jobs) comprise 40%, 44%, and 42%, respectively.
Another 1,527 people reported having a pension but were not matched to their private
pension or Social Security data. They are slightly less educated and more likely to be in blue
collar jobs. 1,332 people reported having no pension. They are even less skilled and are
substantially poorer. We omit both groups from the analysis because we do not feel confident
explaining who has a pension or pension data.

16

Pension characteristics are reported in Tables 2 and 3. In these tables, and in our
regressions, we convert the data on individuals in columns (1)-(3) of Table 1 into person-age
cells, so each observation represents an individual at a given age.31
As expected, DC pension accruals are very smooth. In Table 2 the median of pension
accruals for men is consistently around $4-5,000, regardless of retirement age, or around $34,000 when an estimate of voluntary contributions is excluded. Women with DC plans have
lower levels of voluntary and mandatory contributions.
In contrast, the median DB pension accrual is highest at age 54, when the early retirement
date is reached in many plans. Median accruals turn rapidly negative after age 61, when many
plans begin to pass their normal retirement date. Women with DB plans experience positive
pension accrual at later ages because of shorter job tenure and longer life-expectancy. Patterns
of accrual in the DB and DC components of combined plans resemble those of stand-alone plans.
Lastly, it is worth emphasizing the considerable variation in the pattern of DB pension accruals
across the sample, as indicated by the 25th and 75th percentile values of pension accruals shown
in Table 3.
Table 4 shows the proportion of the sample from columns (1)-(3) of Table 1, at each age,
who voluntarily leave their 1992 job and retire by 1998. Altogether, 39% of those in our sample
leave their job. Workers with a DB or combined plans exit at higher rates than workers with
only a DC plan. At ages 55-59, 4.4% with a DB plan and 5.2% with a combined plan leave their
job each year, on average, compared to 2.2% with a DC plan. At ages 60-62 the statistics were
11.8% with a DB plan, 8.7% with a combined plan, and 6.3% with a DC plan. This key
distinction across pension types emerges in the estimation results below.

31

We exclude observations of people aged 51 and 52 for ease of computation. Few retire or reach key swings in
pension accrual at those ages.

17

III. ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF PENSIONS ON RETIREMENT

Descriptive statistics confirm that both pension wealth accruals and job exit vary with
pension type. This section reports estimates of the effect of pension accruals on retirement,
controlling for pension wealth and other characteristics.
A. Estimation strategy

We have chosen a straightforward estimation approach. This has the advantages that we
avoid strong assumptions about the functional form of utility, and that the source of identifying
variation from pension incentives is clear. We pool observations on full-time employees with
pensions at each age between the years 1992 and 1998.32 In most of our specifications, our lefthand side variable is a binary indicator for whether a worker leaves a pensioned job voluntarily
(not due to layoff or plant closure) from one age to the next and fully retires.33 We focus later on
exits to another job. We estimate probits with Huber-White standard errors adjusted for personlevel clustering and use the HRS-provided person-level analysis weights.34
On the right-hand side, our key variable is the peak value measure of pension accrual
(discounted peak minus current pension wealth, or zero if past the peak), introduced by Coile and
Gruber (2000). Although they did not, we test for a nonlinear effect of peak value, and we add
an indicator for being at or older than the peak, since peak value is set to zero after accruals turn
negative. We allow separate effects of peak value in DB plans and in the DB component of
combined plans. Similarly, we allow separate effects of pension wealth from DB, DC, and
combined plans, in case differences in pension structure (such as the annuitization of DB pension
32

Again, we will refer to full-time employees as “workers”. Additional sample selection criteria are mentioned in
the notes to Table 5.
33
In contrast to our annual approach, Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) tracked employment changes and pension
accruals by wave (i.e., over two years), which introduces some imprecision since pension accruals can varyannually.

18

wealth) imply different response to the same value of pension wealth. Furthermore, we include
separate dummy variables for each pension type, in case other pension characteristics are related
to retirement. We normalize pension variables by earnings.35 We experiment with indicators for
being at the early or normal DB retirement dates, in case such institutional details matter, and
add indicators for employers matching employee contributions to DC plans, since that
discourages retirement, and for employers offering a temporary early retirement “window plan”.
We control for a variety of other influences on retirement, including earnings, Social
Security peak value and wealth, on-the-job and post-retirement health insurance coverage, and
non-pension financial assets and home ownership. We control for employer size, industry,
unionization, occupation, education, and tenure, which are potentially correlated with pension
structure. In addition, we include dummies for recent hospitalizations, gender, marital status,
race, and age.
B. Estimation results

Table 5 reports marginal effects from probit estimates for several specifications. The
dependent variable is whether a person voluntarily leaves his or her 1992 job and retires at a
particular age, so a positive coefficient indicates a higher probability. The basic specification in
5.1 follows the literature by including pension wealth and a measure of pension accrual. The
specification in 5.2 adds dummies for being at or past the age of peak pension wealth (when peak
value is zero) and the pension’s normal retirement date. Our preferred specification in 5.3 adds a
quadratic in peak value.
We find that both private and public pension accruals influence retirement. In all three
34

Coile and Gruber (2000) also estimated probits on annual retirement hazards. They found that results from a Cox
proportional hazards model were virtually identical.

19

specifications, peak value is significant at the 5% level for workers with DB plans and also for
workers with combined plans. Peak value has a larger effect in combined plans, but the
differences across pension type are not statistically significant. In specification 5.2, holding all
other variables constant, having the mean DB (combined) peak value instead of a peak value of
zero reduces the annual retirement hazard by 1.1 (3.6) percentage points for ages 55-59, or a
20% (36%) reduction compared to the observed hazard. The quadratic terms in peak value are
significant in specification 5.3, and allowing for nonlinear effects actually increases the overall
effect of peak value, both at the center of the distribution and at the first and third quartiles.
Now, having the mean DB (combined) peak value reduces the retirement hazard by 1.7 (3.8)
percentage points for ages 55-59, or a 29% (37%) reduction compared to the observed hazard.36
It should be noted that we control for tenure, age, and earnings, which are key determinants of
peak value, so the estimated effect of peak value does not reflect their impact on retirement.
Peak value is not economically meaningful after pension wealth peaks, so it is set to zero.
Therefore, we added dummy variables in 5.2 and 5.3 to capture the disincentive effect of
declining pension wealth. Being at or older than the DB peak raises the retirement hazard by
1.21 percentage points in 5.3, but the estimate fall a little short of statistical significance, and it is
far from significant for combined plans.
We also experimented with controls for being at the DB pension’s early or normal
retirement date. The results indicate that institutional factors sometimes affect retirement. In
estimates that are not shown, we found no spike in quits at the early retirement date (ERD) when

35

The “option-value” measure of pension accrual in Samwick (1998) implicitly weighs pension income by
earnings. We also control for earnings separately.
36
Cubic terms in peak value are not statistically significant. We tried normalizing peak value by years to peak, but
the resulting coefficients are insignificant, as peak value and years to peak are highly correlated. This shows that
peak value captures the key pension incentives.

20

reduced pension benefits are first available. The ERD generally occurs early, often around age
55, when we observe few retirements. On the other hand, being at the normal retirement date
(NRD) significantly raises quits among DB people; it lowers quits among combined people,
though not significantly. The lack of significance among combined people may arise in part
because the NRD tends to occur later in combined plans, and fewer people in our sample have
reached the later NRD. The NRD is 60 or younger in 35% of stand-alone DB plans, compared to
21% of combined plans. One reason is the greater proportion of stand-alone DB plans in
professional services and public administration; these plans have an earlier average NRD.
Nevertheless, controlling for industry did not affect the estimation results. Taken together, these
findings suggest that institutional factors and social norms involving the NRD play a role for
people with stand-alone DB plans, which tend to have an earlier NRD.
To continue, we allowed the effect of pension wealth to vary by pension type. We find a
significant and positive, though economically quite small, effect of DB wealth on DB people
and, in 5.1, of DC wealth on combined people. Coefficients on the other pension wealth
variables have similar magnitudes but are not statistically significant.37 Samwick (1998) and
Coile and Gruber (2000) also found weak effects of pension wealth. The results suggest that
differences in other pension characteristics which we are not controlling for directly (the lack of
annuitization in DC pensions, for example) do not significantly affect retirement.
Other pension characteristics which we control for do not have a major impact. Notably,
the dummies for pension type are not small but they are far from significant, so the impact of
pension type is captured primarily by the differences in accrual and wealth patterns. Indicators
for employers matching employee contributions to DC plans or offering early retirement

21

“window” plans are not statistically significant. We tried other specifications that did not yield
significant results and are not shown. For example, we found no evidence of a spike in
retirement for DC people at ages 59 and 60, when 401(k) withdrawals no longer suffer tax
penalties, or of other pension-related differences in retirement by age.38 Retirement hazards of
people who report investing their DC plan partly or mostly in stocks were not significantly
different; this variable was not included in our main specification because portfolio choice is
potentially endogenous. A measure of subjective life expectancy was not significant and did not
alter the estimated effect of DB plans, although annuitization makes DB pensions more valuable
to those who are risk-averse and lack a strong bequest motive.
As with private pensions, Social Security incentives significantly affect retirement.
Social Security peak value reduces the retirement hazard by 1-2 percentage points for people in
their late 50s, evaluated at the sample means; the impact is similar to peak value of private
pension plans.39 Although we allowed the effect of Social Security accruals to vary by private
pension type, the responses are very similar – suggesting that people with DC plans react in the
same way when faced with DB-type incentives as people with DB plans react.
It is important to note that industry, unionization, job tenure, and firm size do not
significantly influence retirement, though they are related to pension type. Leaving these
variables out of the regression also has little effect on the pension estimates. Briefly, other
control variables have the same qualitative impact on retirement found in a great deal of previous
research. The retirement hazard rises with age, especially after 60. Higher financial assets are
37

Adjusting DC pension wealth for the tendency to overestimate pension wealth in plans that allow voluntary
contributions, using the method proposed by Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) and discussed earlier, leads to larger
but still insignificant coefficients.
38
Thus, allowing for distinct age dummies by pension type does not alter the estimated effect of peak value. A
spike in DB retirements at age 55 is the only significant difference by age; it is apparently related to the importance
of the NRD in stand-alone DB plans, mentioned earlier.
39
Coile and Gruber (2000) found responses of a similar magnitude to Social Security.

22

associated with significantly earlier retirement, so that a 10% increase in financial assets raises
the hazard by about 0.6 percentage points. People with zero financial assets tend to retire earlier
too, an anomalous result found in other research using the same data.40 Higher earnings lead to
highly significant, though small, delays in retirement; an additional $10,000 in earnings reduces
the hazard by about 0.25 percentage points.41 When an employer provides health insurance for
workers but not retirees, a worker is about a percentage point less likely to retire. People with
more education are less likely to retire. Many of the other variables fall short of statistical
significance, but the estimates should grow more precise as the sample ages and more
individuals retire.42
In sum, the estimates demonstrate that differences in pension accrual patterns alter
retirement, as we hypothesized. Sharp spikes in DB pension accruals influence the timing of
retirement, compared to smooth DC accruals. We discuss some additional specifications next
and then analyze whether the shift in pension structure led to earlier or later retirement.
C. Additional specifications

This section reviews additional results shown in Table 6. We build on specification 5.3
and try using a different discount rate, excluding voluntary DC contributions, estimating the
impact of pensions on people taking a new job, and separating the sample by gender.
In 6.1 we experiment with a discount rate of 5%, rather than 3%, in case people behave
impatiently. As Samwick (2000) pointed out, observed patterns of aggregate saving and wealth
holdings are consistent with a relatively high discount rate. In this case, a high discount rate
40

Friedberg (2003). Omitting the wealth variables from the specification, based on the argument that they are
endogenously determined with retirement, does not alter the estimated effect of the pension variables.
41
We tried including a measure of recent earnings growth in order to capture the shape of the earnings profile; it did
not have a significant effect.

23

reduces the present value of future pension accruals and hence the age of peak value. Since we
observe low retirement hazards at younger ages, this reduces the magnitude of the peak value
variables, and it increases those of the pension type and past-the-peak variables. Thus, using a
higher discount rate does not increase the explanatory power of the pension accrual variables.
Another concern is that voluntary DC contributions are endogenously determined with
retirement. Since the HRS does not distinguish between voluntary and compulsory
contributions, we tried subtracting all employee contributions from pension wealth when plan
rules allow for voluntary contributions. In the resulting estimates in 6.2, DB pension variables
continue to have a similar effect, whether or not someone has voluntary contributions in a DC
plan. Thus, later retirement by workers with DC plans is not explained by endogenous voluntary
contributions; we see, as before, that it is explained by the absence of DB pension accruals.
In this sample, 73% of quits result in retirement. In 6.3, the dependent variable is defined
as a job change, and retirements are now excluded. The pension variables are insignificant for
this sample, suggesting that a fuller understanding of job changes must await an investigation of
the new jobs taken by those who quit.43
Lastly, retirement patterns differ somewhat for men and women in estimates that are not
shown. The influence of peak value has a similar magnitude by gender, but it has greater
statistical significance for women. Pension wealth tends to have smaller effects for women.
Women react more strongly to the DB normal retirement date, which accounts for its
significance in the earlier regressions. Building on the explanation offered earlier, these
differences seem to arise because DB plans in some sectors (especially professional services and
public administration) have an earlier average NRD which is more likely to have been reached,
42

Recent hospitalization does not significantly affect retirement. Including self-reported disability instead
significantly raises the retirement hazard, but this variable may be correlated with unobserved retirement preferences.

24

and women are more likely to work in those sectors. Lastly, simply having a DB or combined
plan leads women to retire earlier. Obviously, career paths of men and women clearly differ
along many dimensions – only some of which are captured by differences in pension wealth –
and warrant future investigation.
D. The aggregate impact of the decline in DB plans

Since DB pensions encourage people to work until a certain date and then to retire, the
shift towards DC pensions may lead to either earlier or later retirement. We use simulations,
based on our preferred specification in 5.3, to understand the impact of pension structure on
retirement. We also compare our simulation results to recent trends in retirement.
Figure 2 shows predicted labor force participation rates at each age for workers in our
sample who have DB pensions.44 It compares the predicted participation rate when workers have
their own DB pensions to predictions if they instead had a typical DC plan. Differences in the
underlying predicted retirement hazards arise entirely because of differences in pension
characteristics.45
Forecasted participation rates begin to diverge after age 55 as some DB plans reach their
early or normal retirement dates, though retirement hazards remain low (under 5% per year) for
both pension types until around age 60. At that point, retirement of workers with DB plans
accelerates, as many pass their peak pension value. The difference in retirement hazards by
pension type exceeds 5 percentage points at ages 62 and up, resulting in a substantial difference

43

The HRS has not collected pension data from new employers.
Recall that these are predicted participation rates for people who are in pensioned full-time jobs at ages 51-61 and
will either stay in their pensioned jobs or retire fully.
45
To characterize the typical DC plan, we use median pension wealth at age 53, augmented with the median of pension
wealth accrual at each subsequent age. We chose to allow other pension characteristics to differ as well, on the
assumption that a change in pension type typically involves a change in pension wealth, etc.; however, pension wealth
has a very small effect on the retirement hazards. Other right-hand side variables are assigned their mean values.
44

25

in cumulative labor force participation. The median retirement age is 62 years and 6 months for
workers with DB plans, versus 64 years and 3 months if instead they have DC plans, a difference
of 21 months. We tried a similar exercise for workers with combined DB and DC plans.
Predicted retirement hazards for workers with combined plans yield a median retirement age of
62 years and 8 months, versus 63 years and 9 months if they only retain their DC plans.

FIGURE 2: Predicted labor force participation of
workers if they have...

1 - cumulative retirement hazard

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
53

55

57

59

61

63

65

Age

their own DB plan

the median DC plan

We are also interested in understanding the impact on aggregate retirement patterns of the
recent shift in pension structure. However, there is no consistent data source that reports past
changes in pension structure, and of course we must make inferences about future changes. We
will therefore rely on information from a few data sets. For older workers (i.e., full-time
employees) in the 1980s, we use employer-reported data on pensions from the Survey of

26

Consumer Finances (SCF) Pension Provider Supplement in 1983, and for younger workers in the
1990s, we use individual-reported data from the 1995 SCF.46 That allows us to establish trends
in pension coverage starting with workers who were aged 53-57 in 1983 and finishing with
workers who were aged 33-37 in 1995 and will be 53-57 in 2015.47 To determine pension
coverage of workers aged 53-57 at an intermediate date, we try both employer-reported data
from the 1992 HRS and individual-reported data from the 1995 SCF. Using the former yields a
small past decline in DB pension coverage and a large future decline, while using the latter
yields a larger past decline and smaller future decline.
The resulting predictions are shown in Table 7.48 We assume no further change in DB
coverage as workers aged 33-37 in 1995 get older, nor any change in typical DB pension
provisions.49 Our data sources imply a 41.3 percentage point decline in DB pension coverage
among all workers aged 53-57 between 1983 and 2015, from 64.0% to 22.7%, and a 44.9
percentage point decline among pensioned workers. This implies a 10 month increase in the
median retirement age of pensioned workers aged 53-57 over this period; or, equivalently, an
increase in the predicted employment rate of pensioned workers from 59% to 65% at age 62 and
from 31% to 45% at age 65. Based on data from the 1992 HRS, that 10 month increase consists
of a gain of 1 month between 1983 and 1992 and 9 months between 1992 and 2015. Based
instead on data from the 1995 SCF, it consists of a gain of 7 months between 1983 and 1995 and
3 months between 1995 and 2015. These forecasts follow directly from the simulation results

46

The SCF has surveyed a cross-section of households every three years since 1983. In 1983 the SCF also
collected pension data from the employers of respondents. While employer-reported data is more accurate, as
Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) noted, there is no source for younger workers in the 1990s. We use the 1995
instead of 1998 data because it is closer in time to the HRS data in 1992.
47
We chose those age groups in order to observe long-term trends in pension structure because those aged 53-57
are representative of older workers but have not yet begun retiring in large numbers, and those aged 33-37 are
representative of younger workers but have already settled into relatively long-term jobs.
48
Again, these are predicted participation rates for people are in full-time jobs at ages 51-61.
49
Detailed evidence in Mitchell (1999) shows only minor changes during the 1990s.

27

discussed above. Since having a DB plan reduces the median retirement age by about 21
months, then, if DB coverage fell by 20 percentage points, that suggests an increase in the
median retirement age of about 4 ½ months.
In order to make projections for all workers in full-time jobs at ages 51-61, we have to
take into account that, as DB pension coverage drops, some workers gain DC pensions and
others have no pension.50 We have to make some assumption about retirement behavior among
those with no pension, even though our estimates do not offer any guidance about them. We
report predictions under two possible assumptions. One is that the increased numbers without a
pension will behave like workers with no pension in the 1992 HRS who are retiring later, on
average, than workers with DB or DC plans; this assumption yields a jump of 13 months in the
median retirement age of all workers aged 53-57 between 1983 and 2015, consisting of 3 (7)
months early on and 10 (6) months later, based on the 1992 HRS (1995 SCF) data. The overall
increase in the median retirement age of 13 months corresponds to a gain in the predicted
employment rate from 61% to 67% at age 62 and from 37% to 50% at age 65. Another
assumption is that they will behave like workers with DC plans, or alternatively that they will get
a DC plan as they age; this assumption yields a jump in the median retirement age of all workers
aged 53-57 of roughly 9 months, consisting of a little under 2 (6) months early on and a little
under 8 (4) months later. The increase in the median retirement age of 9 months corresponds to
a gain in predicted employment from 64% to 71% at age 62 and from 38% to 52% at age 65.
It is important to keep in mind that we cannot directly test how our simulated retirement
rates match data reported in other sources, which do not distinguish the sample that was in full-

50

Overall pension coverage in 1995 was lower for workers aged 33-37 than for workers aged 53-57. This probably
reflects both an age effect that disappears as the cohort grows older and a time effect due to trends in pension
coverage. We infer this because there was also an age differential in pension coverage in 1983, though it was
smaller, and because pension coverage of older workers also fell between 1983 and 1995, though by less.

28

time jobs at ages 51-61. Nevertheless, we can observe general trends in employment rates,
which are shown in Figure 3 for older men in the Current Population Survey.51 We would expect
to see increases in employment rates at ages when DB plans typically induced retirement; at ages
62-63, average accruals in DB plans in our HRS sample turned negative, according to Table 2.
This is what Figure 3 shows, with the employment rate at ages 62-64 rising from 44.7% in the
late 1980s and 43.2% in the early 1990s to 46.2% in the late 1990s and 48.1% in the early 2000s.
Increases of a similar magnitude occurred for men aged 65-66. In order to control crudely for
aggregate trends, we might contrast those increases with slight declines in employment observed
for men in their late 50s.

FIGURE 3: Employment rate, men
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

55-57

58-59

60-61

62-64

65-66

Age groups
1976-80

1981-85

1986-90

51

1991-95

1996-00

2001-02

We focus on men because of major secular increases in labor supply of older women since the 1980s.
Employment rates are computed using the basic monthly weights from March CPSs. Using multiplicative
adjustment factors that account for changes in the employment series due to the 1994 redesign yields almost the
same results (Povlika and Miller 1998).

29

In sum, major changes in pension structure can be expected to raise the median
retirement age of pensioned workers by 10 months, and the median retirement age of all workers
by 9-13 months, when comparing the cohort aged 53-57 in 1983 with the cohort aged 53-57 in
2015. This response stands in sharp contrast to the trend towards earlier retirement that ceased in
the early 1980s, and it can help explain increases in employment rates among people in their 60s
since then.
IV. CONCLUSIONS

While an extensive literature has analyzed the savings effects of DC pensions, we focus
on retirement. We have found substantial changes in retirement patterns resulting from the
spread of 401(k) and other DC plans in place of DB plans. These changes arise because of major
differences in the accrual of pension wealth – pension wealth in DC plans accrues smoothly,
while pension wealth in traditional DB plans spikes sharply at older ages and turns negative
afterwards. While we expected to find smoother retirement rates for workers with DC plans
compared to workers with DB plans, this does not allow us to predict a priori whether that would
reduce the average retirement age, if DB plans constrain workers to retire later than they would
otherwise; or raise the average retirement age, if DB plans constrain workers to retire earlier.
Our estimates show that workers with DC plans are retiring significantly later.
Retirement patterns begin to diverge at around age 55 and accelerate around age 60, when most
workers with DB plans begin to experience negative accruals. While endogenous selection into
jobs with different pensions remains a concern, we find that older workers with different types of
pensions are quite similar in their observable characteristics, and controlling for variables that
may relate to selection does not alter the estimation results.

30

Thus, we conclude that the spread of DC pensions helps explain why employment rates
have recently risen among people in their 60s, after decades of decline. Our results suggest that
these trends will continue, as younger workers who increasingly have DC pensions approach
retirement.

REFERENCES

Anderson, Patricia, Alan Gustman, and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. “Trends in Male Labor Force
Participation and Retirement: Some Evidence on the Role of Pensions and Social Security in the
1970s and 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 17 (4): 757-783.
Brown, Charles. 1999. “Early Retirement Windows,” in Forecasting Retirement Needs and
Retirement Wealth, O. Mitchell, P. Hammond, and A. Rappaport, eds. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia Mitchell, James Poterba, and Mark Warshawsky. 1999. “Taxing
Retirement Income: Nonqualified Annuities and Distributions from Qualified Accounts.” NBER
Working Paper No. 7268.
Burkhauser, Richard. 1979. “The Pension Acceptance Decision of Older Workers.” Journal of
Human Resources 14 (1): 63-75.
Clark, Robert, and Ann McDermed. 1990. The Choice of Pension Plans in a Changing
Regulatory Environment. Washington DC: The AEI Press.
Coile, Courtney, and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. “Social Security Incentives for Retirement,” in
Themes in the Economics of Aging, D. Wise, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Coronado, Julia Lynn, and Maria Perozek. 2001. “Wealth Effects and the Consumption of
Leisure: Retirement Decisions During the Stock Market Boom of the 1990s.” Draft, Federal
Reserve Board.
Employee Benefit Research Institute. 1996. “Fundamentals of Employee Benefit Programs.”
Washington, Fifth Edition.
Engen, Eric, William Gale, and John Karl Scholz. 1996. “The Illusory Effects of Saving
Incentives on Saving.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (4): 113-138.
Filer, Randall, and Marjorie Honig. 1998. “A Model of Endogenous Pensions in Retirement
Behavior.” Manuscript, Hunter College.

31

Friedberg, Leora. 2003. “The Impact of Technological Change on Older Workers: Evidence
from Data on Computer Use.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review forthcoming.
Friedberg, Leora, and Michael Owyang. 2002a. “Not Your Father’s Pension Plan: The Rise of
401(k) and Other Defined Contribution Plans.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 84
(1): 23-34.
Friedberg, Leora, and Michael Owyang. 2002b. “Explaining the Evolution of Pension Structure
and Job Tenure.” Saint Louis Federal Reserve Bank Working Paper No. 2002-022A.
Gendell, Murray. 2001. “Retirement Age Declines Again in 1990s.” Monthly Labor Review
124 (10): 12-21.
Gustman, Alan, and Steinmeier, Thomas. 1992. “The Stampede Toward Defined Contribution
Pension Plans: Fact or Fiction?” Industrial Relations 31 (2): 361-369.
Gustman, Alan, and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. “What People Don’t Know About Their
Pensions and Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data From the Health and Retirement
Study.” NBER Working Paper No. 7368.
The Hay-Huggins Company. “Pension Plan Expense Study.” Final report submitted to the
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. September, 1990.
Ippolito, Richard. 1995. “Toward Explaining the Growth of Defined Contribution Pensions.”
Industrial Relations 34 (1): 1-20.
Kotlikoff, Laurence, and David Wise. 1985. “Labor Compensation and the Structure of Private
Pension Plans: Evidence for Contractual versus Spot Labor Markets,” in Pensions, Labor, and
Individual Choice, D. Wise, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 55-85.
Kotlikoff, Laurence, and David Wise. 1987. “The Incentive Effects of Private Pension Plans,”
in Issues in Pension Economics, Z. Bodie, J. Shoven, and D. Wise, eds. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 283-339
Kotlikoff, Laurence, and David Wise. 1989. “Employee Retirement and a Firm’s Pension Plan,”
in The Economics of Aging, D. Wise, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 279-330.
Kruse, Douglas. 1995. “Pension Substitution in the 1980s: Why the Shift toward Defined
Contribution?” Industrial Relations 34 (2): 218-241.
Lazear, Edward P. 1986. “Retirement from the Labor Force.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 1, edited by O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard. New York: Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Lumsdaine, Robin, James Stock, and David Wise. 1990. “'Efficient Windows and Labor Force
Reduction.” Journal of Public Economics 43: 131-159.

32

Lumsdaine, Robin, James Stock, and David Wise. 1992. “Three Models of Retirement:
Computational Complexity Versus Predictive Validity,” in Topics in the Economics of Aging, D.
Wise, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mitchell, Olivia. 1999. “New Trends in Pension Benefit and Retirement Provisions.” NBER
Working Paper No. 7381.
Papke, Leslie. 1999. “Are 401(k) Plans Replacing Other Employer-provided Pensions?
Evidence from Panel Data.” Journal of Human Resources 34 (2): 346-368.
Poterba, James, Steve Venti, and David Wise. 1996. “Personal Retirement Saving Programs
and Asset Accumulation: Reconciling the Evidence.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (4):
91-112.
Povlika, Anne, and Stephen Miller. 1998. “The CPS after the Redesign: Refocusing the
Economic Lens,” in Labor Statistics Measurement Issues, J. Haltiwanger, M. Manser, and R.
Topel, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Quinn, Joseph. 2000. “New Paths to Retirement.” In Forecasting Retirement Needs and
Retirement Wealth, edited by B. Hammond, O. Mitchell, and A. Rappaport. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 13-32.
Quinn, Joseph, Richard Burkhauser, Kevin Cahill, and Robert Weathers. 1998.
“Microeconometric Analysis of the Retirement Decision: United States.” OECD Ageing
Working Paper AWP 1.5.
Samwick, Andrew. 1998. “New Evidence on Pensions, Social Security, and the Timing of
Retirement.” Journal of Public Economics 70: 207-36.
Samwick, Andrew. 2000. Comment on “Social Security Incentives for Retirement,” C. Coile
and J. Gruber, in Themes in the Economics of Aging, D. Wise. ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Stock, James, and David Wise. 1990a. “Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and Retirement.”
Econometrica 58 (5): 1151-80.
Stock, James, and David Wise. 1990b. “The Pension Inducement to Retire: An Option Value
Analysis,” in Issues in the Economics of Aging, D. Wise, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Webb, Anthony. 2002. “The Impact of 401(k) Plans on Pre-Retirement Saving, Age of
Retirement and Post-Retirement Consumption.” Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California,
San Diego.

33

TABLE 1
Characteristics of workers, 1992
(1)
DB
only

(2)
DC
only

N
948
304
mean birthyear 1937
1936
female
0.45
0.42
married
0.76
0.77
poor health
0.07
0.07
education
< high school
0.11
0.15
completed HS 0.37
0.36
some college
0.52
0.49
occupation
unskilled
0.37
0.31
semi-skilled
0.23
0.25
skilled
0.40
0.44
industry
agric,mining,
0.04
0.07
construction
manuf, trsprt
0.32
0.29
prof services,
0.55
0.33
public admin
trade, non0.09
0.31
prof services
mean job tenure 19
14
median
32,000 30,000
earnings
owns home
0.90
0.87
median financial assets
22,000 25,500
pension wealth at age 65
49,109
25% quartile 89,920
203,949 102,298
median
75% quartile 384,378 230,946

(3) Combined,
DB and
DC

(1)-(3)

(4) DCeligible
nonparticipants

(5)
Has
pension,
no data

(1)-(5)

(6)
No
pension

276
1937
0.37
0.76
0.07

1528
1937
0.43
0.76
0.07

47
1936
0.47
0.82
0.01

1527
1937
0.42
0.73
0.07

3102
1937
0.43
0.75
0.07

1332
1936
0.50
0.67
0.10

0.07
0.36
0.57

0.11
0.37
0.52

0.09
0.42
0.49

0.16
0.39
0.45

0.13
0.38
0.49

0.28
0.42
0.30

0.32
0.26
0.42

0.33
0.25
0.43

0.30
0.30
0.40

0.39
0.25
0.36

0.36
0.25
0.39

0.54
0.26
0.21

0.03

0.04

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.10

0.44
0.29

0.33
0.46

0.19
0.54

0.38
0.32

0.35
0.39

0.24
0.23

0.24

0.17

0.19

0.24

0.20

0.43

18
33,000

18
31,500

10
28,000

16
29,000

17
30,000

8
15,500

0.89

0.89

0.80

0.86

0.87

0.73

26,300

23,100

25,000

22,000

23,000

5,000

-

-

-

-

-

160,354
345,156
647,207

Data: Health and Retirement Study, wave 1, 1992.
Sample: People who in 1992 were aged 51-61, worked at least 30 hours per week, were not self-employed,
were in households containing a financial respondent; and who were observed in wave 2 and did not leave
their jobs involuntarily by wave 2.
Notes: The estimates use person-level analysis weights. Those in column (4) told the HRS they had a
pension but had zero DC assets and no DB pension. Those in column (5) said they had a pension, but the
HRS was unable to obtain data on their pension or Social Security. Those in column (6) said they had no
pension. Skilled occupations include management, professional, and technical jobs; semi-skilled include
clerical and sales; and unskilled include all others.

34

TABLE 2
Median of pension wealth accruals, as the retirement age changes

DB only
Total
Retirement
age:
Men
53
6,381
54
8,734
55
5,416
56
5,275
57
4,748
58
4,764
59
4,595
60
2,849
61
2,614
62
137
63
-798
64
-1,527
65
-3,267
66
-4,086
Women
53
5,155
54
5,714
55
5,449
56
5,716
57
6,147
58
6,540
59
5,956
60
3,853
61
3,656
62
2,661
63
1,927
64
1,074
65
424
66
-186

Total

DC only
Excluding
voluntary
contributions

Total

Combination
DB
DC
component component

4,811
4,763
5,110
5,542
5,522
5,017
5,755
5,856
5,972
5,901
5,973
5,932
5,612
5,263

3,114
3,164
3,052
3,474
3,580
3,696
3,848
3,981
4,086
4,109
3,982
4,040
3,745
3,627

12,276
20,955
13,321
13,882
14,031
13,652
12,690
10,280
8,683
7,258
6,622
5,988
2,483
1,111

6,079
14,387
7,101
7,137
6,083
6,362
6,407
3,578
3,020
1,127
-104
-1,273
-3,237
-4,372

4,353
4,707
4,870
5,069
5,175
5,317
5,471
5,612
5,745
5,865
5,747
5,572
5,174
4,909

1,903
2,007
2,115
2,192
2,392
2,843
2,946
2,991
3,174
3,293
3,385
3,472
3,552
3,532

1,443
1,522
1,763
1,922
1,940
1,980
2,136
2,204
2,290
2,360
2,358
2,394
2,463
2,486

8,834
8,314
7,409
8,537
8,277
9,274
9,923
6,570
6,336
5,388
5,520
5,437
3,702
3,179

4,920
5,814
4,045
4,092
4,755
4,791
5,556
3,670
3,340
2,261
2,201
1,939
604
216

2,114
2,285
2,408
2,933
2,636
2,743
2,760
2,644
2,824
2,703
2,908
2,907
2,960
2,865

Data: Health and Retirement Study.
Sample: Person-age observations of individuals from the sample appearing in columns (1)-(3) of Table 1,
excluding observations below the age of 53 and excluding job exits that were involuntary or that were to
another job, rather than to full retirement; this yields the same sample as that used in the estimation results
in Table 5.
Notes: Pension wealth is defined as the value of the pension if workers leave their jobs at each particular
age. Pension wealth accrual is the discounted change in pension wealth gained by working one more
period and then leaving.

35

TABLE 3
More statistics on pension wealth accrual

Quartile
DB
values
25%
75%
Retirement age:
Men
53
2,083
14,454
54
1,724
21,191
55
2,094
12,173
56
1,913
10,953
57
1,349
10,342
58
789
9,868
59
239
10,236
60
-622
6,690
61
-1,686
6,911
62
-2,783
3,909
63
-4,716
2,915
64
-6,521
2,660
65
-9,008
369
66
-10,959
-39
Women
53
1,917
11,056
54
1,417
14,174
55
1,998
9,670
56
2,060
10,253
57
2,333
10,886
58
2,454
11,225
59
2,349
12,285
60
1,486
7,269
61
1,298
7,426
62
821
5,149
63
129
4,209
64
-204
4,235
65
-1,571
1,708
66
-2,779
1,187

DC

Combination
25%
75%

25%

75%

3,017
2,777
3,224
3,440
2,988
2,790
2,892
2,884
3,075
3,159
2,971
3,188
3,000
2,875

10,413
9,829
10,260
10,676
10,411
11,138
10,703
10,914
11,256
10,591
10,727
10,661
9,625
9,343

6,592
9,577
7,387
6,597
7,614
7,123
6,403
5,341
3,576
3,012
1,654
449
-1,721
-3,050

20,767
60,340
20,811
22,800
24,154
23,062
27,330
18,608
17,973
15,455
13,950
12,905
7,288
5,624

1,265
1,244
1,324
1,371
1,487
1,673
1602
1,718
1,886
1,909
1,859
1,921
1,958
1,919

3,547
4,049
4,195
4,941
5,340
5,525
6,431
5,995
6,226
6,341
6,670
6,644
6,967
6,698

4,521
6,415
4,090
4,553
4,528
4,616
4,832
3,580
3,673
3,431
3,265
2,883
1,738
959

16,820
17,629
13,454
15,124
16,767
14,672
15,503
12,525
12,206
9,299
8,798
8,759
6,702
5,488

See Table 2 notes.

36

TABLE 4
Annual retirement hazard rates, 1992-1998
(1)
DB
only

(2)
DC
only

Men

(3)
Combined,
DB and
DC

(1)-(3)

(4) DCeligible
nonparticipants

(5)
Has
pension,
no data

(1)-(5)

(6)
No
pension

53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
Total

2%
1
3
4
5
3
6
5
11
27
23
19
24
18
37

0%
0
1
1
1
6
2
3
7
15
31
0
19
0
25

0%
2
6
6
3
7
9
6
9
11
22
10
48
0
33

1%
1
3
4
4
5
6
5
10
22
25
13
26
12
34

0%
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
17
0
0
0
0
0
8

2%
1
3
4
2
3
5
7
5
18
16
8
19
0
25

1%
1
3
4
3
4
5
6
7
20
21
10
22
6
30

2%
0
2
1
2
0
4
3
2
14
9
7
15
4
16

Women
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
Total

3%
2
6
5
3
3
7
7
9
15
20
13
29
21
40

0%
1
0
2
1
3
3
2
5
12
10
8
20
28
19

0%
1
5
5
4
5
2
6
7
18
9
27
21
32
25

2%
2
5
4
3
3
5
6
8
15
16
14
25
24
26

0%
0
0
0
5
5
0
12
0
36
7
0
48
0
39

1%
0
1
1
1
2
3
6
6
14
14
22
27
38
16

1%
1
3
3
2
3
4
6
7
15
15
17
27
29
23

0%
0
0
1
1
0
1
2
4
8
12
2
7
5
9

Sample: Same as Table 1.
Details: Retirement hazard rates are computed as the percentage who are working at one birthday and have
left their pensioned job and retired fully by the next birthday. The sample excludes quits by people who
take another job, as well as involuntary job exits due to layoff or plant closure.

37

TABLE 5-A
Regression results:
Coefficient estimates on pension variables

5.1

5.2

5.3

(peak value / earnings)2: DB plan

0.0131
(0.0121)
0.0213
(0.0223)
-0.0084**
(0.0034)
-0.0163**
(0.0076)
-

0.0090
(0.0124)
0.0254
(0.0232)
-0.0068**
(0.0034)
-0.0171**
(0.0078)
-

DB portion of combined plan

-

-

-

0.0140
(0.0100)
0.0096
(0.0211)
0.0227**
(0.0133)
-0.0230
(0.0118)
0.00270**
(0.00106)
0.00105
(0.00294)
0.00084
(0.00192)
0.00252
(0.00158)
0.0032
(0.0072)
0.0094
(0.0107)

0.0114
(0.0124)
0.0324
(0.0251)
-0.0106**
(0.0044)
-0.0284**
(0.0110)
0.0008**
(0.0004)
0.0041*
(0.0022)
0.0121
(0.0098)
0.0060
(0.0200)
0.0221**
(0.0132)
-0.0234
(0.0115)
0.00259**
(0.00107)
0.00073
(0.00293)
0.00086
(0.00192)
0.00253
(0.00159)
0.0037
(0.0072)
0.0096
(0.0108)

Dependent variable: leaves one’s job
Pension variables:

has a: DB plan
combined plan
peak value / earnings: DB plan
DB portion of combined plan

at or older than peak value: DB plan
combined plan

-

at normal retirement date: DB plan

-

combined plan
pension wealth / earnings:
DB plan
DB (combined plan)
DC plan
DC (combined plan)
DC, employer matches own contributions
early-out incentive offered

0.00315**
(0.00101)
0.00151
(0.00265)
0.00085
(0.00192)
0.00282*
(0.00156)
0.0031
(0.0072)
0.0087
(0.0106)

38

TABLE 5-B
Regression results:
Coefficient estimates on pension variables
Dependent variable: leaves one’s job
Other financial variables:

earnings / 10,000
Social Security peak value / earnings:
private pension is DB only
private pension is DC only
private pension is combined
at or older than peak value: Social Security

5.1

5.2

5.3

-0.0024**
(0.0011)

-0.0024**
(0.0011)

-0.0025**
(0.0011)

-0.0146**
(0.0049)
-0.0197**
(0.0090)
-0.0166*
(0.0087)

-0.0140**
(0.0050)
-0.0202**
(0.0091)
-0.0170**
(0.0087)
0.0028
(0.0101)

-0.0140**
(0.0050)
-0.0206**
(0.0091)
-0.0173**
(0.0087)
0.0029
(0.0102)

-0.00112
(0.00135)

-0.00118
(0.00136)

-

Social Security wealth / earnings

-0.00117
(0.00132)

0.0061**
(0.0014)
0.0923**
(0.0416)
-0.0020
(0.0067)
-0.198

log financial assets
financial assets = 0
not a homeowner
Log likelihood per observation

0.0061**
(0.0014)
0.0917**
(0.0415)
-0.0010
(0.0067)
-0.198

0.0061**
(0.0014)
0.0918**
(0.0415)
-0.0012
(0.0067)
-0.197

Sample: Person-age observations of individuals from the sample appearing in columns (1)-(3) of Table 1,
through 1998 or until they retire, who are aged 53 and over, and who did not exit their job involuntarily or
exit to another job. N = 7965.
Details: The table reports estimated marginal effects from probits, computed at sample means of the righthand side variables, and, in parentheses, Huber-White standard errors adjusted for person-level clustering.
The dependent variable is an indicator for leaving one’s job and retiring from one age to the next between
1992 and 1998. The estimates use person-level analysis weights. Significance at the 90% (*) and 95% (**)
levels are indicated.

39

TABLE 5-C
Regression results:
Coefficient estimates on other variables

5.3

Dependent variable: leaves one’s job

Other independent variables:
industry: agriculture, mining, construction
manufacturing, transport
professional services, public admin
firm size: 100-500 employees
>500 employees
tenure: joined employer 1974-85
joined employer 1986+
occupation: admin, professional, technical
sales, clerical
union member
has pay and promotion responsibility
health insurance: provided by employer
employer plan provided to retirees
privately purchased
from Medicare or VA
from Medicaid or other public source
hospitalized: once in last year
twice or more in last year
education: high-school diploma at least
more than 12 years schooling
demographic characteristics: female
married
married female
black
hispanic
age:

54
55
56
57
58
59
60

-0.0095 (0.0091)
-0.0037 (0.0057)
-0.0057 (0.0081)
0.0077 (0.0101)
0.0044 (0.0054)
-0.0024 (0.0051)
-0.0063 (0.0067)
0.0006 (0.0070)
0.0048 (0.0074)
0.0043 (0.0051)
0.0102 (0.0067)
-0.0091 (0.0078)
0.0101* (0.0053)
0.0042 (0.0067)
0.0733** (0.0486)
0.0232** (0.0115)
-0.0028 (0.0067)
0.0036 (0.0126)
-0.0037 (0.0079)
-0.0167** (0.0058)
0.0017 (0.0111)
-0.0093 (0.0098)
0.0121 (0.0131)
-0.0021 (0.0064)
-0.0009 (0.0103)

-0.0062 (0.0152)
0.0382** (0.0233)
0.0392** (0.0234)
0.0218 (0.0201)
0.0334* (0.0230)
0.0455** (0.0253)
0.0325* (0.0230)

61
62
63
64
65
66
67+

40

0.0775** (0.0323)
0.1800** (0.0503)
0.2193** (0.0610)
0.1245** (0.0536)
0.2572** (0.0795)
0.1770** (0.0834)
0.0433 (0.0848)

TABLE 6-A
Regression results, additional specifications:
Coefficient estimates on pension variables
Dependent variable: leaves one’s job

6.1
5% discount
rate

6.2
excludes
voluntary DC
contributions

6.3
Dependent
variable: takes
a new job

0.0113
(0.0104)
-

0.0112
(0.0132)
0.0714*
(0.0519)
0.0243
(0.0284)
-0.0102**
(0.0045)
-0.0323*
(0.0166)
-0.0148
(0.0258)
0.0008*
(0.0004)
0.0045*
(0.0027)
-0.0004
(0.0090)
0.0129
(0.0101)
0.0142
(0.0283)
0.0058
(0.0374)
0.0223*
(0.0134)
-0.0366**
(0.0049)
-0.0086
(0.0252)
0.00299**
(0.00111)
0.00063
(0.00393)

0.0016
(0.0105)
-

Pension variables:
has a: DB plan
combined plan, only voluntary
contributions in DC plan
combined plan
peak value / earnings: DB plan
DB portion of combined plan,
only voluntary contrib. in DC plan
DB portion of combined plan
(peak value / earnings)2: DB plan
DB portion of combined plan,
only voluntary contrib. in DC plan
DB portion of combined plan
at or older than peak value: DB plan
combined plan, only voluntary
contributions in DC plan
combined plan
at normal retirement date: DB plan
combined plan, only voluntary
contributions in DC plan
combined plan
pension wealth / earnings:
DB plan
DB (combined plan), only
voluntary contrib. in DC plan

0.0422**
(0.0252)
-0.0086**
(0.0038)
-0.0253**
(0.0104)
0.0007
(0.0004)
0.0059**
(0.0021)
0.0242**
(0.0124)
0.0110
(0.0182)
0.0215**
(0.0119)
-0.0243*
(0.0071)
0.00330**
(0.00085)
-

41

-0.0114
(0.0109)
0.0049
(0.0056)
0.0177
(0.0140)
-0.0011
(0.0011)
-0.0059
(0.0047)
-0.0087
(0.0068)
0.0139
(0.0246)
0.0028
(0.0116)
(collinear w/ other
variables)

-0.00030
(0.00105)
-

DB (combined plan)
DC plan
DC (combined plan)
DC, employer matches own
contributions
early-out incentive offered

0.00042
(0.00294)
0.00217*
(0.00117)
0.00143
(0.00114)
-0.0030
(0.0060)
0.0163*
(0.0104)

0.00216
(0.00474)
0.00077
(0.00357)
0.00170
(0.00479)
0.0060
(0.0078)
0.0128
(0.0117)

0.00242
(0.00254)
-0.00054
(0.00171)
0.00021
(0.00133)
0.0087
(0.0066)
0.0117
(0.0097)

TABLE 6-B
Regression results, additional specifications:
Coefficient estimates on pension variables

6.1
5% discount
rate

6.2
excludes
voluntary DC
contributions

6.3
Dependent
variable: takes
a new job

-0.0017*
(0.0010)

-0.0018
(0.0012)

-0.0005
(0.0009)

Social Security peak difference / earnings:
private pension is DB only
-0.0104**
(0.0042)
private pension is DC only
-0.0151*
(0.0081)
private pension is combined
-0.0173**
(0.0083)
at or older than peak value:
0.0035
Social Security
(0.0090)
Social Security wealth / earnings
-0.00107
(0.00114)
log financial assets
0.0052**
(0.0012)
financial assets = 0
0.0691**
(0.0365)
not a homeowner
0.0003
(0.0060)
Log likelihood per observation
-0.172
Number of observations
7962

-0.0148**
(0.0051)
-0.0230**
(0.0100)
-0.0213**
(0.0094)
0.0037
(0.0105)
-0.00100
(0.00139)
0.0043**
(0.0014)
0.0565**
(0.0331)
-0.0015
(0.0071)
-0.201
7635

0.0003
(0.0022)
-0.0001
(0.0050)
-0.0031
(0.0055)
-0.0029
(0.0085)
-0.00086
(0.00093)
-0.0000
(0.0011)
-0.0041
(0.0107)
-0.0083*
(0.0046)
-0.113
7254

Dependent variable: leaves one’s job

Other financial variables:
earnings / 10,000

See Table 5 notes.
Details: In 6.1, the discount rate used to compute DB pension wealth was set at 5% instead of 3%. In 6.2, DC
pension wealth excludes an estimate of voluntary contributions, as described in the text; consequently, we
chose to distinguish in the estimation between combined plans with a DC component that only has voluntary
contributions and other combined plans. In 6.3, the sample excludes exits to full retirement and includes exits
to another job.

42

TABLE 7
Predicted changes in retirement

Change in retirement attributable to past change in pension structure
Workers aged:
53-57 in 1983
53-57 in 1992
data source
respondents
actual pension structure
% DB, combined
% DC only
% no pension

Workers aged:
53-57 in 1983
53-57 in 1995

SCF
employers

HRS
employers

SCF
employers

SCF
workers

64.0
12.0
24.0

55.4
13.6
31.1

64.0
12.0
24.0

38.5
32.4
29.2

predicted change in median retirement age:
over the time period:

1983-1992

1983-1995

among workers with a pension: +1 months

+7 months

among all workers, if those with no pension behave like:
those with no pension today
those with a DC plan today

+3 months
+2 months

+7 months
+6 months

Change in retirement attributable to future change in pension structure
Workers aged:
53-57 in 1992
33-37 in 1995
data source
respondents
actual pension structure
% DB, combined
% DC only
% no pension

Workers aged:
53-57 in 1995
33-37 in 1995

HRS
employers

SCF
workers

SCF
workers

SCF
workers

55.4
13.6
31.1

22.7
35.0
42.3

38.5
32.4
29.2

22.7
35.0
42.3

predicted change in median retirement age:
over the time period

1992-2015

1995-2015

among workers with a pension:

+9 months

+3 months

among all workers, if those with no pension behave like:
those with no pension today
those with a DC plan today

+10 months
+8 months

+6 months
+4 months

Predictions based on simulation results from specification 5.3 and on the observed decline in DB pension
coverage. See text for more details.

43

